COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2020/1201 of 14 August 2020 as regards measures to prevent the introduction into and the spread within the Union of Xylella fastidiosa (Wells et al .) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 28(1) and (2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I DEFINITIONS Article 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: CHAPTER II ANNUAL SURVEYS FOR THE PRESENCE OF THE SPECIFIED PEST AND CONTINGENCY PLANS Article 2 Surveys of the specified pest in the territories of the Member States 1. Member States shall conduct annual surveys of the host plants for the detection of the specified pest in their territory. 2. Those surveys shall be carried out by the competent authorities, or under the official supervision of the competent authorities. 3. Those surveys shall be performed on the basis of the level of risk. They shall take place in open air, including cropping fields, orchards, vineyards, as well as nurseries, garden centres and/or trading centres, natural areas and other relevant locations. 4. Those surveys shall consist in the collection of samples and testing of plants for planting. Taking into account the European Food Safety Authority’s (Authority) Guidelines for statistically sound and risk-based surveys of Xylella fastidiosa , the survey design and sampling scheme used shall be able to identify within the Member State concerned, with at least 80 % of confidence, a level of presence of infected plants of 1 %. 5. Those surveys shall be carried out at appropriate times of the year with regard to the possibility to detect the specified pest, taking into account the biology of that pest and its vectors, the presence and biology of host plants, and the scientific and technical information referred to in the Authority’s Pest Survey Card on Xylella fastidiosa. 6. The presence of the specified pest shall be monitored by one of the molecular tests listed in Annex IV. In case of positive results detected in areas other than the demarcated areas, the presence of the specified pest shall be confirmed by one more positive molecular test listed in that Annex, targeting different parts of the genome. Those tests shall be performed on the same plant sample or, if appropriate for the molecular confirmatory test used, on the same plant extract. 7. The identification of the subspecies of the specified pest shall be carried out on each plant species that is found infected by the specified pest in the demarcated area concerned. That identification shall be carried out by using the molecular tests listed in Section B of Annex IV. 8. Member States shall report the results of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1 in accordance with Article 22(3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031. Article 3 Contingency plans 1. Each Member State shall establish a contingency plan. That contingency plan shall set out the actions to be taken in its territory concerning: Each Member State shall update its contingency plan, as appropriate, by 31 December of each year. Contingency plans established under Implementing Decision (EU) 2015/789 shall be updated by 31 December 2020. 2. In addition to the elements referred to in Article 25(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031, the contingency plan shall include all of the following elements: CHAPTER III DEMARCATED AREAS Article 4 Establishment of demarcated areas 1. Where the presence of the specified pest is officially confirmed, the Member State concerned shall without delay establish a demarcated area. Where only the presence of one or more particular subspecies of the specified pest is confirmed, the Member State concerned may demarcate an area with regard to those subspecies only. Where the confirmation of the presence of a subspecies is pending, the Member State concerned shall demarcate that area with regard to the specified pest and all of its possible subspecies. 2. The demarcated area shall consist of an infected zone and a buffer zone. The infected zone shall have a radius of at least 50 m around the plant found infected by the specified pest. The buffer zone shall be of the following width: 3. The Commission shall update and publish a list of the demarcated areas established by Member States, as notified pursuant to Article 18(6) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031. Article 5 Derogations for the establishment of demarcated areas 1. By way of derogation from Article 4, the buffer zone surrounding the infected zone established for the purpose of eradication may be reduced to a width of no less than 1 km, where there is a high degree of confidence that the initial presence of the specified pest did not result in its spread and where all of the following conditions have been fulfilled: 2. When reducing the width of the buffer zone pursuant to paragraph 1, the Member State concerned shall immediately notify the Commission and the other Member States of the justification for that reduction. 3. By way of derogation from Article 4, the Member State concerned may decide not to establish a demarcated area immediately, where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: 4. In the case referred to in paragraph 3, the Member State concerned shall: Article 6 Lifting of the demarcated areas 1. Where, based on the surveys referred to in Article 10, the specified pest has not been detected in a demarcated area for a period of four years, this demarcation may be lifted. In such cases, the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission and other Member States. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, in the case where the Member State concerned has reduced the buffer zone to a width of no less than 1 km in accordance with Article 5(1), the Member State may lift the demarcated area after 12 months since its initial establishment, where both of the following conditions are fulfilled: 3. Where a demarcated area is lifted pursuant to paragraph 2, the specified plants located in the previously established demarcated area shall be subject to intensive surveys during the following two years. For that purpose, and taking into account the Authority’s Guidelines for statistically sound and risk-based surveys of Xylella fastidiosa, the survey design and sampling scheme shall be able to identify with at least 80 % confidence a level of presence of infected plants of 1 %. 4. When lifting the demarcated area after 12 months since its initial identification, the Member State concerned shall immediately notify the Commission and the other Member States of the justification for that lifting. CHAPTER IV ERADICATION MEASURES Article 7 Removal of plants 1. The Member State concerned shall immediately remove from the infected zone: 2. When removing the plants referred to in paragraph 1, the Member State concerned shall take all necessary precautions into account, and shall organise the removal on the basis of the level of risk posed by those plants 3. By way of derogation from points (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph 1, Member States may decide that individual specified plants officially designated as plants with historic value do not need to be removed, provided that all of the following conditions have been fulfilled: Article 8 Measures against the vectors of the specified pest 1. The Member State concerned shall apply appropriate phytosanitary treatments, in the infected zone, against the vector population of the specified pest, in all its stages. It shall apply those treatments prior to and during the removal of the plants referred to in Article 7(1). Those treatments shall include efficient chemical, biological or mechanical treatments against the vectors, taking into account the local conditions. 2. The Member State concerned shall apply agricultural practices for the control of the vector population of the specified pest, in all its stages, in the infected zone and in the buffer zone. It shall apply those practices at the most appropriate time of the year, regardless of the removal of the plants concerned. Those practices shall include efficient chemical, biological or mechanical treatments against the vectors, as appropriate, taking into account the local conditions. Article 9 Destruction of plants 1. The Member State concerned shall destroy the plants and parts of plants referred to in Article 7(1), in a manner ensuring that the specified pest is not spread, in situ or in a nearby location designated for this purpose within the infected zone or, provided that those plants or parts of plants are covered by net against the vectors, at the shortest distance from that location. 2. The Member State concerned may decide, on the basis of the risk level, to limit the destruction to the branches and foliage only and subject the related wood to phytosanitary treatment as referred to in Article 8(1). The root system of those plants shall be either removed or devitalised, with an appropriate phytosanitary treatment to avoid resprouting. Article 10 Annual surveillance of the demarcated area In the entire demarcated area, the Member State concerned shall monitor, at the most appropriate times, the presence of the specified pest by annual surveys, in accordance with Article 2(5) and (6), and taking into account the information referred to in the Authority’s Pest Survey Card on Xylella fastidiosa. In the infected zones, the Member State concerned shall sample and test the host plants, including the specified plants which have not been removed pursuant to Article 7(1). For that purpose, and taking into account the Authority’s Guidelines for statistically sound and risk-based surveys of Xylella fastidiosa, the survey design and sampling scheme shall be able to identify with at least 90 % confidence a level of presence of infected plants of 0,5 %. In buffer zones, the Member State concerned shall sample and test the host plants, as well as other plants showing symptoms indicating possible infection or suspected to be infected by that pest. For that purpose, and taking into account the Authority’s Guidelines for statistically sound and risk-based surveys of Xylella fastidiosa, the survey design and sampling scheme shall be able to identify with at least 90 % confidence a level of presence of infected plants of 1 %, taking into account that the first 400 m surrounding the infected zones has a higher risk. The Member State concerned shall also monitor the presence of the specified pest in the vectors located in the demarcated area in order to determine the risk of further spreading posed by vectors and to evaluate the effectiveness of the phytosanitary control measures applied in accordance with Article 8. Article 11 Other relevant measures for the eradication of the specified pest 1. The Member State concerned shall take any other measure which may contribute to the eradication of the specified pest, in accordance with International Standard for Phytosanitary Measure (‘ISPM’) No 9 ( 9 ) and to contributing to applying an integrated approach in accordance with the principles set out in ISPM No 14 ( 10 ) . 2. The Member State concerned shall take measures addressing any particularity or complication that could reasonably be expected to prevent, hinder or delay eradication, in particular those related to the adequate destruction of all plants that are infected or suspected of infection, or to the accessibility of their location, public or private ownership or the person or entity responsible for them. 3. The Member State concerned shall carry out appropriate investigations to identify the origin of the infection. It shall trace the host plants associated with the case of infection concerned, including those which were moved before a demarcated area was established. The results of such investigations shall be communicated to the Commission and the Member States in which those plants concerned originate, to the Member States through which those plants have moved and to the Member States where those plants have moved into. CHAPTER V CONTAINMENT MEASURES Article 12 General provisions The competent authority of the Member State concerned may decide to apply the containment measures set out in Articles 13 to 17, instead of eradication measures, in an infected zone listed in Annex III. Article 13 Removal of plants in an infected zone listed in Annex III 1. The Member State concerned shall remove all plants which have been found to be infected by the specified pest on the basis of the monitoring referred to in Article 15(2). That removal shall take place immediately after the official identification of the presence of the specified pest or, if the specified pest is detected outside the flight season of the vector, that removal shall take place before the next flight season of the vector. All necessary precautions shall be taken to avoid spreading of the specified pest and its vectors during and after removal. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the Member State concerned may decide, for scientific purposes, not to remove plants which have been found to be infected by the specified pest in the sites of plants with particular cultural and social value, referred to in Article 15(2)(b). Article 14 Measures against the vectors of the specified pest in the infected zones listed in Annex III 1. The Member State concerned shall apply appropriate phytosanitary treatments against the vector population of the specified pest, in all its stages, on the plants referred to in Article 13(1) prior to their removal and around the plants referred to in Article 13(2). Those treatments shall include efficient chemical, biological or mechanical treatments against the vectors, taking into account the local conditions. 2. In the areas referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 15(2), the Member State concerned shall apply agricultural practices for the control of the vector population of the specified pest, in all its stages, at the most appropriate time of each year. Those practices shall include efficient chemical, biological or mechanical treatments against the vectors, taking into account the local conditions. Article 15 Annual surveillance of the infected zones listed in Annex III 1. The Member State concerned shall, at least in the parts of the infected zone referred to in paragraph 2, immediately sample and test, within a radius of 50 m around the plants which have been found to be infected by the specified pest, the following plants: 2. The Member State concerned shall monitor, at the most appropriate times, the presence of the specified pest by annual surveys, taking into account the information referred to in the Authority’s Pest Survey Card on Xylella fastidiosa . That monitoring shall take place at least in the following parts of the infected zone listed in Annex III: In those parts of the infected zone, the Member State concerned shall carry out sampling and testing of the species of host plants found infected in the demarcated area, in accordance with Article 2(6). For that purpose, taking into account the Authority’s Guidelines for statistically sound and risk-based surveys of Xylella fastidiosa, the survey design and sampling scheme shall be able to identify with at least 90 % confidence a level of presence of infected plants of 0,7 %. It shall also sample and test the vector population for the presence of the specified pest. 3. Point (a) of paragraph 2 shall not apply in the case of islands which are entirely under containment measures and are situated more than 5 km to the nearest Union land territory. 4. In buffer zones, the Member State concerned shall sample and test the host plants, as well as other plants showing symptoms indicating possible infection by that pest or suspected to be infected by that pest. For that purpose, taking into account the Authority’s Guidelines for statistically sound and risk-based surveys of Xylella fastidiosa, the survey design and sampling scheme shall be able to identify with at least 90 % confidence a level of presence of infected plants of 1 %, taking into account that the first 400 m adjacent to the infected zones pose a higher risk. 5. The Member State shall monitor the presence of the specified pests in vectors in the parts of the infected zone referred to in paragraph 2 and in the buffer zone in order to determine the risk of further spreading posed by vectors and to evaluate the effectiveness of the phytosanitary control measures applied in accordance with Article 14. Article 16 Destruction of plants 1. The Member State concerned shall, in situ or in a nearby location designated for this purpose within the infected zone listed in Annex III, destroy plants and parts of plants which have been found to be infected by the specified pest, in a manner ensuring that the specified pest is not spread. 2. The Member State concerned may decide to limit the destruction to branches and foliage only and subject the related wood to appropriate phytosanitary treatments in accordance with Article 14(1), where it concludes that those plants do not pose any risk for further spreading of the specified pest. The root system of those plants shall be either removed or devitalised with an appropriate phytosanitary treatment to avoid resprouting. Article 17 Other relevant measures for the containment of the specified pest The Member State concerned shall take measures addressing any particularity or complication that could reasonably be expected to prevent, hinder or delay containment, in particular those related to the adequate destruction of all plants that are infected or suspected of infection, or to the accessibility of their location, public or private ownership or the person or entity responsible for them. CHAPTER VI PLANTING OF SPECIFIED PLANTS IN INFECTED ZONES Article 18 Authorisation concerning the planting of specified plants in infected zones The planting of specified plants in infected zones may only be authorised by the Member State concerned in one of the following cases: CHAPTER VII MOVEMENT WITHIN THE UNION OF SPECIFIED PLANTS Article 19 Movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones, of specified plants which have been grown in authorised production sites located in that demarcated area The movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones, of specified plants which have been grown in a production site located in that demarcated area, may only be allowed where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 20 Movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones, of specified plants which have never been found infected in that demarcated area The movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zone into the buffer zones, of specified plants which have never been found infected in that demarcated area, may only be allowed where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 21 Movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones, of specified plants which have been grown for the entire production cycle in vitro in that demarcated area The movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones, of specified plants which have been grown for the entire production cycle in vitro in that demarcated area, may only be allowed where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 22 Movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones, of dormant plants of Vitis which have been grown for part of their life in that demarcated area Movement out of a demarcated area, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones, of dormant plants of Vitis intended for planting, other than seeds, which have been grown for part of their life in that demarcated area and are listed as specified plants for that demarcated area, may only be allowed where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 23 Movement within the infected zones, within the buffer zones, and from the buffer zones into their respective infected zones, of specified plants which have been grown for part of their life in a demarcated area The movement within the infected zones, within the buffer zones, and from the buffer zones into their respective infected zones, of specified plants which have been grown for at least part of their life in a demarcated area may only be allowed where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 24 Authorisation of production sites 1. The competent authority may only authorise a production site for the purposes of Articles 19 and 21 where it fulfils all of the following conditions: 2. Where, during the annual inspections, the competent authorities detect the presence of the specified pest, or damages to the physical protection referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1, they shall immediately revoke the authorisation of the site and temporarily suspend the movement of the specified plants out of the demarcated areas concerned, and from the respective infected zones into the buffer zones. 3. Each Member State shall establish and update a list of all sites authorised in accordance with paragraph 1. It shall transmit that list to the Commission and the other Member States immediately after establishing or updating that list. Article 25 Movement within the Union of specified plants which have never been grown inside a demarcated area 1. Specified plants which have never been grown inside a demarcated area may only be moved within the Union where they have been grown in a site that fulfils the following conditions: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, plants for planting, other than seeds, of Coffea, Lavandula dentata L., Nerium oleander L., Olea europaea L., Polygala myrtifolia L. and Prunus dulcis (Mill.) D.A. Webb, may only be moved for the first time within the Union where the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 26 Movement within the Union of pre-basic mother plants or pre-basic material, which have been grown outside a demarcated area Pre-basic mother plants as defined in Article 1(3) of Commission Implementing Directive 2014/98/EU ( 11 ) or pre-basic material as defined in Article 2(5) of Council Directive 2008/90/EC ( 12 ) which belong to the species Juglans regia L., Olea europaea L., Prunus amygdalus Batsch, P. amygdalus x P. persica , P. armeniaca L., P. avium (L.) L., P. cerasus L., P. domestica L., P. domestica x P. salicina, P. dulcis (Mill.) D.A. Webb, P. persica (L.) Batsch, and P. salicina Lindley and which have been grown outside a demarcated area and spent at least part of their life outside insect-proof facilities, may only be moved within the Union where they are accompanied by a plant passport and the following conditions have been fulfilled: Article 27 Plant passports The plants referred to in Articles 19 to 26 shall only be moved within the Union if accompanied by a plant passport, subject to the requirements of Articles 78 to 95 of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031. In the case of the specified plants referred to in Article 23, the following additional conditions shall apply: CHAPTER VIII INTRODUCTION INTO THE UNION OF HOST PLANTS Article 28 Introduction into the Union of host plants originating in a third country where the specified pest is known not to be present Host plants originating in a third country where the specified pest is known not to be present, may only be introduced into the Union where the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 29 Introduction into the Union of host plants originating in a pest free area of an infected country Host plants originating in a third country where the specified pest is known to be present may only be introduced into the Union where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 30 Introduction into the Union of host plants originating in a pest free production site of an infected country 1. Host plants originating in a third country where the specified pest is known to be present may only be introduced into the Union where the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. Host plants which originate in a third country where the specified pest is known to be present and have been grown for the entire production cycle in vitro, may only be introduced into the Union where the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 31 Authorisation of production sites as pest free A production site may only be authorised as pest free where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Where during the annual inspections, the competent authorities detect the presence of the specified pest, or damages compromising the insect-proof conditions of the pest free production site, they shall immediately revoke the authorisation of the site and temporarily suspend the movement of the host plants. They shall immediately inform the Commission thereof. CHAPTER IX OFFICIAL CHECKS ON MOVEMENT OF SPECIFIED PLANTS WITHIN, AND OF HOST PLANTS INTO, THE UNION Article 32 Official checks on movements of specified plants within the Union 1. Member States shall carry out systematic official checks on specified plants being moved out of a demarcated area, or from an infected zone to a buffer zone. 2. Such checks shall be performed at least in the locations, including roads, airports and ports, where the host plants are moved from infected zones into buffer zones or other parts of the Union territory. 3. Those checks shall include a documentary check, and an identity check of the specified plants. 4. Those checks shall be carried out irrespective of the declared origin of the specified plants, ownership or the person or entity responsible for them. 5. Where those checks show that the conditions laid down in Articles 19 to 23 are not satisfied, the Member State which carried them out shall immediately destroy the non-compliant plant in situ or in a nearby location. That action shall be carried out taking all necessary precautions to avoid spreading of the specified pest, and any vectors carried by that plant, during and after removal. Article 33 Official checks at introduction into the Union 1. All consignments of host plants introduced into the Union from a third country shall be officially checked at the point of entry into the Union or at the place of destination established in accordance with Commission Directive 2004/103/EC ( 14 ) . 2. Ιn case of host plants originating in areas where the specified pest is known to occur, the competent authority shall carry out an inspection, consisting of sampling and testing of the lot of the specified plants to confirm the absence of the specified pest, using a sampling scheme able to identify with at least 80 % confidence, a level of infected plants of 1 %, taking account of ISPM No 31. 3. Paragraph 2 shall not apply to host plants which have been grown for the entire production cycle in vitro and are transported in transparent containers under sterile conditions. CHAPTER X COMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES Article 34 Awareness campaigns 1. Member States shall make information available to the general public, travellers, professional and international transport operators concerning the threat of the specified pest for the Union territory. They shall make that information publicly available, in the form of targeted awareness campaigns on the respective websites of the competent authority or other websites designated by it. 2. Within the demarcated areas, the Member State concerned shall raise public awareness concerning the threat of the specified pest and the measures adopted to prevent its introduction into and spread within the Union. It shall ensure that the general public, travellers and relevant operators are aware of the delimitation of the demarcated area, the infected zone and the buffer zone. The Member State concerned shall also inform relevant operators about the measures to take against the vector as laid down in Articles 8 and 14. CHAPTER XI FINAL PROVISIONS Article 35 Reporting on measures by Member States 1. Member States shall, by 30 April of each year, transmit to the Commission and to the other Member States a report on the measures taken during the preceding year, pursuant to Articles 2, 4, 5, 7 to 18 and 32, as applicable, and on the results of those measures. The results of the surveys carried out pursuant to Articles 10 and 15 in demarcated areas shall be transmitted to the Commission using the templates referred to in Annex V. 2. Member States shall, by 31 December of each year, transmit to the Commission and the other Member States a plan setting out the measures to be taken pursuant to Articles 2, 4, 5, 7 to 18 and 32, as applicable, in the following year. That plan shall set out the scheduled time period of each measure, the deadlines for implementing the measures and the allocated budget for all measures. 3. Where justified by the development of the respective phytosanitary risk, Member States shall adapt the respective measures and accordingly update the plan referred to paragraph 2. They shall immediately communicate that update to the Commission and the other Member States. 4. The Member State concerned shall immediately notify the Commission and the other Member States of any official identification of the presence of the specified pest in the locations referred to in Article 15(2)(a). Article 36 Compliance Member States shall, as necessary in order to comply with this Regulation, repeal or amend the measures, which they have adopted to protect themselves against the introduction and spread of the specified pest. They shall immediately inform the Commission of the repeal or amendment of those measures. Article 37 Repeal Implementing Decision (EU) 2015/789 is repealed. Article 38 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . However, the second sentence of Article 2(4), the third sentence of Article 5(1)(c), the second sentence of Article 28(a) and the second sentence of Article 29(a) shall apply from 1 January 2023. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 14 August 2020. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2015/789 of 18 May 2015 as regards measures to prevent the introduction into and the spread within the Union of Xylella fastidiosa (Wells et al.) ( OJ L 125, 21.5.2015, p. 36 ). ( 3 ) EFSA Journal 2019;17(5):5665, 200 pp. ( 4 ) EFSA Journal 2019;17(5):5666, 17 pp. ( 5 ) EFSA Supporting publication 2019:EN-1667. 53 pp. ( 6 ) EFSA Journal 2020;18(4):6114. ( 7 ) EFSA Supporting publication 2020:EN-1873. 76 pp. ( 8 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on official controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products, amending Regulations (EC) No 999/2001, (EC) No 396/2005, (EC) No 1069/2009, (EC) No 1107/2009, (EU) No 1151/2012, (EU) No 652/2014, (EU) 2016/429 and (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Regulations (EC) No 1/2005 and (EC) No 1099/2009 and Council Directives 98/58/EC, 1999/74/EC, 2007/43/EC, 2008/119/EC and 2008/120/EC, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 854/2004 and (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 89/608/EEC, 89/662/EEC, 90/425/EEC, 91/496/EEC, 96/23/EC, 96/93/EC and 97/78/EC and Council Decision 92/438/EEC (Official Controls Regulation) ( OJ L 95, 7.4.2017, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Guidelines for pest eradication programmes – Reference Standard ISPM No 9 by the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention, Rome. Published 15 December 2011. ( 10 ) The use of integrated measures in a systems approach for pest risk management – Reference Standard ISPM No 14 by the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention, Rome. Published 8 January 2014. ( 11 ) Commission Implementing Directive 2014/98/EU of 15 October 2014 implementing Council Directive 2008/90/EC as regards specific requirements for the genus and species of fruit plants referred to in Annex I thereto, specific requirements to be met by suppliers and detailed rules concerning official inspections, OJ L 298, 16.10.2014, p. 22 . ( 12 ) Council Directive 2008/90/EC of 29 September 2008 on the marketing of fruit plant propagating material and fruit plants intended for fruit production, OJ L 267, 8.10.2008, p. 8 . ( 13 ) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/925 of 29 May 2017 temporarily authorising certain Member States to certify pre-basic material of certain species of fruit plants, produced in the field under non-insect proof conditions, and repealing Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/167, OJ L 140, 31.5.2017, p. 7 . ( 14 ) Commission Directive 2004/103/EC of 7 October 2004 on identity and plant health checks of plants, plant products or other objects, listed in Part B of Annex V to Council Directive 2000/29/EC, which may be carried out at a place other than the point of entry into the Community or at a place close by and specifying the conditions related to these checks ( OJ L 313, 12.10.2004, p. 16 ). ‘ANNEX I List of plants known to be susceptible to one or more subspecies of the specified pest (‘host plants’) Acacia Albizia julibrissin Durazz. Alnus rhombifolia Nutt. Amaranthus retroflexus L. Ambrosia Ampelopsis arborea (L.) Koehne Ampelopsis brevipedunculata (Maxim.) Trautv. Ampelopsis cordata Michx. Anthyllis hermanniae L. Artemisia Asparagus acutifolius L. Baccharis Brassica Calicotome spinosa (L.) Link Calicotome villosa (Poiret) Link Callicarpa americana L. Callistemon citrinus (Curtis) Skeels Calluna vulgaris (L.) Hull Catharanthus Celtis occidentalis L. Cercis canadensis L. Cercis occidentalis Torr. Cercis siliquastrum L. Chamaecrista fasciculata (Michx.) Greene Chamaesyce canescens (L.) Prokh. Chenopodium album L. Chionanthus Chitalpa tashkentensis T. S. Elias & Wisura Cistus Citrus Clematis cirrhosa L. Coelorachis cylindrica (Michx.) Nash Coffea Conium maculatum L. Convolvulus cneorum L. Coprosma repens A.Rich. Coronilla glauca (L.) Batt. Coronilla valentina L. Cyperus eragrostis Lam. Cytisus Digitaria Dimorphoteca Diospyros kaki L.f. Diplocyclos palmatus (L.) C.Jeffrey Dodonaea viscosa (L.) Jacq. Elaeagnus angustifolia L. Encelia farinosa A. Gray ex Torr. Eremophila maculata (Ker Gawler) F. von Müller. Erigeron Erodium moschatum (L.) L’Hérit. Erysimum Euphorbia chamaesyce L. Euphorbia terracina L. Euryops chrysanthemoides (DC.) B.Nord Euryops pectinatus (L.) Cass. Fagus crenata Blume Fallopia japonica (Houtt.) Ronse Decr. Fatsia japonica (Thunb.) Decne. & Planch. Ficus carica L. Frangula alnus Mill. Fraxinus Genista Ginkgo biloba L. Gleditsia triacanthos L. Grevillea juniperina Br. Helianthus Helichrysum Heliotropium europaeum L. Hemerocallis Hevea brasiliensis (Willd. ex A.Juss.) Müll.Arg. Hibiscus Humulus scandens (Lour.) Merr. Ilex aquifolium L. Ilex vomitoria Sol. ex Aiton Iva annua L. Jacaranda mimosifolia D. Don Juglans Juniperus ashei J. Buchholz Koelreuteria bipinnata Franch. Lagerstroemia Laurus nobilis L. Lavandula Ligustrum lucidum L. Liquidambar styraciflua L. Lonicera japonica Thunb. Lupinus Magnolia grandiflora L. Mallotus paniculatus (Lam.) Müll.Arg. Malva parviflora L. Medicago arborea L. Medicago sativa L. Metrosideros Mimosa Modiola caroliniana (L.) G. Don Myoporum insulare R. Br. Myrtus communis L. Nandina domestica Murray Neptunia lutea (Leavenw.) Benth. Nerium oleander L. Osteospermum ecklonis DC. Osteospermum fruticosum (L.) Norl. Parthenocissus quinquefolia (L.) Planch. Paspalum dilatatum Poir. Pelargonium Persea americana Mill. Phagnalon saxatile (L.) Cass. Phillyrea angustifolia L. Phillyrea latifolia L. Phlomis fruticosa L. Phoenix reclinata Jacq. Phoenix roebelenii O’ Brien Pinus taeda L. Pistacia vera L. Plantago lanceolata L. Platanus Pluchea odorata (L.) Cass. Polygala myrtifolia L. Polygala x grandiflora Nana Prunus Pterospartum tridentatum (L.) Willk. Quercus Ratibida columnifera (Nutt.) Wooton & Standl. Rhamnus alaternus L. Robinia pseudoacacia L. Rosmarinus officinalis L. Salvia mellifera Greene Sambucus Santolina chamaecyparissus L. Sapindus saponaria L. Sassafras Setaria magna Griseb. Solidago fistulosa Mill. Solidago virgaurea L. Sorghum halepense (L.) Pers. Spartium Stewartia pseudocamellia Strelitzia reginae Aiton Streptocarpus Symphyotrichum divaricatum (Nutt.) G.L.Nesom Teucrium capitatum L. Trifolium repens L. UlexUlmus Vaccinium Westringia fruticosa (Willd.) Druce Westringia glabra R.Br. Xanthium strumarium L. ANNEX II List of plants known to be susceptible to specific subspecies of the specified pest (‘specified plants’) Specified plants susceptible to Xylella fastidiosa subspecies fastidiosa Ambrosia artemisiifolia L. Calicotome spinosa (L.) Link Cercis occidentalis Torr. Cistus monspeliensis L. Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck Coffea arabica L. Erysimum Genista lucida L. Juglans regia L. Lupinus Magnolia grandiflora L. Malva parviflora L. Medicago sativa L. Metrosideros Nerium oleander L. Pluchea odorata (L.) Cass. Polygala myrtifolia L. Prunus Rhamnus alaternus L. Rosmarinus officinalis L. Rubus rigidus Sm. Rubus ursinus Cham. & Schldl. Sambucus Spartium junceum L. Streptocarpus Teucrium capitatum L. Ulmus americana L. Vinca major L. Specified plants susceptible to Xylella fastidiosa subspecies multiplex Acacia Acer griseum (Franch.) Pax Acer pseudoplatanus L. Acer rubrum L. Alnus rhombifolia Nutt. Ambrosia psilostachya DC. Ambrosia trifida L. Ampelopsis cordata Michx. Anthyllis hermanniae L. Artemisia Asparagus acutifolius L. Baccharis halimifolia L. Calicotome spinosa (L.) Link Calicotome villosa (Poir.) Link Callistemon citrinus (Curtis) Skeels Calluna vulgaris (L.) Hull Celtis occidentalis L. Cercis canadensis L. Cercis occidentalis Torr. Cercis siliquastrum L. Chionanthus Cistus Clematis cirrhosa L. Convolvulus cneorum L. Coprosma repens A. Rich. Coronilla glauca (L.) Batt. Coronilla valentina L. Cytisus Dimorphoteca Dodonaea viscosa (L.) Jacq. Elaeagnus angustifolia L. Encelia farinosa Gray ex Torr. Erigeron karvinskianus DC. Euryops chrysanthemoides (DC.) B.Nord. Euryops pectinatus (L.) Cass. Fallopia japonica (Houtt.) Ronse Decr. Ficus carica L. Frangula alnus Mill. Fraxinus Genista Ginkgo biloba L. Gleditsia triacanthos L. Grevillea juniperina Br. Helianthus Helichrysum Ilex aquifolium L. Iva annua L. Koelreuteria bipinnata Franch. Lagerstroemia Laurus nobilis L. Lavandula Liquidambar styraciflua L. Lupinus villosus Willd. Magnolia grandiflora L. Medicago arborea L. Medicago sativa L. Metrosideros excelsa Rich. Myrtus communis L. Osteospermum ecklonis (DC.) Norl. Pelargonium Phagnalon saxatile (L.) Cass. Phillyrea angustifolia L. Phlomis fruticosa L. Pistacia vera L. Plantago lanceolata L. Platanus Polygala myrtifolia L. Polygala x grandiflora Nana Prunus Pterospartum tridentatum (L.) Willk. Quercus Ratibida columnifera (Nutt.) Wooton & Standl. Rhamnus alaternus L. Robinia pseudoacacia L. Rosmarinus officinalis L. Salvia mellifera Greene Sambucus Santolina chamaecyparissus L. Sapindus saponaria L. Solidago virgaurea L. Spartium Strelitzia reginae Aiton Ulmus americana L. Ulmus crassifolia Nutt. Vaccinium Westringia fruticosa Guerin. Xanthium strumarium L. Specified plants susceptible to Xylella fastidiosa subspecies pauca Acacia Amaranthus retroflexus L. Asparagus acutifolius L. Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don Chamaesyce canescens (L.) Prokh. Chenopodium album L. Cistus albidus L. Cistus creticus L. Citrus Coffea Dimorphoteca fruticosa (L.) DC. Dodonaea viscosa (L.) Jacq. Eremophila maculata (Ker Gawler) F. von Müller. Erigeron Euphorbia chamaesyce L. Euphorbia terracina L. Grevillea juniperina Br. Heliotropium europaeum L. Hibiscus Laurus nobilis L. Lavandula angustifolia Mill. Lavandula dentata L. Lavandula stoechas L. Myoporum insulare Br. Myrtus communis L. Nerium oleander L. Olea europaea L. Osteospermum fruticosum (L.) Norl. Pelargonium x fragrans Willd. (syn. Pelargonium fragrans E. Mey.) Phillyrea latifolia L. Polygala myrtifolia L. Prunus Rhamnus alaternus L. Rosmarinus officinalis L. Spartium junceum L. Vinca minor L. Westringia fruticosa (Willd.) Druce Westringia glabra Br. ANNEX III Infected zones referred to in Article 4(2) where containment measures set out in Articles 13 to 17 are applied PART A Infected zone in Italy The infected zone of Italy includes the following areas: PART B Infected zone in France The infected zone in France includes the following area: The region of Corsica PART C Infected zone in Spain The infected zone in Spain includes the following area: The Autonomous Community of Balearic Islands ANNEX IV Tests for the identification of Xylella fastidiosa and its subspecies A. Tests for the screening and identification of the presence of Xylella fastidiosa B. Molecular tests for the identification of the subspecies of Xylella fastidiosa ANNEX V Templates for the reporting of the results of the surveys carried out pursuant to Articles 10 and 15 in demarcated areas PART A Template for the report of results of statistically based annual surveys Instructions on how to fill in the template Explain the assumptions for the survey design. Summarise and justify: PART B Template for the report of results of surveys carried out for insect vectors of Xylella fastidiosa Instructions on how to fill in the template