COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/2449 of 6 November 2023 laying down rules for the application of Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards templates for monitoring plans, emissions reports, partial emissions reports, documents of compliance, and reports at company level, and repealing Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1927 (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on the monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas emissions from maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 6(5), Article 12(2) and Article 17(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Electronic template of the monitoring plan 1. For the purposes of submitting the monitoring plan pursuant to Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, companies shall use the electronic version of the template available in the Thetis MRV automated Union information system operated by the European Maritime Safety Agency (‘Thetis MRV’). 2. The electronic version of the template of the monitoring plan referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain the information set out in Annex I. Article 2 Electronic template of the emissions report and partial emissions report 1. For the purposes of submitting the report referred to in Article 11(1) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757 (the ‘emissions report’) and the report referred to in Article 11(2) of that Regulation (the ‘partial emissions report’), companies shall use the electronic version of the template available in Thetis MRV. 2. The electronic version of the template of the emissions report and the partial emissions report shall contain the information set out in Annex II. Article 3 Electronic template of the document of compliance 1. For the purposes of issuing a document of compliance pursuant to Article 17(1) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the verifier shall provide relevant data using the electronic version of the template available in Thetis MRV. 2. The electronic version of the template of the document of compliance referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain the information set out in Annex III. Article 4 Electronic template of the report at company level 1. For the purposes of submitting the aggregated emissions data at company level pursuant to Article 11a(2) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757 (the ‘report at company level’), companies shall use the electronic version of the template available in Thetis MRV. 2. The electronic version of the template of the report at company level shall contain the information set out in Annex IV. Article 5 Repeal 1. Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1927 is repealed with effect from 1 January 2024. 2. Article 6 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 1 January 2024. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 6 November 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 55 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1927 of 4 November 2016 on templates for monitoring plans, emissions reports and documents of compliance pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council on monitoring, reporting and verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport ( OJ L 299, 5.11.2016, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/957 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 amending Regulation (EU) 2015/757 in order to provide for the inclusion of maritime transport activities in the EU Emissions Trading System and for the monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions of additional greenhouse gases and emissions from additional ship types ( OJ L 130, 16.5.2023, p. 105 ). ( 4 ) Adopted by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) by Assembly Resolution A.741(18). ( 5 ) Regulation 22 Marpol Annex VI. ( 6 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1122 of 12 March 2019 supplementing Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the functioning of the Union Registry ( OJ L 177, 2.7.2019, p. 3 ). ANNEX I Template for monitoring plans PART A REVISION RECORD SHEET PART B BASIC DATA Table B.1 Identification of the ship and shipowner details Table B.2 Company information Table B.3 Emission sources and fuel types used Table B.4 Emission factors referred to in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 Table B.5 Slippage coefficient referred to in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 Table B.6 Application of carbon capture and storage technologies referred to in Part C, point 1.4, of Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 Table B.7 Procedures, systems and responsibilities used to update the completeness of emission sources Table B.8 Procedures, systems and responsibilities used to determine and update emission factors in accordance with Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 Table B.9 Procedure used to determine the CO 2 emission factors of biofuels and RFNBOs/RCFs referred to in Part C, point 1.2, of Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 PART C ACTIVITY DATA Table C.1 Conditions of exemption related to Article 9(2) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757 Table C.2 Monitoring of greenhouse gas emissions and fuel consumption C.2.1. Methods used to determine greenhouse gas emissions and fuel consumption of each emission source: C.2.2. Procedures for determining fuel bunkered and fuel in tanks: C.2.3. Regular cross-checks between bunkering quantity as provided by BDN and bunkering quantity indicated by on-board measurement: C.2.4. Description of the measurement instruments involved: C.2.5. Procedures for recording, retrieving, transmitting and storing information regarding measurements: C.2.6. Method for determination of density: C.2.7. Level of uncertainty associated with fuel monitoring: C.2.8. Procedures for ensuring quality assurance of measuring equipment: C.2.9. Method for determining the split of fuel consumption into freight and passenger part (for ro-pax ships only): C.2.10. Procedures for determining and recording the fuel consumption on laden voyages (voluntary monitoring): C.2.11. Procedures for determining and recording the fuel consumption for cargo heating (voluntary monitoring for chemical tankers): C.2.12. Procedures for determining and recording the fuel consumption for dynamic positioning (voluntary monitoring for oil tankers and ‘other ship types’): Table C.3 List of voyages Table C.4 Distance travelled Procedures for determining and recording the distance travelled when navigating through ice (voluntary monitoring): Table C.5 Amount of cargo carried and number of passengers Procedures for determining and recording the average density of the cargoes transported (voluntary monitoring for chemical tankers, bulk carriers and combination carriers): Table C.6 Time spent at sea Procedures for determining and recording the time spent at sea when navigating through ice (voluntary monitoring): PART D DATA GAPS Table D.1 Methods to be used to estimate greenhouse gas emissions and fuel consumption Table D.2 Methods to be used to treat data gaps regarding distance travelled Table D.3 Methods to be used to treat data gaps regarding cargo carried Table D.4 Methods to be used to treat data gaps regarding time spent at sea PART E MANAGEMENT Table E.1 Regular check of the adequacy of the monitoring plan Table E.2 Procedures for data flow activities Table E.3 Procedures for risk assessment Table E.4 Control activities: Quality assurance and reliability of information technology Table E.5 Control activities: Internal reviews and validation of data relevant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 Table E.6 Control activities: Corrections and corrective actions Table E.7 Control activities: Outsourced activities (if applicable) Table E.8 Control activities: Documentation PART F FURTHER INFORMATION Table F.1 List of definitions and abbreviations Table F.2 Additional information ( 1 ) Status to be attributed by the IT system, as: ‘Working draft’, ‘Under revision’, ‘Final draft submitted to the verifier’, ‘Assessed by verifier’, ‘Modified without need for re-assessment’, ‘Submitted to the administering authority responsible for approval’, ‘Approved’. ( 2 ) As recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ( 3 ) The Registered Owner is the owner specified on a ship’s certificate of registry. ( 4 ) As recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ( 5 ) Select one of the following categories: ‘Passenger ship’, ‘Ro-ro ship’, ‘Container ship’, ‘Oil tanker’, ‘Chemical tanker’, ‘LNG carrier’, ‘Gas carrier’, ‘Bulk carrier’, ‘General cargo ship’, ‘Refrigerated cargo ship’, ‘Vehicle carrier’, ‘Combination carrier’, ‘Ro-pax ship’, ‘Container/ro-ro cargo ship’, ‘Other ship types’. Under the category ‘Passenger ship’, the sub-type ‘Passenger Cruise Ship’ is included for selection, if applicable. Under the category ‘Other ship types’, the sub-type ‘Offshore Ship’ is included for selection, if applicable. ( 6 ) Mandatory to benefit from the derogation for ice-class ships under Article 12(3-e) of Directive 2003/87/EC. Select one of the Polar Classes PC1 – PC7 or one of the Finnish-Swedish Ice Classes (IC, IB, IA or IA Super). To establish the correspondence between ice classes, HELCOM Recommendation 25/7 shall be used. ( 7 ) Ships should report the Technical Efficiency index EEDI or EEXI, and if this does not exist, EIV can be reported. ( 8 ) An additional contact person may be entered here. ( 9 ) Dropdown: Ship falling within the scope of the ISM Code [Yes/No]. In case Yes is selected, select one of the following categories: ‘Shipowner’, ‘ISM Company distinct from the shipowner’. In case No is selected ‘Shipowner’ applies. ( 10 ) Identification number as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ( 11 ) The country of registration shall be identical to the country of registration as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ( 12 ) Select one of the following categories: ‘Main engines’, ‘Auxiliary engines’, ‘Gas turbines’, ‘Boilers’, ‘Inert gas generators’, ‘Fuel cells’, ‘Waste incinerators’, ‘Other’. ( 13 ) Select one of the following categories: ICE (other), LNG Otto (dual fuel medium speed), LNG Otto (dual fuel slow speed), LNG Diesel (dual fuel slow speed), LBSI, Gas turbine, Boilers, Fuel Cells, Waste Incinerators, Inert Gas generators. ( 14 ) May include the identification number in case of multiple identical emission sources. ( 15 ) Select at least one of the following categories: ‘Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO)’, ‘Light Fuel Oil (LFO)’, ‘Diesel/Gas Oil (MDO/MGO)’,‘Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)’, ‘Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Butane, LPG)’, ‘Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Propane, LPG)’, ‘H 2 (Fossil)’, ‘NH 3 (Fossil), ‘Methanol (Fossil)’, ‘Ethanol’, ‘Bio-diesel’, ‘Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO)’, ‘Liquified bio-methane as transport fuel (Bio-LNG)’, ‘Bio-methanol’, ‘Other Biofuel’, ‘Bio-H 2 ’, ‘e-diesel’, ‘e-methanol’, ‘e-LNG’, ‘e-H 2 ’, ‘e-NH 3 ’, ‘e-LPG’, ‘e-DME’, ‘Non-fossil Other fuel’. ( 16 ) Select at least one of the following categories: ‘Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO)’, ‘Light Fuel Oil (LFO)’, ‘Diesel/Gas Oil (MDO/MGO)’,‘Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)’, ‘Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Butane, LPG)’, ‘Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Propane, LPG)’, ‘H 2 (Fossil)’, ‘NH 3 (Fossil), ‘Methanol (Fossil)’, ‘Ethanol’, ‘Bio-diesel’, ‘Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO)’, ‘Liquified bio-methane as transport fuel (Bio-LNG)’, ‘Bio-methanol’, ‘Other Biofuel’, ‘Bio-H 2 ’, ‘e-diesel’, ‘e-methanol’, ‘e-LNG’, ‘e-H 2 ’, ‘e-NH 3 ’, ‘e-LPG’, ‘e-DME’, ‘Non-fossil Other fuel’. ( 17 ) Confirm the use of default emission factors or insert an actual emission factor. For fossil fuels only the default emission factor for CO 2 can be used. ( 18 ) Confirm the use of default emission factors or insert an actual emission factor. For LNG fuels (fossil LNG, bio-LNG, e-LNG) the emissions factor for CH 4 shall be zero. ( 19 ) Confirm the use of default emission factors or insert an actual emission factor. ( 20 ) As reported under Table B.3 ( 21 ) Where applicable, the description of the procedure must identify how actual emission factors listed under Table B.4 and B.5 are derived for approval, including the method by which compliance with the conditions and restrictions for diverging from default values in accordance with Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 is demonstrated. ( 22 ) Where applicable, the description of the procedure must identify how CO 2 emission factors are derived for approval, including the method by which compliance with the conditions set under Part C, point 1.2, of Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 is demonstrated. ( 23 ) Select either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. ( 24 ) Select either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. ( 25 ) Select ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Not applicable’. ( 26 ) As reported under Table B.3. ( 27 ) Select one of the following categories: ‘Main engines’, ‘Auxiliary engines’, ‘Gas turbines’, ‘Boilers’, ‘Inert gas generators’, ‘Fuel cells’, ‘Waste incinerators’, ‘Other’. ( 28 ) Select one or more of the following categories: ‘Method A: BDN and periodic stocktakes of fuel tanks’, ‘Method B: Bunker fuel tank monitoring on-board’, ‘Method C: Flow meters for applicable combustion processes’ or ‘Method D: Direct greenhouse gas emissions measurement’. ( 29 ) Select one of the following categories: ‘On-board measurement equipment’, ‘Fuel supplier’ or ‘Laboratory test’. ( 30 ) Select one of the following categories: ‘Measurement equipment’, ‘Fuel supplier’, ‘Laboratory test’. ( 31 ) Select one or more of the following categories: ‘Method A: BDN and periodic stocktakes of fuel tanks’, ‘Method B: Bunker fuel tank monitoring on-board’, ‘Method C: Flow meters for applicable combustion processes’ or ‘Method D: Direct greenhouse gas emissions measurement’. ( 32 ) Select one of the following categories: ‘Default value’ or ‘Ship specific estimate’. ( 33 ) Select either ‘Mass method’ or ‘Area method’. ( 34 ) For passenger ships, the ‘Unit of cargo/passengers’ shall be specified as ‘passengers’. For ro-ro ships, container ships, oil tankers, chemical tankers, gas carriers, bulk carriers, refrigerated cargo ships, combination carriers, the ‘Unit of cargo/passengers’ shall be specified as ‘tonnes’. For LNG carriers, container/ro-ro cargo ships, the ‘Unit of cargo/passengers’ shall be specified as ‘cubic metres’. For general cargo ships, the ‘Unit of cargo/passengers’ shall be specified by selecting one of the following categories: ‘tonnes of deadweight carried’, ‘tonnes of deadweight carried and tonnes’. For vehicle carriers, the ‘Unit of cargo/passengers’ shall be specified by selecting one of the following categories: ‘tonnes’, ‘tonnes and tonnes of deadweight carried’. For ro-pax ships, the ‘Unit of cargo/passengers’ shall be specified as ‘tonnes’ and as ‘passengers’. For other ship types, the ‘Unit of cargo/passengers’ shall be specified by selecting one of the following categories: ‘tonnes’, ‘tonnes of deadweight carried’. ( 35 ) Select one of the following categories: ‘Method A: BDN and periodic stocktakes of fuel tanks’, ‘Method B: Bunker fuel tank monitoring on-board’, ‘Method C: Flow meters for applicable combustion processes’, ‘Method D: Direct greenhouse gas emissions measurement’ or ‘Not applicable’. The selected category must be different from the category selected under ‘Chosen methods for greenhouse gas emissions and fuel consumption’ in Table C.2 (Monitoring of greenhouse gas emissions and fuel consumption – Methods used to determine emissions and fuel consumption of each emission source). ANNEX II Template for emissions reports and partial emissions reports PART A Data identifying the ship and the company PART B Verification PART C Information on the monitoring method used and the related level of uncertainty PART D Results from annual monitoring of the parameters in accordance with Article 10 FUEL CONSUMPTION AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMITTED DISTANCE TRAVELLED, TIME SPENT AT SEA AND TRANSPORT WORK ENERGY EFFICIENCY PART E Results from annual monitoring in accordance with Article 10, point (k), of Regulation (EU) 2015/757 GREENHOUSE GAS EMITTED AND OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION ( 1 ) The country shall be identical to the country of registration as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ( 2 ) The country shall be identical to the country of registration as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ANNEX III Template for documents of compliance This is to certify that the ship ‘NAME’ emissions report covering the reporting period ‘YEAR N – 1’ has been considered as satisfactory regarding the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2015/757. This document of compliance has been issued on ‘DAY/MONTH/YEAR N’. This document of compliance is linked to emissions report No ‘NUMBER’ and is valid until 30 JUNE ‘YEAR N + 1’. 1. Ship particulars 2. Shipowner details 3. Details of company fulfilling the obligations under Regulation (EU) 2015/757 (voluntary field) 4. Verifier ( 1 ) The country shall be identical to the country of registration as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ( 2 ) The country shall be identical to the country of registration as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. ANNEX IV Template for reports at company level PART A Data identifying the company and the ships under the company’s responsibility for ETS purposes PART B Verification PART C Aggregated emissions data at company level RESULTS FROM THE AGGREGATION AT COMPANY LEVEL OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS TO BE REPORTED UNDER DIRECTIVE 2003/87/EC RESULTS FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUBMISSION TO THE UNION REGISTRY PART D Methodology used to aggregate emissions data at company level Description of the methodology used by the company to collect and aggregate its data for the purposes of this report, including changes in the methodology compared to the previous reporting period. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)