COMMISSION REGULATION (EC) No 498/2007 of 26 March 2007 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 on the European Fisheries Fund THE COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, Having regard to Council Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 of 27 July 2006 on the European Fisheries Fund ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 102 thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation lays down detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 (the basic Regulation) as regards the following: Article 2 Specific arrangements for certain operational programmes For operational programmes for which the total eligible public expenditure does not exceed EUR 90 million at 2004 prices, specific arrangements are laid down in Article 28(2) and Articles 51, 52 and 53. CHAPTER II STRUCTURE AND TRANSMISSION OF THE OPERATIONAL PROGRAMMES Article 3 Structure and transmission of the operational programmes 1. The content of the operational programme, referred to in Article 20 of the basic Regulation, shall be established in accordance with Part A of Annex I to this Regulation and the financing plan as set out in Part B of that Annex. The ex ante evaluation, referred to in Article 48 of the basic Regulation, shall be annexed to the operational programme. 2. Member States shall make available to the Commission an electronic version of their operational programme, updated following each programme revision. Member States shall submit to the Commission requests for programme revisions, referred to in Article 18 of the basic Regulation, by electronic means in accordance with Article 65 of this Regulation. Member States shall submit to the Commission their requests for revision of the operational programme, affecting the European Fisheries Fund (EFF) contribution for the ongoing year, by 30 September of that year at the latest. CHAPTER III PRIORITY AXES SECTION 1 Priority axis 1: Measures for the adaptation of the Community fishing fleet Article 4 Public aid for permanent cessation of fishing activities 1. After the permanent cessation of fishing activities, the fishing vessel concerned shall be permanently deleted from the fishing fleet register of the Community and, where appropriate, the fishing licence associated with it shall be permanently cancelled. 2. The operational programme shall specify the methods for calculating the premiums granted under Article 23 of the basic Regulation. 3. Where the permanent cessation of fishing activities of a fishing vessel is achieved by its reassignment as referred to in Article 23(1)(b) of the basic Regulation, Member States shall adjust the level of the premium accordingly, taking into account criteria such as the market value of the fishing licence for the vessel and the residual value of the vessel. 4. If a fishing vessel is lost between the date of the decision to grant the premium and the actual date of permanent cessation of fishing activities, the management authority shall make a financial correction for the amount of the compensation paid by the insurance. Article 5 Public aid for the temporary cessation of fishing activities 1. The operational programme shall specify the methods for calculating the premiums granted under Article 24 of the basic Regulation. 2. For the purposes of Article 24(2) of the basic Regulation, ‘Community financial assistance allocated to the sector’ shall mean the EFF contribution to the operational programme of the Member Sate concerned. Article 6 Investments on board fishing vessels and selectivity 1. For the purposes of Article 25 of the basic Regulation, the managing authority shall be responsible for assessing compliance with paragraphs 2 to 5 of this Article and shall provide the Commission with all relevant documents upon request. 2. The total eligible expenditure to be supported per fishing vessel over the entire programming period under Article 25 of the basic Regulation, except under paragraph 6(e) of that Article, shall not exceed a maximum amount established on the basis of objective criteria, such as those listed in Article 23(3) of that Regulation and included in the operational programme. 3. The 20 % reduction in engine power may be achieved by a group of vessels as provided for in Article 25(4) of the basic Regulation, subject to all the following conditions: 4. The exits from the fishing fleet of fishing capacity with public aid shall not be taken into account in the calculation of the 20 % reduction in power that may be achieved by a group of vessels as provided for in Article 25(4) of the basic Regulation. 5. Financial support granted under Article 25(6)(e) of the basic Regulation shall be granted only for equipment and modernisation works for the protection of catch and gear from wild predator species protected under Council Directives 79/409/EEC ( 13 ) and 92/43/EEC ( 14 ) . Article 7 Small-scale coastal fishing 1. Where the private financial participation rate is reduced in accordance with Article 26(2) of the basic Regulation, the rate of the public contribution shall be increased accordingly. The contribution from the EFF shall be calculated in accordance with the rates provided for in Article 53 of the basic Regulation in relation to such resulting public contribution. 2. The operational programme shall specify the methods for calculating premiums granted under Articles 26(3) and 26(4) of the basic Regulation in favour of small- scale coastal fishing. 3. For the purposes of Article 26(4)(b) of the basic Regulation ‘fisheries products’ shall mean fishery products originating from the catches of small-scale coastal fishing vessels. Article 8 Socio-economic compensation for the management of the Community fishing fleet 1. The operational programme shall specify the methods for calculating the socio-economic compensation for the management of the Community fishing fleet granted under Article 27 of the basic Regulation. 2. Support provided for in Article 27(1)(d) of the basic Regulation for early retirement shall be eligible for a contribution from the EFF, even where it is paid to the beneficiaries after 31 December 2015, provided that it has been secured for this purpose in a blocked account before that date. SECTION 2 Priority axis 2: Aquaculture, inland fishing, processing and marketing of fishery and aquaculture products Article 9 Scope of intervention in aquaculture production Support under Article 28(6) of the basic Regulation may cover the costs of assessments provided for in Council Directive 85/337/EEC ( 15 ) . Article 10 Measures for productive investments in aquaculture 1. For the purpose of Article 29(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the basic Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: 2. The support provided for in Article 29 of the basic Regulation, may cover aquaculture service vessels. Fishing vessels as defined in Article 3(c) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2371/2002 ( 16 ) shall not be regarded as aquaculture service vessels even where they are exclusively used in aquaculture. 3. Without prejudice to Article 35(6) of the basic Regulation, support under Article 29 of that Regulation may cover investments related to on-farm retail trade where such trade forms an integral part of the aquaculture farm. 4. Where Member States use the possibility provided for in Article 29(1)(a) of the basic Regulation, they shall put in place mechanisms to make available to the management authority the results of prospective market analysis on aquaculture species. 5. For the measures provided for in Article 29 of the basic Regulation, Member States shall describe in their operational programme how aid is to be prioritised to micro and small enterprises. Article 11 Aqua-environmental measures 1. Where support is granted to beneficiaries for the purposes referred to in Article 30 of the basic Regulation, Member States shall check that those beneficiaries comply with the aqua-environmental commitments at the latest three years from the date of approval of the operation and at the end of the implementation of the operation. 2. Support provided for in Article 30(2)(b) of the basic Regulation, shall concern only costs for participation in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) that are prior to the approval of the scheme for an individual enterprise. 3. For the purpose of Article 30(2)(c) of the basic Regulation, ‘organic aquaculture’ shall mean the aquaculture activities producing farmed aquatic species in accordance with the organic production method within the meaning of Article 2 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2092/91 ( 17 ) and which bear indications to that effect. Until the adoption of detailed production rules by the Community, including rules on conversion, applicable to organic aquaculture, national rules or, in the absence thereof, private standards, applicable to organic aquaculture, accepted or recognised by the Member States, shall apply. 4. Support provided for in Article 30(2)(d) of the basic Regulation, may be granted only for specific restrictions or requirements for Nature 2000 areas, imposed by the relevant national measures for the implementation of the Directives 79/409/EEC and 92/43/EEC. 5. For the purpose of Article 30(3) of the basic Regulation, ‘normal good aquaculture practice’ shall mean compliance with binding legislation, whether it relates to health, veterinary or environmental matters, and the use of production protocols that prevent the wastage of resources and avoidable pollution. Article 12 Animal health measures 1. Support provided for in Article 32 of the basic Regulation, may cover: 2. The managing authority of the operational programme shall decide whether it will contribute to the financing of control measures referred to in paragraph 1(a), or an eradication programme referred to in paragraph 1(b), and adopt the detailed arrangements for its financial participation before submitting the measures or the programme, respectively, in accordance with the provisions of Decision 90/424/EEC. 3. If the Commission does not approve, in accordance with Article 24 of Decision 90/424/EC, the control measures or the eradication programme referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the committed contribution shall be immediately returned to the budget of the operational programme. 4. If the value of the eligible costs in the action approved by the Commission in accordance with Article 24 of Decision 90/424/EC is less than the sum committed by the management authority, the difference released in this way may be reused by the Member State for its operational programme. 5. Support provided for in Article 32 of the basic Regulation, shall not cover surveillance activities intended to demonstrate freedom from a disease in order to obtain the recognition of the officially disease-free status or fixed costs such as the costs of official veterinary services. Article 13 Inland fishing 1. For the purpose of Article 33 of the basic Regulation, ‘vessels operating exclusively in inland waters’ shall mean vessels engaged in commercial fishing in inland waters and not included in the Community fishing fleet register. 2. For the investments provided for in the second subparagraph of Article 33(2) and Article 25 of the basic Regulation, vessels of less than 12 metres, not using towed gear and operating in inland fishing, may be supported with the same aid intensity as provided for small-scale coastal vessels referred to in Article 26 of that Regulation. 3. Member States shall determine in their operational programmes how they will ensure that the investments supported under Article 33 of the basic Regulation do not jeopardise the equilibrium between the fleet size and the corresponding fish resources available. Article 14 Investments in processing and marketing 1. Investments for the extractions from fishmeal or fish oil of dioxin or other substances harmful to human health may be supported by the EFF under Article 34 of the basic Regulation even where the final products are intended to be used and processed for purposes other than human consumption. 2. For the measures provided for in Article 35 of the basic Regulation, Member States shall describe in their operational programmes how aid will be prioritised to small and micro enterprises. SECTION 3 Priority axis 3: Measures of common interest Article 15 Collective actions 1. Support provided for in Article 37 of the basic Regulation shall not cover costs related to exploratory fishing. 2. Support provided for in point (n) of the first paragraph of Article 37 of the basic Regulation may be granted for: 3. The support referred to in paragraph 2(b) of this Article shall be degressive over three years following the date of the specific recognition under Article 12 of Regulation (EC) No 104/2000. Article 16 Measures intended to protect and develop aquatic fauna and flora 1. Support provided for in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 38(2) of the basic Regulation shall concern measures for the construction and installation of artificial reefs or other facilities made up of long lasting elements. Support may cover work preliminary to installation, including studies, components, signalling, transport and the assembly of the facilities and scientific monitoring. 2. Support provided for in Article 38(2) of the basic Regulation shall not cover fish aggregating devices. 3. Support provided for in point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 38(2) of the basic Regulation may cover the expenditure on the necessary conservation measures for sites belonging to the Nature 2000 European Ecological Network. Support may cover the preparation of management plans, strategies and schemes, infrastructure including depreciation and equipment for reserves, training and education for the employees of reserves as well as relevant studies. 4. Support provided for in point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 38(2) of the basic Regulation shall not cover compensation for rights foregone, loss of income and salaries of employees. 5. For the purposes of second subparagraph of Article 38(2) of the basic Regulation, ‘direct restocking’ shall mean the activity of releasing live aquatic organisms, whether the animals are produced in hatcheries or fished elsewhere. Article 17 Landing sites Where support is given for investments to restructure landing sites and to improve the conditions for fish landed by coastal fishers in existing landing sites, as provided for in the second subparagraph of Article 39(1) of the basic Regulation, Member States shall ensure compliance with the relevant sanitary rules and the enforcement of control measures in those landing sites. Article 18 Development of new markets and promotional campaigns 1. Support provided for promotional measures, as provided for in Article 40(3)(a), (d), (e) and (g) of the basic Regulation, may cover in particular: 2. As regards products protected under Council Regulation (EC) No 510/2006 ( 20 ) , support may be granted for their promotion only from the date on which the name has been entered in the register as provided for in Article 7 of that Regulation. Article 19 Pilot projects 1. No support shall be granted under Article 41 of the basic Regulation for exploratory fishing. 2. Where support is given for a pilot project, as provided for in Article 41 of the basic Regulation, the managing authority shall ensure that the pilot project includes adequate scientific follow up and that an adequate qualitative assessment of the technical reports referred to in Article 41(3) of that Regulation is made. 3. Pilot projects shall not be of a directly commercial nature. Any profit generated during the implementation of a pilot project shall be deducted from the public aid granted to the operation. 4. Where the total costs of a pilot project exceed EUR 1 million, the managing authority shall, prior to its approval, require an assessment by an independent scientific body. Article 20 Modification for reassignment of fishing vessels Support, as provided for in Article 42 of the basic Regulation, may be granted for the modification of a fishing vessel after its reassignment only if that vessel has been deleted permanently from the fishing fleet register and, where appropriate, the fishing licence associated with it has been permanently cancelled. SECTION 4 Priority axis 4: Sustainable development of fisheries areas Article 21 Objectives and measures The support granted under Article 43 of the basic Regulation shall be for: Article 22 Geographical application of Priority axis 4 1. The operational programme shall specify the procedures and the criteria for selecting the fisheries areas. Member States shall decide how they will apply Articles 43(3) and (4) of the basic Regulation. 2. The fisheries areas selected do not necessarily have to coincide with a national administrative area or with zones established for the purposes of eligibility under the objectives of the Structural Funds. Article 23 Procedures and criteria for selecting the groups 1. A group, as referred to in Article 45(1) of the basic Regulation, shall be composed in such a way that it is able to draw up and implement a development strategy in the area concerned. The relevance and effectiveness of the partnership shall be assessed on the basis its composition, as well as its transparency and clarity in the allocation of tasks and responsibilities. The capacity of the partners to carry out the tasks assigned to them and the effectiveness and decision-making shall be guaranteed. The partnership shall comprise, including at the decision-making level, representatives of the fisheries sector and of other relevant local socio-economic sectors. 2. The administrative capacity of the group shall be considered adequate where the group: 3. If the group is entrusted with the administration of public funds, its financial capacity shall be assessed: 4. The groups for the implementation of local development strategies shall be selected no later than four years from the date of the approval of the operational programme. Longer time limits may be granted where the managing authority organises more than one selection procedure for the groups. 5. The operational programme shall specify: Article 24 Local development strategy The local development strategy proposed by the group in accordance with Article 45(2) of the basic Regulation shall: Article 25 Implementing local development Strategy 1. Notwithstanding Article 45(2) of the basic Regulation, the group shall choose the operations to be financed under the local development strategy. 2. If the group is entrusted with the administration of public funds, it shall create a separate account for the implementation of the local development strategy. SECTION 5 Common provisions for several measures Article 26 Common provisions for priority axes 1 to 4 The following expenditure shall not be eligible for a contribution from EFF: CHAPTER IV EVALUATION OF THE OPERATIONAL PROGRAMMES Article 27 Interim evaluations Member States shall forward the interim evaluations referred to in Article 49 of the basic Regulation by 30 June 2011 at the latest. The Commission may decide to interrupt the payment deadline, in accordance with Article 88 of the basic Regulation, where a Member State has not complied with that obligation. CHAPTER V INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY Article 28 Description of the information and publicity measures in the operational programme and in the annual and final reports on implementation 1. For the purpose of Article 20(1)(g)(v) of the basic Regulation, the operational programme shall include at least the following elements: 2. For the operational programmes referred to in Article 2, paragraphs 1(c) and (d) of this Article shall not apply. 3. The annual reports and final report on implementation of an operational programme, referred to in Article 67 of the basic Regulation, shall include: The annual report on implementation covering the year 2010 and the final report on implementation referred to in Article 67 of the basic Regulation shall contain a chapter assessing the results of the information and publicity measures in terms of visibility and awareness of the operational programme and of the role played by the Community, as provided for in paragraph 1(d) of this Article. Article 29 Information measures for potential beneficiaries 1. For the purposes of Article 51(2)(a) of the basic Regulation, the managing authority shall ensure that the operational programme is disseminated widely with details of the financial contribution from the EFF and that it is made available to all interested parties. The managing authority shall ensure, in addition, that information on the financing opportunities offered by joint assistance from the Community and the Member State through the operational programme is disseminated as widely as possible. 2. The managing authority shall provide potential beneficiaries with clear and detailed information, on at least the following: 3. The managing authority shall inform potential beneficiaries of the publication provided for in point (d) of the second paragraph of Article 31. 4. The managing authority shall involve in information and publicity measures, in accordance with national laws and practices, at least one of the following bodies that can widely disseminate the information listed in paragraph 2: Article 30 Information measures for beneficiaries The managing authority shall inform beneficiaries that acceptance of funding is also an acceptance of their inclusion in the list of beneficiaries published in accordance with point (d) of the second paragraph of Article 31. Article 31 Responsibilities of the managing authority relating to information and publicity measures for the public For the purposes of Article 51(2)(c) of the basic Regulation, the managing authority shall ensure that the information and publicity measures for the public are implemented and that they aim at the widest possible media coverage using various forms and methods of communication at the appropriate territorial level. The managing authority shall be responsible for organising at least the following information and publicity measures: Participants in operations supported by EFF and aimed at improving professional skills and training as well as beneficiaries receiving support for early departure from the fishing sector, including early retirement, as provided for under Article 27(1)(d) of the basic Regulation, shall not be named. Article 32 Responsibilities of beneficiaries relating to information and publicity measures for the public 1. For the purposes of Article 51 of the basic Regulation, the beneficiary shall be responsible for informing the public, by means of the measures laid down in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article, about the assistance obtained from the EFF. 2. Where the total eligible cost of an operation co-financed by the EFF, exceeds EUR 500 000 and consists in the financing of infrastructure or of construction operations the beneficiary shall put up a billboard at the site of the operation during its implementation. The information referred to in Article 33 shall take up at least 25 % of the billboard. When the operation is completed the billboard shall be replaced by the permanent explanatory plaque referred to in paragraph 3. 3. Where the total eligible cost of the operation exceeds EUR 500 000 and consists in the purchase of a physical object or the financing of infrastructure or of construction operations, the beneficiary shall put up a permanent explanatory plaque that is visible and of significant size no later than six months from the date of completion of the operation. The plaque shall state the type and name of the operation in addition to the information referred to in Article 33. The information referred to in that Article shall take up at least 25 % of the plaque. An explanatory plaque shall also be installed at the locations of the groups financed under priority axis 4 of the basic Regulation. 4. In appropriate cases, the beneficiary shall ensure that those taking part in an operation co-financed by the EFF have been informed of that funding. The beneficiary shall provide a clear notice to the effect that the operation being implemented has been selected under an operational programme co-financed by the EFF. Any document, including any attendance or other certificate, concerning such an operation shall include a statement to the effect that the operational programme was co-financed by the EFF. Article 33 Technical characteristics of information and publicity measures for the operation 1. All information and publicity measures aimed at beneficiaries, potential beneficiaries and the public shall include the following: 2. For small promotional objects, paragraph 1(b) and (c) shall not apply. CHAPTER VI FINANCIAL ENGINEERING INSTRUMENTS Article 34 General provisions applicable to all financial engineering instruments 1. Pursuant to Article 55(8) of the basic Regulation, as part of an operational programme, the EFF may co-finance expenditure in respect of an operation comprising contributions to support financial engineering instruments for enterprises, primarily to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), including micro enterprises, as defined in Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC ( 21 ) as of 1 January 2005, such as venture capital funds, guarantee funds and loan funds including through holding funds. The financial engineering instruments shall be in the form of actions which make repayable investments or provide guarantees for repayable investments, or both. The conditions set out in Articles 35, 36 and 37 shall apply to them. 2. The statement of expenditure, as regards financial engineering instruments, shall include the total expenditure paid in establishing or contributing to such instruments. However, at the partial or final closure of the operational programme, the eligible expenditure shall be the total of any payments for investment in enterprises from each of the financial engineering instruments referred to in paragraph 1 or any guarantees provided, including amounts committed as guarantees by guarantee funds and eligible management costs. The corresponding statement of expenditure shall be corrected accordingly. 3. Interest generated by payments from the operational programme to financial engineering instruments shall be used to finance financial engineering instruments for small and medium-sized enterprises, including micro enterprises. 4. Resources returned to the operation from investments undertaken by financial engineering instruments or left over after all guarantees have been honoured shall be reused by the competent authorities of the Member States concerned for the benefit of small and medium-sized enterprises, including micro enterprises. Article 35 Conditions applicable to all financial engineering instruments 1. When the EFF finances operations comprising financial engineering instruments, including those organised through holding funds, a business plan shall be submitted by the co-financing partners or shareholders or by their duly authorised representative. That business plan shall be assessed and its implementation monitored by or under the responsibility of the Member State or the managing authority. The assessment of the economic viability of the investment activities of the financial engineering instruments shall take into account all sources of income of the enterprises concerned. 2. The business plan provided for in paragraph 1 shall specify at least the following: 3. Financial engineering instruments, including holding funds, shall be set up as independent legal entities governed by agreements between the co-financing partners or shareholders or as a separate block of finance within an existing financial institution. Where the financial engineering instrument is established within a financial institution, it shall be set up as a separate block of finance, subject to specific implementation rules within the financial institution, stipulating, in particular, that separate accounts are kept, which distinguish the new resources invested in the financial engineering instrument, including those contributed by the operational programme, from those initially available in the institution. The Commission shall not become a co-financing partner or shareholder in financial engineering instruments. 4. Management costs may not exceed, on a yearly average, for the duration of the assistance any of the following thresholds, unless a higher percentage proves necessary after a competitive tender: 5. The terms and conditions for contributions from the operational programme to financial engineering instruments shall be set out in a funding agreement, to be concluded between the duly mandated representative of the financial engineering instrument and the Member State or the managing authority. 6. The funding agreement referred to in paragraph 5 shall include at least: 7. The managing authority shall take precautions to minimise any distortions of competition in the venture capital or lending markets. Returns from equity investments and loans, less a pro rata share of the management costs and performance incentives, may be allocated preferentially to investors operating under the market economy investor principle up to the level of remuneration laid down in the bylaws of the financial engineering instruments and they shall then be allocated proportionally among all co-financing partners or shareholders. Article 36 Specific conditions applicable to holding funds 1. When the EFF finances financial engineering instruments organised through holding funds, that is, funds set up to invest in several venture capital funds, guarantee funds and loan funds, the Member State or managing authority shall implement them through one or more of the following forms: 2. When the EFF finances financial engineering instruments organised through holding funds, the Member State or the managing authority, shall conclude a funding agreement with the holding fund setting out the funding arrangements and objectives. The funding agreement shall, where appropriate, take account of the conclusions of an evaluation of gaps between the supply of such instruments to, and demand for such instruments by, SMEs. 3. The funding agreement, referred to in paragraph 2, shall in particular make provision for: 4. The terms and conditions for contributions to venture capital funds, guarantee funds, and loan funds from holding funds supported by the operational programme shall be set out in a funding agreement, to be concluded between the venture capital funds, guarantee fund and loan fund, on one hand, and the holding fund, on the other. The funding agreement shall include at least the elements listed in Article 35(6). Article 37 Specific conditions applicable to venture capital funds, guarantee funds and loan funds Financial engineering instruments, other than holding funds, shall invest in enterprises, primarily in SMEs. Such investments may only be made at the establishment, in the early stages, including seed capital, or on the expansion of those enterprises, and only in activities which the managers of the financial engineering instruments judge potentially economically viable. CHAPTER VII MANAGEMENT, MONITORING AND CONTROL SECTION 1 General provisions Article 38 Intermediate bodies 1. Where one or more of the tasks of a managing authority or certifying authority are performed by an intermediate body, the relevant arrangements shall be formally recorded in writing. 2. The provisions of this Regulation concerning the managing authority and certifying authority shall apply to the intermediate body. Article 39 Managing authority 1. For the purposes of the selection and approval of operations, under Article 59(a) of the basic Regulation, the managing authority shall ensure that beneficiaries are informed of the specific conditions concerning the products or services to be delivered under the operation, the financing plan, the time limit for execution, and the financial and other information to be kept and communicated. It shall satisfy itself that the beneficiary has the capacity to fulfil those obligations before the approval decision is taken. 2. The verifications to be carried out by the managing authority under Article 59(b) of the basic Regulation shall cover the administrative, financial, technical and physical aspects of operations, as appropriate. Verifications shall ensure that the expenditure declared is real, the products or services have been delivered in accordance with the approval decision, the applications for reimbursement by the beneficiary are correct and that expenditure complies with Community and national rules. They shall include procedures to avoid double-financing of expenditure with other Community or national schemes and with other programming periods. The verifications shall include the following procedures: 3. Where on-the-spot verifications under paragraph 2(b) are carried out on a sample basis for the operational programme, the managing authority shall keep records describing and justifying the sampling method and identifying the operations or transactions selected for verifications. The managing authority shall determine the size of the sample in order to achieve reasonable assurance as to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions having regard to the level of risk identified by the managing authority for the type of beneficiaries and operations concerned. The managing authority shall review the sampling method each year. 4. The managing authority shall establish written standards and procedures for the verifications carried out under paragraph 2 and shall keep records for each verification, stating the work performed, the date and the results of the verification and the measures taken in respect of any irregularities detected. 5. Where the managing authority is also a beneficiary under the operational programme, arrangements for the verifications referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article shall ensure the adequate separation of functions in accordance with Article 57(1)(b) of the basic Regulation. Article 40 Data on operations to be communicated on request to the Commission 1. The accounting records of operations and the data on implementation, referred to in Article 59(c) of the basic Regulation, shall include at least the information set out in Annex III to this Regulation. That information shall be disaggregated where relevant on the basis of age and gender of beneficiaries. 2. The managing, certifying and audit authorities and the bodies, referred to in Article 61(3) of the basic Regulation, shall have access to the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. 3. At the written request of the Commission, the Member State shall provide the Commission with the appropriate information referred to in paragraph 1 within fifteen working days of receipt of the request or any other agreed period, for the purpose of carrying out documentary and on-the-spot checks. The Commission may require the information referred to in paragraph 1 at the level of the operations, measures, priority axes or of the operational programme. Article 41 Audit trail For the purposes of Article 59(f) of the basic Regulation, an audit trail shall be considered adequate where, it complies with the following criteria: Article 42 Audits of operations 1. The audits referred to in Article 61(1)(b) of the basic Regulation shall be carried out each 12-month period from 1 July 2008 on a sample of operations selected by a method established or approved by the audit authority in accordance with Article 43 of this Regulation. The audits shall be carried out on-the-spot on the basis of documentation and records held by the beneficiary. 2. The audits shall verify that the following conditions are fulfilled: 3. Where any problems detected appear to be systemic in nature and therefore entail a risk for other operations under the operational programme, the audit authority shall ensure that further examinations are carried out, including additional audits where necessary, to establish the scale of any such problems. The necessary preventive and corrective action shall be taken by the responsible authorities. 4. Only expenditure falling within the scope of the audit in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be counted towards the amount of expenditure audited, for the purposes of reporting in the tables in point 9 of Part A of Annex VI and point 9 of Part A of Annex VII. Article 43 Sampling 1. The sample of operations to be audited each 12-month period shall in the first instance be based on a random statistical sampling method as set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4. Additional operations may be selected as a complementary sample as set out in paragraphs 5 and 6. 2. The method used to select the sample and to draw conclusions from the results shall take account of internationally accepted audit standards and be documented. Having regard to the amount of expenditure, the number and type of operations and other relevant factors, the audit authority shall determine the appropriate statistical sampling method to apply. The technical parameters of the sample shall be determined in accordance with Annex IV. 3. The sample to be audited in each 12-month period shall be selected from those operations for which expenditure has been declared to the Commission for the operational programme during the year preceding the year in which the annual control report, provided for in Article 61(1)(e)(i) of the basic Regulation, is communicated to the Commission. For the first twelve month period, the audit authority may decide to group the operations for which expenditure has been declared to the Commission in 2007 and 2008 as a basis for the selection of the operations to be audited. 4. The audit authority shall draw conclusions on the basis of the results of the audits relating to expenditure declared to the Commission during the period referred to in paragraph 3 and communicate them to the Commission in the annual control report. In operational programmes for which the projected error rate is above the materiality level, the audit authority shall analyse its significance and take the necessary actions, including making appropriate recommendations which shall be communicated in the annual control report. 5. The audit authority shall regularly review the coverage provided by the random sample, having regard in particular to the need to have sufficient audit assurance for the declarations to be provided at partial and final closure of the operational programme. It shall decide on the basis of its professional judgment whether it is necessary to audit a complementary sample of additional operations in order to take account of specific risk factors identified and to guarantee for the programme sufficient coverage of different types of operation, beneficiaries, intermediate bodies and priority axes. 6. The audit authority shall draw conclusions on the basis of the results of the audits of the complementary sample and communicate them to the Commission in the annual control report. Where the number of detected irregularities is high or where systemic irregularities have been detected, the audit authority shall analyse the significance thereof and take the necessary actions including making recommendations which shall be communicated in the annual control report. The results of the audits on the complementary sample shall be analysed separately from those of the random sample. In particular, irregularities detected in the complementary sample shall not be taken into account when the error rate of the random sample is calculated. Article 44 Documents presented by the audit authority 1. The audit strategy referred to in Article 61(1)(c) of the basic Regulation shall be established in accordance with the model set out in Annex V to this Regulation. It shall be updated and reviewed annually and, if necessary, during the course of the year. 2. The annual control report and the opinion referred to in Article 61(1)(e)(i) of the basic Regulation shall be based on the systems audits and audits of operations carried out under Article 61(1)(a) and (b) of that Regulation in accordance with the audit strategy for the operational programme and shall be drawn up in accordance with the models set out in Annex VI to this Regulation. 3. The closure declaration referred to in Article 61(1)(f) of the basic Regulation shall be based on all the audit work carried out by or under the responsibility of the audit authority in accordance with the audit strategy. The closure declaration and final control report shall be drawn up in accordance with the model set out in Annex VII to this Regulation. 4. If there is limitation in the scope of examination or if the level of irregular expenditure detected does not allow the provision of a unqualified opinion for the annual opinion referred to in Article 61(1)(e) of the basic Regulation or in the closure declaration referred to in Article 61(1)(f) of that Regulation, the audit authority shall give the reasons and estimate the scale of the problem and its financial impact. 5. In the event of partial closure of an operational programme, the declaration relating to the legality and regularity of the transactions covered by the statement of expenditure referred to in Article 85 of the basic Regulation shall be drawn up by the audit authority in accordance with the model set out in Annex VIII to this Regulation and submitted with the opinion referred to in Article 61(1)(e)(iii) of the basic Regulation Article 45 Availability of documents 1. For the purposes of Article 87 of the basic Regulation, the managing authority shall ensure that a record is available of the identity and location of bodies holding the supporting documents relating to expenditure and audits, which includes all documents required for an adequate audit trail. 2. The managing authority shall ensure that the documents referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article are made available for inspection by, and extracts or copies thereof are supplied to, persons and bodies entitled thereto, including at least authorised staff of the managing authority, certifying authority, intermediate bodies, audit authority and the bodies referred to in Article 61(3) of the basic Regulation and authorised officials of the Community and their authorised representatives. 3. The managing authority shall keep the information necessary for the purposes of evaluation and reporting, including the information referred to in Article 40, in relation to operations referred to in Article 87(2) of the basic Regulation for the whole of the period referred to in paragraph (1)(a) of that Article. 4. The following at least shall be considered as commonly accepted data carriers, as referred to in Article 87 of the basic Regulation: 5. The procedure for certification of conformity of documents held on commonly accepted data carriers with the original document shall be laid down by the national authorities and shall ensure that the versions held comply with national legal requirements and can be relied on for audit purposes. 6. Where documents exist in electronic version only, the computer systems used must meet accepted security standards that ensure that the documents held comply with national legal requirements and may be relied on for audit purposes. Article 46 Documents submitted by the certifying authority 1. Certified statements of expenditure and applications for payment, as referred to in Article 60(a) of the basic Regulation, shall be drawn up in the format set out in Annex IX to this Regulation and transmitted to the Commission. 2. By 31 March each year, as from 2008, the certifying authority shall submit to the Commission a statement in accordance with the model set out in Annex X identifying for each priority axis of the operational programme: 3. In order to proceed to the partial closure of the operational programme, the certifying authority shall submit to the Commission a statement of expenditure referred to in Article 85 of the basic Regulation in the format set out in Annex xI to this Regulation. Article 47 Description of management and control systems The description of the management and control systems for the operational programme referred to in Article 71(1) of the basic Regulation shall contain information on the points referred to in Article 57 of that Regulation, and the information set out in Articles 48 and 49 of the present Regulation. That information shall be submitted in accordance with the model set out in Part A of Annex XII to this Regulation. Article 48 Information concerning the managing authority, the certifying authority and intermediate bodies As regards the managing authority, the certifying authority and each intermediate body, the Member State shall provide the Commission with the following information: Article 49 Information concerning the audit authority and the bodies referred to in Article 61(3) of the basic Regulation As regards the audit authority and the bodies, referred to in Article 61(3) of the basic Regulation, the Member State shall provide the Commission with the following information: Article 50 Assessment of the management and control systems 1. The report, referred to in Article 71(2) of the basic Regulation, shall be based on an examination of the systems description, of relevant documents concerning the systems and of the system for keeping accounting records and data on the implementation of operations and on interviews with the staff in the main bodies considered important by the audit authority, or other body responsible for the report, in order to complete, clarify or verify the information. 2. The opinion on the compliance of the systems, referred to in Article 71(2) of the basic Regulation, shall be drawn up in accordance with the model set out in Part B of Annex XII to this Regulation. 3. Where the management and control system concerned is essentially the same as that in place for assistance approved under Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006 ( 22 ) , account may be taken of the results of audits carried out by national and Community auditors in relation to that system for the purposes of establishing the report and opinion under Article 71(2) of the basic Regulation. SECTION 2 Derogations with regard to the control of operational programmes referred to in Article 2 Article 51 General derogations 1. For the operational programmes referred to in Article 2 of this Regulation, the audit authority shall not be required to present to the Commission an audit strategy as provided for in Article 61(1)(c) of the basic Regulation. 2. For the operational programmes referred to in Article 2 of this Regulation, where the opinion on the compliance of the system referred to in Article 71(2) of the basic Regulation is without reservations, or where reservations have been withdrawn following corrective measures, the Commission may conclude: 3. Where the Commission reaches the conclusion referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, it shall inform the Member State concerned accordingly. Where there is evidence to suggest shortcomings, it may require the Member State concerned to carry out audits in accordance with Article 72(3) of the basic Regulation or it may carry out its own audits under Article 72(2) of that Regulation Article 52 Establishment of bodies and procedures under national law 1. For the operational programmes referred to in Article 2, a Member State may in addition to the general derogations provided for in Article 51, exercise the option of establishing, in accordance with national rules, the bodies and procedures for carrying out: 2. Where a Member State exercises the option referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall not be required to designate a certifying authority and an audit authority, as provided for in Article 58(1)(b) and (c) of the basic Regulation. 3. Where a Member State exercises the option referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the provisions of Article 71 of the basic Regulation shall apply mutatis mutandis . Article 53 Specific provisions for bodies and procedures established under national law 1. This Article shall apply to operational programmes in respect of which a Member State has exercised the option provided for in Article 52(1). 2. The verifications referred to in Article 39(2) shall be carried out by the national bodies referred to in Article 52(1). 3. The audits of operations referred to in Article 61(1)(b) of the basic Regulation shall be carried out in accordance with national procedures. Articles 42 and 43 of this Regulation shall not apply. 4. Article 44 (2) to (5) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the preparation of the documents issued by the national bodies referred to in Article 52(1). The annual control report and the annual opinion shall be drawn up following, as appropriate, the models set out in Annex VI. 5. The obligations laid down in Article 46(2), shall be carried out by the national bodies referred to in Article 52(1). The statement of expenditure shall be drawn up following the models set out in Annexes IX and XI. 6. The information to be included in the description of the management and control systems referred to in Articles 47, 48 and 49 shall, where applicable, include the information concerning the national bodies referred to in Article 52(1). CHAPTER VIII IRREGULARITIES Article 54 Definitions For the purposes of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply: Article 55 Initial reporting — derogations 1. Without prejudice to the obligations under Article 70 of basic Regulation, within two months following the end of each quarter, Member States shall report to the Commission any irregularities which have been the subject of a primary administrative or judicial finding. In that report, Member States shall in all cases give details concerning the following: 2. By way of derogation from the paragraph 1, the following cases need not be reported: However, irregularities preceding a bankruptcy and cases of suspected fraud must be reported. 3. Where some of the information referred to in paragraph 1, and in particular information concerning the practices employed in committing the irregularity and the manner in which it was discovered, is not available, Member States shall as far as possible supply the missing information when submitting subsequent quarterly reports of irregularities to the Commission. 4. If national provisions provide for the confidentiality of investigations, the communication of the information shall be subject to the authorisation of the competent court or tribunal. 5. Where a Member State has no irregularities to report under paragraph 1, it shall inform the Commission of that fact within the time limit set out in that paragraph. Article 56 Urgent cases Each Member State shall immediately report to the Commission and, where necessary, to the other Member States concerned, any irregularities discovered or supposed to have occurred, where it is feared that: Article 57 Reporting of follow-up and non-recovery 1. Within two months following the end of each quarter, Member States shall inform the Commission, with a reference back to any previous reports made under Article 55, of the procedures instituted with respect to all irregularities previously notified and of any important changes resulting from them. That information shall include at least the following: Member States shall report to the Commission administrative or judicial decisions, or the main points thereof, concerning the termination of such procedures and shall state in particular whether or not the findings are such that fraud is suspected. In the case referred to in point (d), Member States shall, as far as possible, notify the Commission before a decision is taken. 2. Where a Member State considers that an amount cannot be recovered or is not expected to be recovered, it shall inform the Commission, in a special report, of the amount not recovered and the facts relevant to the decision on apportionment of the loss under Article 70(2) of basic Regulation. That information shall be sufficiently detailed so as to allow the Commission to take such decision as soon as possible, after consulting the authorities of the Member States concerned. It shall include at least: 3. In the case referred to in paragraph 2, the Commission may expressly request the Member State to continue the recovery procedure. Article 58 Electronic transmission The information referred to in Articles 55 and 56 and Article 57(1) shall be submitted, whenever it is possible to do so, by electronic means, using the module provided by the Commission for this purpose via a secure connection Article 59 Reimbursement of judicial costs Where the competent authorities of a Member State decide, at the express request of the Commission, to initiate or continue judicial proceedings with a view to recovering amounts unduly paid, the Commission may undertake to reimburse the Member State all or part of the judicial costs and costs arising directly from the proceedings, on presentation of documentary evidence, even where the proceedings are unsuccessful. Article 60 Contacts with Member States 1. The Commission shall maintain appropriate contacts with the Member States concerned for the purpose of supplementing the information supplied on the irregularities referred to in Article 55, on the procedures referred to in Article 57, and, in particular, on the possibility of recovery. 2. Independently of the contacts referred to in paragraph 1 the Commission shall inform Member States where the nature of the irregularity is such as to suggest that identical or similar practices could occur in other Member States. 3. The Commission shall organise information meetings at Community level for representatives of the Member States in order to examine with them the information obtained pursuant to Articles 55, 56 and 57, and paragraph 1 of this Article. The examination shall focus on the lessons to be learned from the information in connection with irregularities, preventive measures and legal proceedings. 4. At the request of a Member State or the Commission, the Member State and the Commission shall consult with one another for the purpose of closing any loopholes prejudicial to Community interests which become apparent in the course of the enforcement of provisions in force. Article 61 Use of information The Commission may use any information of a general or operational nature communicated by Member States under this Regulation to perform risk analyses, and may, on the basis of the information obtained, produce reports and develop early-warning systems serving to identify risks more effectively. Article 62 The provision of information to Committees The Commission shall regularly inform the Member States, in the framework of the advisory committee for the coordination of fraud prevention set up by Commission Decision 94/140/EC ( 25 ) , of the order of magnitude of the funds involved in the irregularities which have been discovered and of the various categories of irregularity, broken down by type and number. The committee referred to in Article 101 of the basic Regulation shall also be informed. Article 63 Irregularities under the reporting threshold 1. Where the irregularities relate to amounts of less than EUR 10 000 chargeable to the general budget of the European Communities, Member States shall not submit to the Commission the information provided for in Articles 55 and 57 unless the latter expressly requests it. However, in accordance with Article 60(f) of the basic Regulation, Member States shall keep accounts of amounts below that threshold that are recoverable and of amounts recovered or withdrawn following cancellation of the contribution to an operation and shall repay the recovered amounts to the general budget of the European Communities. Without prejudice to the obligations arising directly out of Article 70(1)(b) of the basic Regulation, the Member State and the Community shall share any losses arising from amounts below the threshold that cannot be recovered in accordance with the co-financing rate applicable to the operation concerned. The procedure set out in Article 57(2) of this Regulation shall not apply unless the Commission decides otherwise. The third subparagraph of this paragraph shall also apply to cases of bankruptcy exempted from the reporting obligation provided for in Article 55(1). 2. Member States which have not adopted the euro as their currency by the date the irregularity is established shall convert expenditure paid in national currency into euro, in accordance with Article 95 of the basic Regulation. Where the expenditure has not been registered in the accounts of the certifying authority, the most recent accounting exchange rate published electronically by the Commission shall be used. CHAPTER IX ELECTRONIC EXCHANGE OF DATA Article 64 Computer system for data exchange For the purpose of Articles 65 and 75 of the basic Regulation, a computer system for exchange of data shall be established as a tool for the exchange of all data relating to the operational programme. The exchange of data between each Member State and the Commission shall be carried out using that computer system, established by the Commission, which permits the secure exchange of data between the Commission and each Member State. The Member States shall be involved in the further development of the computer system for data exchange. Article 65 The content of computer system for data exchange 1. The computer system for data exchange shall contain information of common interest to the Commission and the Member States, and at least the following data necessary for financial transactions: 2. In addition to paragraph 1, the computer system for data exchange shall contain at least the following documents and data of common interest enabling monitoring to be carried out: 3. The data referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall, where applicable, be transmitted in the format given in the Annexes. Article 66 Functioning of the computer system for data exchange 1. The Commission and the authorities designated by the Member State pursuant to the basic Regulation as well as the bodies to which that task has been delegated shall record into the computer system for data exchange the documents for which they are responsible and any update thereto, in the required format. 2. Member States shall centralise and submit to the Commission requests for access rights to the computer system for data exchange. 3. Exchanges of data and transactions shall bear an electronic signature as defined in Article 2(1) of Directive 1999/93/EC. The Member States and the Commission shall recognise the legal effectiveness and admissibility of the electronic signature used in the computer system for data exchange as evidence in legal proceedings. 4. The cost of developing the computer system shall be financed by the general budget of the European Communities under Article 46(1) of the basic Regulation. Any costs of an interface between the common computer system for data exchange and national, regional and local computer systems and any costs of adapting national regional and local systems to requirements under the basic Regulation shall be eligible under Article 46(2) of that Regulation. Article 67 Transmission of data through the computer system for data exchange 1. The computer system for data exchange shall be accessible to the Member States and the Commission either directly or via an interface for automatic synchronisation and recording of data with national, regional and local computer management systems. 2. The date taken into account for the forwarding of documents to the Commission shall be the date on which the Member State records the documents into the computer system for data exchange. 3. In cases of force majeure , and in particular of malfunctioning of the computer system for data exchange or a lack of a lasting connection, the Member State concerned may forward to the Commission the documents required by the basic Regulation in hard copy, in accordance with the model forms set out in Annex I and Annexes V to XIV to this Regulation. As soon as the cause of force majeure ceases, the Member State shall record the corresponding documents into the computer system for data exchange without delay. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, the date to be taken into account for submission shall be deemed to be the date of submission of the documents in hard copy. CHAPTER X PERSONAL DATA Article 68 Protection of personal data 1. Member States and the Commission shall take all necessary measures to prevent any unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, the information referred to in Article 40(1), information collected by the Commission in the course of its audits, and the information referred to in Chapter VIII. 2. The information referred to in Article 40(1), of this Regulation together with information collected by the Commission in the course of its audits, shall be used by the Commission for the sole purpose of fulfilling its responsibilities provided for in Article 72 of the basic Regulation. The European Court of Auditors and the European Anti-Fraud Office shall have access to that information. 3. The information referred to in Chapter VIII shall not be sent to persons, other than those in the Member States or within the Community institutions whose duties require that they have access to it, unless the Member State supplying such information has expressly so agreed. 4. Any personal data included in the information referred to in point (d) of the second paragraph of Article 31 shall only be processed for the purposes specified in that Article. CHAPTER XI FINAL PROVISIONS Article 69 Repeal Regulations (EC) No 2722/2000, (EC) No 908/2000 and (EC) No 366/2001 are repealed. The provisions of the Regulations repealed shall continue to apply to assistance approved under Regulation (EC) No 2792/1999. Article 70 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 26 March 2007. For the Commission Joe BORG Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 223, 15.8.2006, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 161, 26.6.1999, p. 54 . ( 3 ) OJ L 337, 30.12.1999, p. 10 . Regulation as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 485/2005 ( OJ L 81, 30.3.2005, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 14 . ( 5 ) OJ L 178, 12.7.1994, p. 43 . Regulation as amended by Regulation (EC) No 2035/2005 ( OJ L 328, 15.12.2005, p. 8 ). ( 6 ) OJ L 13, 19.1.2000, p. 12 . ( 7 ) OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31 . Directive as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003 ( OJ L 284, 31.10.2003, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1 . ( 9 ) OJ L 314, 14.12.2000, p. 10 . ( 10 ) OJ L 105, 3.5.2000, p. 15 . Regulation as amended by Regulation (EC) No 2438/2000 ( OJ L 280, 4.11.2000, p. 37 ). ( 11 ) OJ L 55, 24.2.2001, p. 3 . ( 12 ) OJ L 222, 17.8.2001, p. 53 . ( 13 ) OJ L 103, 25.4.1979, p. 1 . ( 14 ) OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 . ( 15 ) OJ L 175, 5.7.1985, p. 40 . ( 16 ) OJ L 358, 31.12.2002, p. 59 . ( 17 ) OJ L 198, 22.7.1991, p. 1 . ( 18 ) OJ L 224, 18.8.1990, p. 19 . ( 19 ) OJ L 17, 21.1.2000, p. 22 . ( 20 ) OJ L 93, 31.3.2006, p. 12 . ( 21 ) OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36 . ( 22 ) OJ L 210, 31.7.2006, p. 25 . ( 23 ) OJ C 316, 27.11.1995, p. 49 . ( 24 ) OJ L 160, 30.6.2000, p. 1 . ( 25 ) OJ L 61, 4.3.1994, p. 27 . ANNEX I OPERATIONAL PROGRAMME PART A Content of an operational programme Information referred to in points 3 and 4 shall be provided in a summary form where it is included in the national strategic plan. 1. TITLE OF THE OPERATIONAL PROGRAMME, MEMBER STATE 2. GEOGRAPHICAL ELIGIBILITY Identify: 3. ANALYSIS 4. STRATEGY AT OPERATIONAL PROGRAMME LEVEL Strategy chosen to meet strengths and weaknesses including: 5. SUMMARY OF THE EX ANTE EVALUATION Include a summary of the ex ante evaluation that will identify and appraise the elements referred to in Article 48 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. The ex ante evaluation shall address also the requirements of the environmental assessment provided for by Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 3 ) (the ‘Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive’). The complete ex ante evaluation shall be presented as an annex to the operational programme. 6. PROGRAMME'S PRIORITY AXES 7. FINANCIAL PROVISIONS To be drawn up in accordance with this Annex, Part B: Financing plans for the operational programme. 8. IMPLEMENTING PROVISIONS PART B Financing plan for the operational programme Table I: Financing plan of the operational programme giving the annual commitment of the EFF in the operational programme separately, where appropriate, for the regions eligible under the convergence objective and the non-convergence objective Commitments shall be made on an annual basis according to the following plan: Operational programme reference (CCI number): Year by source for the programme, in EUR: Convergence objective regions Non-convergence objective regions Table II: Financing plan of the operational programme giving, separately for the whole programming period, and for each priority axis, and separately, where appropriate, for regions eligible under the convergence objective and the non-convergence objective, the amount of the total financial allocation of the EFF in the operational programme, the national public contribution and the rate of reimbursement by priority axis Operational programme reference (CCI number): Priority axes in EUR Table II: Financial table for operational programme by priority axis Convergence objective regions Non-convergence objective regions ( 1 ) The impact indicators refer to the consequences of the operational programme beyond the immediate effects. ( 2 ) The result indicators relate to the direct and immediate effects on beneficiaries brought about by the operational programme. ( 3 ) OJ L 197, 21.7.2001, p. 30 . ( 4 ) The EFF co-financing rate may be rounded-off in the table. The precise rate used to reimburse payments is the percentage (d). ( 5 ) In the case of operational programmes covering a mix of regions eligible under the convergence objective and the non-convergence objective, the total public contribution for priority axis 5 may be allocated to the predominant type of regions which have the highest total amount of public contribution in the operational programme. ( 6 ) The EFF co-financing rate may be rounded-off in the table. The precise rate used to reimburse payments is the percentage (d). ( 7 ) In the case of operational programmes covering a mix of regions eligible under the convergence objective and the non-convergence objective, the total public contribution for priority axis 5 may be allocated to the predominant type of regions which have the highest total amount of public contribution in the operational programme. ANNEX II INSTRUCTIONS FOR CREATING THE EMBLEM AND A DEFINITION OF THE STANDARD COLOURS Symbolic description Against a background of blue sky, 12 golden stars form a circle representing the union of the peoples of Europe. The number of stars is fixed, 12 being the symbol of perfection and unity. Heraldic description On an azure field a circle of twelve golden mullets, their points not touching. Geometric description The emblem has the form of a blue rectangular flag of which the fly is one and a half times the length of the hoist. Twelve gold stars situated at equal intervals form an invisible circle whose centre is the point of intersection of the diagonals of the rectangle. The radius of the circle is equal to one third of the height of the hoist. Each of the stars has five points which are situated on the circumference of an invisible circle whose radius is equal to 18th of the height of the hoist. All the stars are upright, i.e. with one point vertical and two points in a straight line at right angles to the mast. The circle is arranged so that the stars appear in the position of the hours on the face of a clock. Their number is invariable. Regulation colours Monochrome reproduction process Reproduction on a coloured background ANNEX III LIST OF DATA TO BE COMMUNICATED ON REQUEST TO THE COMMISSION UNDER ARTICLE 40 The data on operations that the Commission may request at any time under Article 40 of this Regulation comprises the following information, without prejudice to other information required for financial management, monitoring, control or evaluation and specified in Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. At the written request of the Commission, the Member State shall provide the Commission with the appropriate information within 15 working days of receipt of the request or other agreed period for the purpose of carrying out documentary and on-the-spot checks. The Commission may require the information at the level of the operations, measures, priority axes or of the operational programme. Member State Details of the operation (delete as appropriate) Short description of the operation using data listed here after, where appropriate C.C.I. (common identification code) for programme: Commission Decision approving the Operational programme … No … of ../../200.. Information on individual operations Financial data expressed in EUR Wording of columns: see hereafter. Name, status and signature of representative of competent authority: Date: ../../20.. Wording of table columns (Information to be provided for each operation) Columns 1 to 5: administrative details of operation Columns 7 to 10: expenditure forecasts under the operation in accordance with the administrative decision granting public aid taken by managing authority Columns 11 to 15: physical data concerning the operation (classification and physical implementation) Columns 16 to 18: information concerning financial implementation of operation — statement of eligible expenditure and corresponding public aid NOMENCLATURE OF PRIORITY AXES, MEASURES, ACTIONS AND IMPLEMENTATION DATA Priority axis 1: Measures for the adaptation of the Community fishing fleet Measure 1.1: Permanent cessation of fishing activities Measure 1.2: Temporary cessation of fishing activities Measure 1.3: Investments on board fishing vessels and selectivity Measure 1.4: Small-scale coastal fishing Measure 1.5: Socio-economic compensations for the management of the fleet Priority axis 2: Aquaculture, inland fishing, processing and marketing of fishing and aquaculture products Measure 2.1: Aquaculture Measure 2.2. Inland fishing Measure 2.3. Fish processing and marketing Priority axis 3: Measures of common interest Measure 3.1: Collective actions Measure 3.2: Protection and development of aquatic fauna and flora Measure 3.3: Fishing ports landing sites and shelters Measure 3.4: Development of new markets and promotion campaigns Measure 3.5: Pilot operations Measure 3.6: Modification for reassignment of fishing vessels Priority axis 4: Sustainable development of fisheries areas Measure 4.1: Development of fisheries areas Priority axis 5: Technical assistance Measure 5.1: Technical assistance ( 1 ) OJ L 208, 24.7.1992, p. 1 . ANNEX IV TECHNICAL PARAMETERS FOR RANDOM STATISTICAL SAMPLING UNDER ARTICLE 43 (SAMPLING) ANNEX V MODEL AUDIT STRATEGY AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 61(1)(C) OF REGULATION (EC) No 1198/2006 1. INTRODUCTION 2. LEGAL BASIS AND SCOPE 3. METHODOLOGY 4. AUDIT APPROACH AND PRIORITIES 5. RISK ASSESSMENT 6. RELIANCE ON THE WORK OF OTHERS 7. RESOURCES 8. REPORTING ANNEX VI MODEL ANNUAL CONTROL REPORT AND OPINION PART A Model annual control report under Article 61(1)(e)(i) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Article 44(2) of the present Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION 2. CHANGES IN MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 3. CHANGES TO AUDIT STRATEGY 4. SYSTEMS AUDITS 5. AUDITS OF SAMPLE OF OPERATIONS 6. COORDINATION BETWEEN AUDIT BODIES AND SUPERVISION WORK OF THE AUDIT AUTHORITY 7. FOLLOW-UP OF PREVIOUS YEARS’ AUDIT ACTIVITY 8. OTHER INFORMATION (IF APPLICABLE) 9. TABLE FOR DECLARED EXPENDITURE AND SAMPLE AUDITS Convergence objective regions Non-convergence objective regions PART B Model annual opinion under Article 61(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Article 44(2) of the present Regulation To the European Commission, Directorate-General […] 1. INTRODUCTION I, the undersigned, representing the (name of body designated by Member State), have examined the functioning of the management and control systems in the operational programme (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period), in order to issue an opinion on whether the systems functioned effectively so as to provide reasonable assurance that the statements of expenditure presented to the Commission are correct and as a consequence reasonable assurance that the underlying transactions are legal and regular. 2. SCOPE OF THE EXAMINATION The examination was carried out in accordance with the audit strategy in respect of this programme during the period 1 July to 30 June (year) and reported in the attached annual control report under Article 61(1)(e)(i) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. Either There were no limitations on the scope of the examination The scope of the examination was limited by the following factors: (c) etc. (Indicate any limitation on the scope of the examination, for example any systemic problems, weaknesses in the management and control system, lack of supporting documentation, cases under legal proceedings, etc and estimate the amounts of the expenditure and the Community contribution affected. If the audit authority does not consider that the limitations have an impact on the final expenditure declared, this must be stated.) 3. OPINION Either (Unqualified opinion) Based on the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that for the abovementioned period the management and control system established for the programme … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) complied with the applicable requirements of Articles 57 to 61 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Chapter VII of Commission Regulation (EC) No 498/2007 ( 7 ) and functioned effectively so as to provide reasonable assurance that the statements of expenditure presented to the Commission are correct and as a consequence reasonable assurance that the underlying transactions are legal and regular. (Qualified opinion) Based on the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that for the abovementioned period the management and control systems established for the programme … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) complied with the applicable requirements of Articles 57 to 61 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Chapter VII of Commission Regulation (EC) No 498/2007 and functioned effectively so as to provide reasonable assurance that the statements of expenditure presented to the Commission are correct and as a consequence reasonable assurance that the underlying transactions are legal and regular, except in the following respects ( 8 ) . My reasons for considering that this (these) aspect(s) of the systems did not comply with the requirements and/or did not operate in such a way as to give a reasonable assurance that the statements of expenditure presented to the Commission are correct as follows … ( 9 ) . I estimate the impact of the qualification(s) to be … of the total expenditure declared. The Community contribution affected is thus …. (Adverse opinion) Based on the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that for the abovementioned period the management and control system established for the programme … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) did not comply with the requirements of Articles 57 to 61 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Chapter VII of Commission Regulation (EC) No 498/2007 and did not function effectively so as to provide reasonable assurance that the statements of expenditure presented to the Commission are correct and, as a consequence, does not provide reasonable assurance that the underlying transactions are legal and regular. This adverse opinion is based on … ( 10 ) ( 1 ) Expenditure for complementary sample and expenditure for random sample not in the reference year. ( 2 ) Amount of expenditure audited. ( 3 ) Percentage of expenditure audited in relation to eligible expenditure declared to the Commission in the reference year. ( 4 ) Expenditure for complementary sample and expenditure for random sample not in the reference year. ( 5 ) Amount of expenditure audited. ( 6 ) Percentage of expenditure audited in relation to eligible expenditure declared to the Commission in the reference year. ( 7 ) OJ L 120, 10.5.2007, p. 1 . ( 8 ) Indicate the body or bodies and the aspect(s) of their systems that did not comply with requirements and/or did not operate effectively. ( 9 ) Indicate for each body and each aspect of the system the reasons for the qualification. ( 10 ) Indicate for each body and each aspect the reasons for the adverse opinion. ANNEX VII MODEL FINAL CONTROL REPORT AND CLOSURE DECLARATION FOR THE OPERATIONAL PROGRAMME UNDER ARTICLE 61(1)(f) OF REGULATION (EC) No 1198/2006 AND ARTICLE 44(3) OF THE PRESENT REGULATION PART A Model final control report 1. INTRODUCTION 2. CHANGES IN MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL SYSTEMS AND AUDIT STRATEGY ( 1 ) 3. SUMMARY OF AUDITS CARRIED OUT UNDER ARTICLE 61(1)(a) AND (b) OF REGULATION (EC) No 1198/2006 AND ARTICLE 43 OF THE PRESENT REGULATION For systems audits: For audits of operations: 4. FOLLOW-UP OF AUDIT ACTIVITY 5. ADDITIONAL WORK UNDERTAKEN BY AUDIT AUTHORITY IN PREPARING ITS CLOSURE DECLARATION 6. LIMITATIONS ON THE SCOPE OF THE EXAMINATION BY THE AUDIT AUTHORITY 7. REPORTED IRREGULARITIES 8. OTHER INFORMATION (IF APPLICABLE) 9. TABLE FOR DECLARED EXPENDITURE AND SAMPLE AUDITS Convergence objective regions Non-convergence objective regions PART B Closure declaration To the European Commission, Directorate-General […] 1. INTRODUCTION I, the undersigned, … representing the (name of the body designated by Member State), have for the operational programme … (name of the operational programme, CCI code number, period) examined the results of the audit work carried out on this programme by or under the responsibility of the audit authority in accordance with the audit strategy (and have carried out the additional work I judged necessary). The results of the examination and the additional work I have performed are summarised in the attached final control report (which also contains the information required by the annual control reports for the period 1 January 2015 to 31 December 2016). I have planned and performed this work with a view to obtaining a reasonable assurance as to whether the payment application for the balance of the Community contribution to the programme is correct and valid and the underlying transactions covered by the final statement of expenditure are legal and regular. 2. SCOPE OF THE EXAMINATION The examination was carried out in accordance with the audit strategy in respect of this programme and reported in the attached final control report under Article 61(1)(f) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. Either There were no limitations on the scope of the examination. The scope of the examination was limited by the following factors: (c) etc. (Indicate any limitation on the scope of the examination, for example any systemic problems, weaknesses in the management and control system, lack of supporting documentation, cases under legal proceedings, etc., and estimate the amounts of expenditure and the Community contribution affected. If the audit authority does not consider that the limitations have an impact on the final expenditure declared, this must be stated.) 3. IRREGULARITIES AND ERROR RATES Either The cases of irregularity and error rates found in the audit work is not such as to preclude an unqualified opinion given the satisfactory way they have been dealt with by the managing authority and the trend in the level of their occurrence over time. The cases of irregularity and error rates found in the audit work and the way they have been dealt with by the managing authority are such as to preclude an unqualified opinion. A list of these cases is provided in the final control report, together with an indication of their possible systemic character and the scale of the problem. The amounts of total declared expenditure and public contribution that could be affected are … respectively. As a consequence, the corresponding Community contribution that could be affected is …. 4. OPINION Either (Unqualified opinion) If there were no limitations on the scope of the examination and the cases of irregularity and error rates and the way they have been dealt with by the managing authority do not preclude an unqualified opinion: Based on the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that the final statement of expenditure presents fairly, in all material respects, the expenditure paid under the operational programme, that the application for payment of the balance of the Community contribution to this programme is valid and that the underlying transactions covered by the final statement of expenditure are legal and regular. (Qualified opinion) If there were limitations on the scope of the examination and/or cases of irregularity and error rates and the way they have been dealt with by the managing authority call for a qualified opinion but do not justify an unfavourable opinion for all the expenditure concerned: Based on the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that the final statement of expenditure presents fairly, in all material respects, the expenditure paid under the operational programme, that the application for payment of the balance of the Community contribution to this programme is valid and that the underlying transactions covered by the final statement of expenditure are legal and regular, except with regard to the matters referred to at point 2 above and/or to the observations at point 3 regarding the error rates and cases of irregularity and the way they have been dealt with by the managing authority, the impact of which is quantified above. I estimate the impact of these qualifications to be … of the total expenditure declared. The Community contribution affected is thus …. (Adverse opinion) If there were major limitations on the scope of the examination error rates and cases of irregularity and the way they have been dealt with by the managing authority are such that no conclusion can be reached on the reliability of the final statement of expenditure without considerable further work: Based on the examination referred to above, and in particular in view of the matters referred to at point 2 and/or the error rates and cases of irregularity and the fact that they have not been dealt with satisfactorily by the managing authority as reported at point 3, it is my opinion that that the final statement of expenditure does not present fairly, in all material respects, the expenditure paid under the operational programme, that, as a consequence, the application for payment of the balance of the Community contribution to this programme is not valid and that the underlying transactions covered by the final statement of expenditure are not legal and regular. ( 1 ) For changes not indicated in earlier annual control reports. ( 2 ) For audits not covered by earlier annual control reports. ( 3 ) Examples of such matters include systemic problems, weaknesses in management and control systems, lack of supporting documents, and cases under legal proceedings. ( 4 ) Expenditure for complementary sample and expenditure for random sample not in the reference year. ( 5 ) Amount of expenditure audited. ( 6 ) Percentage of expenditure audited in relation to eligible expenditure declared to the Commission in the reference year. ( 7 ) Expenditure for complementary sample and expenditure for random sample not in the reference year. ( 8 ) Amount of expenditure audited. ( 9 ) Percentage of expenditure audited in relation to eligible expenditure declared to the Commission in the reference year. ANNEX VIII MODEL DECLARATION FOR THE PARTIAL CLOSURE OF THE OPERATIONAL PROGRAMME UNDER ARTICLE 44(5) To the European Commission, Directorate-General […] The managing authority for the programme … (name of the operational programme, CCI code number, period) has submitted a statement of expenditure relating to operations [completed as at … (date up to which operations were completed)/completed between … and … (dates between which operations were completed/and is applying for partial closure of the programme under Article 85(2)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 for these operations. I, the undersigned, representing the (name of the body designated by the Member State), have examined the results of the audit work carried out on this programme as set out in the annual control reports and annual opinions issued under Article 61(1)(e)(i) and (ii) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 for the year/years … I have planned and performed this work with a view to obtaining a reasonable assurance as to whether the statement of expenditure concerned is correct and valid and the underlying transactions covered by the statement of expenditure are legal and regular. Opinion Based on the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that the statement of expenditure on completed operations submitted by the managing authority for the programme … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) for the purpose of partial closure of the programme in respect of operations (completed as at …/completed between … and …) presents fairly, in all material respects, the expenditure paid and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular. ANNEX IX CERTIFICATE AND STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE AND APPLICATION FOR PAYMENT PART A Certificate and statement of expenditure and application for interim payment EUROPEAN COMMISSION European Fisheries Fund Certificate and statement of expenditure and payment application Member State: … Commission Decision … of … Commission reference (CCI) No: … Convergence and non-convergence regions: … CERTIFICATE I, the undersigned, representing the certifying authority designated by (1): hereby certify that all expenditure included in the attached statement complies with the criteria for eligibility of expenditure set out in Article 55 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and has been paid by the beneficiaries on the implementation of the operations selected under the operational programme in accordance with the conditions for granting of public contributions under Article 78 of that Regulation. after (2) and amounts to: EUR (3) (exact figure to two decimal places) The attached statement of expenditure, broken down by priority axis, is based on accounts provisionally closed on and forms an integral part of this certificate. I also certify that operations are progressing in pursuance with the objectives laid down in the Decision and in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, and in particular that: (1) the expenditure declared complies with the applicable Community and national rules and has been paid in respect of operations selected for funding in accordance with the criteria applicable to the operational programme and the applicable Community and national rules; (2) the statement of expenditure is accurate, results from reliable accounting systems and is based on verifiable supporting documents; (3) the underlying transactions are lawful and comply with the rules and the procedures have been followed satisfactorily; (4) the statement of expenditure and the payment application take account, where applicable, of any amounts recovered, any interest received and of revenue accruing from operations financed under the operational programme. (5) the breakdown of the underlying operations is recorded on computer files and is available to the relevant Commission departments on request. In accordance with Article 87 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, the supporting documents are and will continue to be available for at least three years following the closure of the operational programme by the Commission (without prejudice to the special conditions laid down in Article 98(1) of that Regulation). Name in capitals, stamp, position and signature of competent authority: (1) Indicate the administrative instrument of designation in accordance with Article 58 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 with any (2) Reference date according to the Decision. (3) Total amount of eligible expenditure paid by beneficiaries. Statement of expenditure by priority axis: Interim payment Operational programme reference No (CCI No): … Member State: … Date of provisional closure of accounts: … Date of submission to the Commission: … Total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions eligible under the convergence objective: … Priority axis 2007-2015 Total amount of eligible expenditure paid by beneficiaries EFF contribution National contribution Priority axis 1 Priority axis 1: Total Priority axis 1: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20 .. Priority axis 2 Priority axis 2: Total Priority axis 2: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20 .. Priority axis 3 Priority axis 3: Total Priority axis 3: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20 .. Priority axis 4 Priority axis 4: Total Priority axis 4: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20 .. Priority axis 5 Priority axis 5: Total Priority axis 5: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20 .. Grand total Grand total of expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure (1) (1) Partial closure concerns operations completed as at 31 December of the year preceding the year of partial closure. The list of operations which have been subject to partial closure is made available to the Commission upon request. Total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions eligible under the non-convergence objective: … Priority axis 2007-2015 Total amount of eligible expenditure paid by beneficiaries EFF contribution National contribution Priority axis 1 Priority axis 1: Total Priority axis 1: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 2 Priority axis 2: Total Priority axis 2: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 3 Priority axis 3: Total Priority axis 3: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 4 Priority axis 4: Total Priority axis 4: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 5 Priority axis 5: Total Priority axis 5: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Grand total Grand total of expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Breakdown by year of the total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions under the convergence objective (2): Amounts of expenditure (in euros) Grand total 2007-2015 Breakdown by year of the total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions under the non-convergence objective (2): Amounts of expenditure (in euros) Grand total 2007-2015 (2) By year: the breakdown mentioned in this table shall correspond to the payments made by the beneficiaries in the year concerned. Where it is not possible to establish this breakdown precisely, the best estimate of the breakdown must be given. APPLICATION FOR PAYMENT: Interim payment Member State: Operational programme reference No (CCI): Pursuant to Article 60 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, I, the undersigned (name in capitals, stamp, position and signature of competent authority), hereby request that you pay by way of interim payment the sum of …: The amount requested has been calculated following the provisions of Article 76(1)/76(2) (1) of that Regulation. Convergence objective Non-convergence objective This application is admissible because: Delete as appropriate (a) no more than the maximum amount of assistance from the EFF as laid down in the decision of the Commission approving the operational programme has been paid by the Commission during the whole period for each priority axis; (b) the managing authority has submitted to the Commission the most recent annual report on implementation in accordance with Article 67 (1) and (3) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. — has been submitted by the managing authority within the time limit laid down — is attached — is not due. (c) there is no reasoned opinion by the Commission in respect of an infringement under Article 226 of the Treaty, as regards the operation(s) for which the expenditure is declared in the application for payment. The payment shall be made by the Commission to the body designated by the Member State for the purposes of making payments Designated body Bank account No Holder of account (where not the same as the designated body) Name in capitals, stamp, position and signature of competent authority (1) Delete as appropriate. If the Member State chooses the option provided for under Article 76(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, it shall state the specific and proper reasons for this choice. PART B Certificate and statement of expenditure and application for final payment EUROPEAN COMMISSION European Fisheries Fund Certificate and statement of expenditure and payment application Member State: … Commission Decision … of … Commission reference (CCI) No: … CERTIFICATE I, the undersigned, representing the certifying authority designated by (1): hereby certify that all expenditure included in the attached statement complies with the criteria for eligibility of expenditure set out in Article 55 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and has been paid by the beneficiaries on the implementation of the operations selected under the operational programme in accordance with the conditions for granting of public contributions under Article 78 of that Regulation. after (2) and amounts to: EUR (3) (exact figure to two decimal places) The attached statement of expenditure, broken down by priority axis, is based on accounts provisionally closed on and forms an integral part of this certificate. I also certify that operations are progressing in pursuance with the objectives laid down in the Decision and in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, and in particular that: (1) the expenditure declared complies with the applicable Community and national rules and has been paid in respect of operations selected for funding in accordance with the criteria applicable to the operational programme and the applicable Community and national rules; (2) the statement of expenditure is accurate, results from reliable accounting systems and is based on verifiable supporting documents; (3) the underlying transactions are lawful and comply with the rules and the procedures have been followed satisfactorily; (4) the statement of expenditure and the payment application take account, where applicable, of any amounts recovered, any interest received and of revenue accruing from operations financed under the operational programme. (5) the breakdown of the underlying operations is recorded on computer files and is available to the relevant Commission departments on request. In accordance with Article 87 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, the supporting documents are and will continue to be available for at least three years following the closure of the operational programme by the Commission (without prejudice to the special conditions laid down in Article 98(1) of that Regulation). Name in capitals, stamp, position and signature of competent authority: (1) Indicate the administrative instrument of designation in accordance with Article 58 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 with any (2) Reference date according to the Decision. (3) Total amount of eligible expenditure paid by beneficiaries. Statement of expenditure by priority axis: Payment of balance Operational programme reference No (CCI No): … Member State: … Date of final closure of accounts: … Date of submission to the Commission: … Total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions eligible under the convergence objective: … Priority axis 2007-2015 Total amount of eligible expenditure paid by beneficiaries EFF contribution National contribution Priority axis 1 Priority axis 1: Total Priority axis 1: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 2 Priority axis 2: Total Priority axis 2: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 3 Priority axis 3: Total Priority axis 3: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 4 Priority axis 4: Total Priority axis 4: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 5 Priority axis 5: Total Priority axis 5: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Grand total Grand total of expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure (1) (1) Partial closure concerns operations completed as at 31 December of the year preceding the year of partial closure. The list of operations which have been subject to partial closure must be made available to the Commission upon request. Total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions eligible under the non-convergence objective: … Priority axis 2007-2015 Total eligible expenditure paid by beneficiaries EFF contribution National contribution Priority axis 1 Priority axis 1: Total Priority axis 1: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 2 Priority axis 2: Total Priority axis 2: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 3 Priority axis 3: Total Priority axis 3: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 4 Priority axis 4: Total Priority axis 4: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Priority axis 5 Priority axis 5: Total Priority axis 5: Total expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. Grand total Grand total of expenses relating to operations which have been subject to partial closure at 31/12/20.. (1) (1) Partial closure concerns operations completed as at 31 December of the year preceding the year of partial closure. The list of operations which have been subject to partial closure must be made available to the Commission upon request. Breakdown by year of the total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions eligible under the convergence objective (2): Amounts of expenditure (in EUR) Grand total 2007-2015. Breakdown by year of the total certified eligible expenditure paid in regions eligible under the Non-convergence objective (2): Amounts of expenditure (in EUR) Grand total 2007-2015. (2) By year: the breakdown mentioned in this table shall correspond to the payments paid by the beneficiaries in the year concerned. Where it is not possible to establish this breakdown precisely, the best estimate of the breakdown must be given. APPLICATION FOR PAYMENT: Payment of balance Member State: … Operational programme reference (CCI) No: … Pursuant to Article 60 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, I, the undersigned (name in capitals, stamp, position and signature of competent authority), hereby request that you pay the sum of EUR … from EFF by way of final payment. Convergence objective Non-convergence objective This application is admissible because: Delete as appropriate (a) the final implementation report for the operational programmed under Article 67 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 — has been submitted by the managing authority within the time limit laid down — is attached (b) a closure declaration referred to in Article 61(1)(f) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. — has been submitted by the managing authority within the time limit laid down — is attached (c) there is no reasoned opinion by the Commission in respect of an infringement under Article 226 of the Treaty, as regards the operation(s) for which the expenditure is declared in the payment application in question The payment shall be made by the Commission to the body designated by the Member State for the purposes of making payments: Designated body Bank account No Holder of account (where not the same as the designated body) Name in capitals, stamp, position and signature of competent authority: ANNEX X ANNUAL STATEMENT ON WITHDRAWN AND RECOVERED AMOUNTS AND PENDING RECOVERIES UNDER ARTICLE 46(2) Withdrawals and recoveries for the year 20.. deducted from statements of expenditure for regions eligible under the convergence objective Withdrawals and recoveries for the year 20.. deducted from statements of expenditure for regions eligible under the non-convergence objective Pending recoveries as at 31.12.20.. for regions eligible under the convergence objective Pending recoveries as at 31.12.20.. for regions eligible under the non-convergence objective ( 1 ) This co-financing rate is found in the financial table of the operational programme for the priority axis concerned. ( 2 ) This co-financing rate is found in the financial table of the operational programme for the priority axis concerned. ( 3 ) This co-financing rate is found in the financial table of the operational programme for the priority axis concerned. ( 4 ) This co-financing rate is found in the financial table of the operational programme for the priority axis concerned. ANNEX XI MODEL STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE FOR A PARTIAL CLOSURE UNDER ARTICLE 46(3) Statement of expenditure by priority axis for a partial closure Operational Programme reference (CCI No): Member State: Date of submission to the Commission: Total certified eligible expenditure of operations completed between …/…/ and 31/12 [year] in the regions eligible under the convergence objective: Total certified eligible expenditure of operations completed between …/…/ and 31/12 [year] in the regions eligible under the non-convergence objective: ANNEX XII DESCRIPTION OF MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL SYSTEMS UNDER ARTICLE 71 OF REGULATION (EC) No 1198/2006 AND ARTICLE 47 OF THE PRESENT REGULATION PART A Model description of management and control systems 1. GENERAL 1.1. Information submitted by: 1.2. The information provided describes the situation on: (dd/mm/yyyy) 1.3. System structure (general information and flowchart showing the organisational relationship between the bodies involved in the management and control system) 1.3.1. Managing authority (Name, address and contact person of the managing authority) 1.3.2. Intermediate bodies (Name, address and contact person of the intermediate bodies) 1.3.3. Certifying authority (Name, address and contact person of the certifying authority) 1.3.4. The audit authority and bodies carrying out audits under the responsibility of the audit authority (Name, address and contact person of the audit authority and other audit bodies) 1.4. Guidance provided to the managing and certifying authorities and intermediate bodies to ensure sound financial management of EFF. (date and reference) 2. MANAGING AUTHORITY 2.1. Managing authority and its main functions 2.1.1. The date and form of the formal designation authorising the managing authority to carry out its functions 2.1.2. Specification of the functions and tasks carried out directly by the managing authority 2.1.3. Functions formally delegated by the managing authority (functions, intermediate bodies, form of delegation) 2.2. Organisation of the managing authority 2.2.1. Organisation chart and specifications of the functions of the units (including indicative number of posts allocated) 2.2.2. Written procedures prepared for use by staff of the managing authority/intermediate bodies (date and reference) 2.2.3. Description of procedures for selecting and approving operations and for ensuring their compliance, for their whole implementing period, with applicable Community and national rules (Article 59(a) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006) 2.2.4. Verification of operations (Article 59(b) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006) 2.2.5. Processing of applications for reimbursement 2.2.6. Description of how information will be transmitted to the certifying authority by the managing authority 2.2.7. Eligibility rules laid down by the Member State and applicable to the operational programme 2.3. In cases where the managing authority and the certifying authority are both designated in the same body describe how separation of functions is ensured 2.4. Public procurement, State aid, equal opportunities and environment rules 2.4.1. Instructions and guidance issued on the applicable rules (date and reference) 2.4.2. Measures foreseen to ensure that applicable rules are complied with, for example management checks, controls, audits 2.5. Audit trail 2.5.1. Description of how the requirements under Article 41 of Regulation (EC) No 498/2007 will be implemented for the programme and/or for individual priorities 2.5.2. Instructions given on retention of supporting documents by beneficiaries (date and reference) 2.6. Irregularities and recoveries 2.6.1. Instructions issued on reporting and correction of irregularities and recording of debt and recoveries of undue payments (date and reference) 2.6.2. Description of the procedure (including flowchart) to comply with the obligation to report irregularities in accordance with article 55 of Regulation (EC) No 498/2007 3. INTERMEDIATE BODIES NB: This section must be completed separately for each intermediate body. Indicate the authority which has delegated the function to the intermediate bodies. 3.1. The intermediate body and its main functions 3.1.1. Specification of the main functions/tasks of the intermediate bodies. 3.2. Organisation of each intermediate body 3.2.1. Organisation chart and specifications of the functions of the units (including indicative number of posts allocated.) 3.2.2. Written procedures prepared for use by staff of the intermediate body (date and reference). 3.2.3. Description of procedures for selecting and approving operations (if not described under 2.2.3). 3.2.4. Verification of operations (Article 59(b) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006) (if not described under 2.2.4). 3.2.5. Description of procedures for processing of applications for reimbursement (if not described under 2.2.5). 4. CERTIFYING AUTHORITY 4.1. Certifying authority and its main functions 4.1.1. The date and form of the formal designation authorising the certifying authority to carry out its functions. 4.1.2. Specification of the functions carried out by the certifying authority. 4.1.3. Functions formally delegated by the certifying authority (functions, intermediate bodies, form of delegation). 4.2. Organisation of the certifying authority 4.2.1. Organisation chart and specification of the functions of the units (including indicative number of posts allocated). 4.2.2. Written procedures prepared for use by staff of the certifying authority (date and reference). 4.3. Certification of statements of expenditure 4.3.1. Description of the procedure by which statements of expenditure are drawn up, certified and submitted to the Commission. 4.3.2. Description of the steps performed by the certifying authority to ensure fulfilment of requirements under Article 60 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006). 4.3.3. Arrangements for access of the certifying authority to the detailed information on operations and verifications and audits held by the managing authority, intermediate bodies and audit authority. 4.4. Accounting system 4.4.1. Description of the accounting system to be set up and used as a basis for certification of expenditure to the Commission. 4.4.2. Level of detail of the accounting system: 4.5. Recoveries 4.5.1. Description of the system for ensuring the prompt recovery of Community assistance. 4.5.2. Arrangements made to maintain a debtors’ ledger and to deduct amounts recovered from expenditure to be declared. 5. AUDIT AUTHORITY AND AUDIT BODIES 5.1. Description of the main tasks and interrelationships of the audit authority and bodies carrying out audits under the responsibility of the audit authority 5.2. Organisation of the audit authority and bodies under its responsibility 5.2.1. Organisation charts (including the number of posts attributed). 5.2.2. Arrangements for ensuring the independence. 5.2.3. Required qualification or experience. 5.2.4. Description of procedures for monitoring the implementation of recommendations and corrective measures from audit reports. 5.2.5. Description of the procedures (where appropriate) for the supervision of the work of other bodies by the audit authority. 5.3. Annual control report, annual opinion and closure declaration Description of the procedures for preparation of the annual control report, annual opinion and closure declaration. 6. INFORMATION SYSTEM (ARTICLE 59(c) OF REGULATION (EC) No 1198/2006) 6.1. Description of the information system including flowchart (central or common network system or decentralised system with links between the systems) 6.2. Indication as to whether the system is already operational to gather reliable financial and statistical information on implementation of the 2007-2013 programmes PART B Model opinion issued under Article 71(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and under Article 50 of the present Regulation on the compliance of management and control system To the European Commission, Directorate-General […] Introduction I, the undersigned representing (name of the audit authority or the operationally independent body designated by the Member State under Article 71(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006, as the body responsible for drawing up a report setting out the results of an assessment of the management and control systems established for the programme … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) and for giving an opinion on their compliance with Articles 57 to 61 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 have carried out an examination in accordance with Article 50 of Regulation (EC) No 498/2007. Scope of the examination The examination was based on the description of the management and control systems received on dd/mm/yyyy from (name of body/bodies submitting the description). In addition, we have examined further information concerning (subjects) and interviewed staff of (bodies whose staff was interviewed). The examination covered the managing, certifying and audit authorities, the body designated to receive the payments made by the Commission and to make the payments to beneficiaries and the following intermediate bodies ( list …). Opinion ( 1 ) Either (Unqualified opinion) On the basis of the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that the management and control systems established for the programme … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) comply with the requirements of Articles 57 to 61 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Chapter VII of Regulation (EC) No 498/2007. (Qualified opinion) On the basis of the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that the management and control systems for the programme … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) comply with the requirements of Articles 57 to 61 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Chapter VII of Regulation (EC) No 498/2007, except in the following respects … ( 2 ) . My reasons for considering that this/these aspect(s) of the systems do(es) not comply with the requirements and my assessment of the seriousness is as follows ( 3 ) : (Adverse opinion) On the basis of the examination referred to above, it is my opinion that the management and control systems for the programme (s) … (name of operational programme, CCI code number, period) do not comply with the requirements of Articles 57 to 61 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 and Chapter VII of Regulation (EC) No 498/2007. This adverse opinion is based on … ( 4 ) ( 1 ) Where the opinion is issued by the audit authority, the latter must provide a separate ‘Declaration of Competence and Operational Independence’ on its own functions under Article 65 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. ( 2 ) Indicate the body or bodies and the aspects of their systems that appear not to comply with the requirements. ( 3 ) Indicate the reason(s) for the reservations entered for each body and on each aspect. ( 4 ) Indicate the reason(s) for the adverse opinion for each body and on each aspect. ANNEXE XIII FORECASTS OF LIKELY APPLICATIONS FOR PAYMENT Provisional forecasts of likely payment applications, for the current and subsequent financial year: ( 1 ) Only provisional forecasts of likely applications for payment in respect of the Community contribution, and not total expenditure forecast, shall be stated in the table. In the provisional forecasts of likely applications for payment, the Community contribution must be stated for the year in question, and must not be cumulated from the beginning of the programming period. ANNEX XIV ANNUAL AND FINAL REPORTING 1. IDENTIFICATION Member State: 2. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 3. OVERVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE OPERATIONAL PROGRAMME BY PRORITY AXIS 3.1. Information on the physical progress of the priority axes For each quantifiable result indicator mentioned in the operational programme related to the objectives and the expected results, (for the year N, for the previous reporting years, as well as cumulatively). Priority axis: In addition the information may be presented graphically. All indicators shall be broken down by gender where possible. If the figures (data) are not yet available, information on when they will become available and how the Managing Authority will provide it to the Commission shall be stated. 3.2. Specific information for priority axes and measures 3.3. Financial information (All financial data shall be expressed in Euro) Regions eligible under the convergence objective Regions eligible under the non convergence objective In addition, financial information may be provided graphically. 3.4. Qualitative analysis Analysis of the achievements as measured by physical and financial indicators, including qualitative analysis on the progress achieved in relation to the targets set out initially. Demonstration on the effects of the operational programme on the promotion of equal opportunities between men and women as appropriate and description of the partnership agreements. List of unfinished operations and the schedule for their completion (final report only). 3.5. Monitoring arrangements Monitoring and evaluation measures taken by the Managing Authority or the Monitoring Committee, to ensure the quality and effectiveness of implementation, in particular monitoring and evaluation measures, including mid-term and ongoing evaluation activities, data collection arrangements, difficulties encountered and steps taken to solve them. 3.6. Significant problems encountered and measures taken to overcome them. (to be completed only if there was significant modification since the previous report) Any significant problems encountered in implementing the operational programme and by priority axis to the extent of which any priority axis is affected, including a summary of serious problems identified under the procedure in Article 61(1)(e)(i) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 where appropriate, as well as any measures taken by the managing authority or the monitoring committee to solve the problems. 3.7. Recommendations from the Commission following annual examination of the Operational programme (to be completed only if there was significant modification since the previous report) Where appropriate, the report must provide the description of how the Member State has implemented the recommendation from the Commission for the previous annual examination of the programme. If any recommendation has not been implemented, the Managing Authority must provide reasons for not implementing it. 3.8. Assistance repaid or re-used (to be completed only if there was significant modification since the previous report) Information on the use made of assistance repaid or re-used following cancellation of assistance as referred to in Article 56 and Article 96(2) of the Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006. 3.9. Substantial modification within the meaning of Article 56 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 (to be completed only if there was significant modification since the previous report) Cases where a substantial modification within the meaning of Article 56 of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006 has been detected. 3.10. Changes in the context and general conditions to the implementation of the Operational programme (to be completed only if there was significant modification since the previous report) Description of any elements which, without stemming directly from the assistance of the operational programme, have a direct impact on the programme's implementation (such as legislative changes or unexpected socio-economic developments). 4. THE USE MADE OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (TO BE COMPLETED ONLY IF THERE WAS SIGNIFICANT MODIFICATION SINCE THE PREVIOUS REPORT) 5. INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY (TO BE COMPLETED ONLY IF THERE WAS SIGNIFICANT MODIFICATION SINCE THE PREVIOUS REPORT) 6. INFORMATION ABOUT COMPLIANCE WITH COMMUNITY LAW Any significant problems relating to the Compliance with the Community law which have been encountered in the implementation of the operational programme and the measures taken to deal with them. 7. COMPLEMENTARITY WITH OTHER INSTRUMENTS Summary of the implementation of the arrangements made ensuring demarcation and complementarity between the assistance from the EFF, the Structural Funds, the Cohesion Fund, and other existing financial instruments (Article 6(4) of Regulation (EC) No 1198/2006). ( 1 ) The target can be given annually or for the whole programming period.