COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/2326 of 30 November 2021 establishing best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, for large combustion plants (notified under document C (2021) 8580) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for large combustion plants, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 In the event that the Court of Justice reverses the judgment in Case T-699/17 so that Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/1442 remains valid, this Decision shall cease to apply on the date of the delivery of the judgment in Case C-207/21 P. Article 3 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 30 November 2021. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 . ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/1442 of 31 July 2017 establishing best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, for large combustion plants ( OJ L 212, 17.8.2017, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Judgment of the General Court of 27 January 2021, Poland v Commission, T-699/17, ECLI:EU:T:2021:44. BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES (BAT) CONCLUSIONS These BAT conclusions concern the following activities specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU: In particular, these BAT conclusions cover upstream and downstream activities directly associated with the aforementioned activities including the emission prevention and control techniques applied. The fuels considered in these BAT conclusions are any solid, liquid and/or gaseous combustible material including: These BAT conclusions do not address the following: as this is covered by the BAT conclusions for waste incineration. Other BAT conclusions and reference documents that could be relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: ACRONYMS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following acronyms apply: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, these BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) Where emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) are given for different averaging periods, all of those BAT-AELs have to be complied with. The BAT-AELs set out in these BAT conclusions may not apply to liquid-fuel-fired and gas-fired turbines and engines for emergency use operated less than 500 h/yr, when such emergency use is not compatible with meeting the BAT-AELs. BAT-AELs for emissions to air Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations, expressed as mass of emitted substance per volume of flue-gas under the following standard conditions: dry gas at a temperature of 273,15 K, and a pressure of 101,3 kPa, and expressed in the units mg/Nm 3 , μg/Nm 3 or ng I-TEQ/Nm 3 . The monitoring associated with the BAT-AELs for emissions to air is given in BAT 4 Reference conditions for oxygen used to express BAT-AELs in this document are shown in the table given below. The equation for calculating the emission concentration at the reference oxygen level is: Where: For averaging periods, the following definitions apply: BAT-AELs for emissions to water Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations, expressed as mass of emitted substance per volume of water, and expressed in μg/l, mg/l, or g/l. The BAT-AELs refer to daily averages, i.e. 24-hour flow-proportional composite samples. Time-proportional composite samples can be used provided that sufficient flow stability can be demonstrated. The monitoring associated with BAT-AELs for emissions to water is given in BAT 5 Energy efficiency levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AEELs) An energy efficiency level associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AEEL) refers to the ratio between the combustion unit’s net energy output(s) and the combustion unit’s fuel/feedstock energy input at actual unit design. The net energy output(s) is determined at the combustion, gasification, or IGCC unit boundaries, including auxiliary systems (e.g. flue-gas treatment systems), and for the unit operated at full load. In the case of combined heat and power (CHP) plants: BAT-AEELs are expressed as a percentage. The fuel/feedstock energy input is expressed as lower heating value (LHV). The monitoring associated with BAT-AEELs is given in BAT 2 Categorisation of combustion plants/units according to their total rated thermal input For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, when a range of values for the total rated thermal input is indicated, this is to be read as ‘equal to or greater than the lower end of the range and lower than the upper end of the range’. For example, the plant category 100–300 MW th is to be read as: combustion plants with a total rated thermal input equal to or greater than 100 MW and lower than 300 MW. When a part of a combustion plant discharging flue-gases through one or more separate ducts within a common stack is operated less than 1 500 h/yr, that part of the plant may be considered separately for the purpose of these BAT conclusions. For all parts of the plant, the BAT-AELs apply in relation to the total rated thermal input of the plant. In such cases, the emissions through each of those ducts are monitored separately. 1. GENERAL BAT CONCLUSIONS The fuel-specific BAT conclusions included in Sections 2 to 7 apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions in this section. 1.1. Environmental management systems BAT 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to implement and adhere to an environmental management system (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Where an assessment shows that any of the elements listed under items x to xvi are not necessary, a record is made of the decision, including the reasons. Applicability The scope (e.g. level of detail) and nature of the EMS (e.g. standardised or non-standardised) is generally related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.2. Monitoring BAT 2. BAT is to determine the net electrical efficiency and/or the net total fuel utilisation and/or the net mechanical energy efficiency of the gasification, IGCC and/or combustion units by carrying out a performance test at full load( 1 ), according to EN standards, after the commissioning of the unit and after each modification that could significantly affect the net electrical efficiency and/or the net total fuel utilisation and/or the net mechanical energy efficiency of the unit. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 3. BAT is to monitor key process parameters relevant for emissions to air and water including those given below. BAT 4. BAT is to monitor emissions to air with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 5. BAT is to monitor emissions to water from flue-gas treatment with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 1.3. General environmental and combustion performance BAT 6. In order to improve the general environmental performance of combustion plants and to reduce emissions to air of CO and unburnt substances, BAT is to ensure optimised combustion and to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. BAT 7. In order to reduce emissions of ammonia to air from the use of selective catalytic reduction (SCR) and/or selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR) for the abatement of NO X emissions, BAT is to optimise the design and/or operation of SCR and/or SNCR (e.g. optimised reagent to NO X ratio, homogeneous reagent distribution and optimum size of the reagent drops). BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for emissions of NH 3 to air from the use of SCR and/or SNCR is < 3–10 mg/Nm 3 as a yearly average or average over the sampling period. The lower end of the range can be achieved when using SCR and the upper end of the range can be achieved when using SNCR without wet abatement techniques. In the case of plants combusting biomass and operating at variable loads as well as in the case of engines combusting HFO and/or gas oil, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 15 mg/Nm 3 . BAT 8. In order to prevent or reduce emissions to air during normal operating conditions, BAT is to ensure, by appropriate design, operation and maintenance, that the emission abatement systems are used at optimal capacity and availability. BAT 9. In order to improve the general environmental performance of combustion and/or gasification plants and to reduce emissions to air, BAT is to include the following elements in the quality assurance/quality control programmes for all the fuels used, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1): Description Initial characterisation and regular testing of the fuel can be performed by the operator and/or the fuel supplier. If performed by the supplier, the full results are provided to the operator in the form of a product (fuel) supplier specification and/or guarantee. BAT 10. In order to reduce emissions to air and/or to water during other than normal operating conditions (OTNOC), BAT is to set up and implement a management plan as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), commensurate with the relevance of potential pollutant releases, that includes the following elements: BAT 11. BAT is to appropriately monitor emissions to air and/or to water during OTNOC. Description The monitoring can be carried out by direct measurement of emissions or by monitoring of surrogate parameters if this proves to be of equal or better scientific quality than the direct measurement of emissions. Emissions during start-up and shutdown (SU/SD) may be assessed based on a detailed emission measurement carried out for a typical SU/SD procedure at least once every year, and using the results of this measurement to estimate the emissions for each and every SU/SD throughout the year. 1.4. Energy efficiency BAT 12. In order to increase the energy efficiency of combustion, gasification and/or IGCC units operated ≥ 1 500 h/yr, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. 1.5. Water usage and emissions to water BAT 13. In order to reduce water usage and the volume of contaminated waste water discharged, BAT is to use one or both of the techniques given below. BAT 14. In order to prevent the contamination of uncontaminated waste water and to reduce emissions to water, BAT is to segregate waste water streams and to treat them separately, depending on the pollutant content. Description Waste water streams that are typically segregated and treated include surface run-off water, cooling water, and waste water from flue-gas treatment. Applicability The applicability may be restricted in the case of existing plants due to the configuration of the drainage systems. BAT 15. In order to reduce emissions to water from flue-gas treatment, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below, and to use secondary techniques as close as possible to the source in order to avoid dilution. The BAT-AELs refer to direct discharges to a receiving water body at the point where the emission leaves the installation. Table 1 BAT-AELs for direct discharges to a receiving water body from flue-gas treatment 1.6. Waste management BAT 16. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal from the combustion and/or gasification process and abatement techniques, BAT is to organise operations so as to maximise, in order of priority and taking into account life-cycle thinking: by implementing an appropriate combination of techniques such as: 1.7. Noise emissions BAT 17. In order to reduce noise emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 2. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE COMBUSTION OF SOLID FUELS 2.1. BAT conclusions for the combustion of coal and/or lignite Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of coal and/or lignite. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 2.1.1. General environmental performance BAT 18. In order to improve the general environmental performance of the combustion of coal and/or lignite, and in addition to BAT 6, BAT is to use the technique given below. 2.1.2. Energy efficiency BAT 19. In order to increase the energy efficiency of the combustion of coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given in BAT 12 and below. Table 2 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for coal and/or lignite combustion 2.1.3. NO X , N 2 O and CO emissions to air BAT 20. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air while limiting CO and N 2 O emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 3 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels for existing combustion plants operated ≥ 1 500 h/yr or for new combustion plants will generally be as follows: 2.1.4. SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air BAT 21. In order to prevent or reduce SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 4 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for SO 2 emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite For a combustion plant with a total rated thermal input of more than 300 MW, which is specifically designed to fire indigenous lignite fuels and which can demonstrate that it cannot achieve the BAT-AELs mentioned in Table 4 for techno-economic reasons, the daily average BAT-AELs set out in Table 4 do not apply, and the upper end of the yearly average BAT-AEL range is as follows: Table 5 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite 2.1.5. Dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air BAT 22. In order to reduce dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 6 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite 2.1.6. Mercury emissions to air BAT 23. In order to prevent or reduce mercury emissions to air from the combustion of coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 7 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for mercury emissions to air from the combustion of coal and lignite 2.2. BAT conclusions for the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 2.2.1. Energy efficiency Table 8 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat 2.2.2. NO X , N 2 O and CO emissions to air BAT 24. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air while limiting CO and N 2 O emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 9 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels will generally be: 2.2.3. SO X, HCl and HF emissions to air BAT 25. In order to prevent or reduce SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 10 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for SO 2 emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat Table 11 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat 2.2.4. Dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air BAT 26. In order to reduce dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 12 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat 2.2.5. Mercury emissions to air BAT 27. In order to prevent or reduce mercury emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for mercury emissions to air from the combustion of solid biomass and/or peat is < 1–5 μg/Nm 3 as average over the sampling period. 3. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE COMBUSTION OF LIQUID FUELS The BAT conclusions presented in this section do not apply to combustion plants on offshore platforms; these are covered by Section 4.3 3.1. HFO- and/or gas-oil-fired boilers Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in boilers. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1 3.1.1. Energy efficiency Table 13 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for HFO and/or gas oil combustion in boilers 3.1.2. NO X and CO emissions to air BAT 28. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air while limiting CO emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 14 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in boilers As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels will generally be: 3.1.3. SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air BAT 29. In order to prevent or reduce SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 15 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for SO 2 emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in boilers 3.1.4. Dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air BAT 30. In order to reduce dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 16 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in boilers 3.2. HFO- and/or gas-oil-fired engines Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. As regards HFO- and/or gas-oil-fired engines, secondary abatement techniques for NO X , SO 2 and dust may not be applicable to engines in islands that are part of a small isolated system( 1 ) or a micro isolated system( 2 ), due to technical, economic and logistical/infrastructure constraints, pending their interconnection to the mainland electricity grid or access to a natural gas supply. The BAT-AELs for such engines shall therefore only apply in small isolated system and micro isolated system as from 1 January 2025 for new engines, and as from 1 January 2030 for existing engines. 3.2.1. Energy efficiency BAT 31. In order to increase the energy efficiency of HFO and/or gas oil combustion in reciprocating engines, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given in BAT 12 and below. Table 17 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines 3.2.2. NO X , CO and volatile organic compound emissions to air BAT 32. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 33. In order to prevent or reduce emissions of CO and volatile organic compounds to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines, BAT is to use one or both of the techniques given below. Table 18 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines As an indication, for existing combustion plants burning only HFO and operated ≥ 1 500 h/yr or new combustion plants burning only HFO, 3.2.3. SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air BAT 34. In order to prevent or reduce SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 19 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for SO 2 emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines 3.2.4. Dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air BAT 35. In order to prevent or reduce dust and particulate-bound metal emissions from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 20 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust emissions to air from the combustion of HFO and/or gas oil in reciprocating engines 3.3. Gas-oil-fired gas turbines Unless stated otherwise, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of gas oil in gas turbines. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 3.3.1. Energy efficiency BAT 36. In order to increase the energy efficiency of gas oil combustion in gas turbines, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given in BAT 12 and below. Table 21 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for gas-oil-fired gas turbines 3.3.2. NO X and CO emissions to air BAT 37. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of gas oil in gas turbines, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 38. In order to prevent or reduce CO emissions to air from the combustion of gas oil in gas turbines, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. As an indication, the emission level for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of gas oil in dual fuel gas turbines for emergency use operated < 500 h/yr will generally be 145–250 mg/Nm 3 as a daily average or average over the sampling period. 3.3.3. SO X and dust emissions to air BAT 39. In order to prevent or reduce SO X and dust emissions to air from the combustion of gas oil in gas turbines, BAT is to use the technique given below. Table 22 BAT-associated emission levels for SO 2 and dust emissions to air from the combustion of gas oil in gas turbines, including dual fuel gas turbines 4. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE COMBUSTION OF GASEOUS FUELS 4.1. BAT conclusions for the combustion of natural gas Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of natural gas. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. They do not apply to combustion plants on offshore platforms; these are covered by Section. 4.3. 4.1.1. Energy efficiency BAT 40. In order to increase the energy efficiency of natural gas combustion, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given in BAT 12 and below. Table 23 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for the combustion of natural gas 4.1.2. NO X , CO, NMVOC and CH 4 emissions to air BAT 41. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 42. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas in gas turbines, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 43. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas in engines, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 44. In order to prevent or reduce CO emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas, BAT is to ensure optimised combustion and/or to use oxidation catalysts. Description See descriptions in Section 10.8.3. Table 24 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas in gas turbines As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels for each type of existing combustion plant operated ≥ 1 500 h/yr and for each type of new combustion plant will generally be as follows: In the case of a gas turbine equipped with DLN burners, these indicative levels correspond to when the DLN operation is effective. Table 25 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas in boilers and engines As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels will generally be: BAT 45. In order to reduce non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC) and methane (CH 4 ) emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas in spark-ignited lean-burn gas engines, BAT is to ensure optimised combustion and/or to use oxidation catalysts. Description See descriptions in Section 10.8.3. Oxidation catalysts are not effective at reducing the emissions of saturated hydrocarbons containing less than four carbon atoms. Table 26 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for formaldehyde and CH 4 emissions to air from the combustion of natural gas in a spark-ignited lean-burn gas engine 4.2. BAT conclusions for the combustion of iron and steel process gases Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of iron and steel process gases (blast furnace gas, coke oven gas, basic oxygen furnace gas), individually, in combination, or simultaneously with other gaseous and/or liquid fuels. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 4.2.1. Energy efficiency BAT 46. In order to increase the energy efficiency of the combustion of iron and steel process gases, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given in BAT 12 and below. Table 27 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for the combustion of iron and steel process gases in boilers Table 28 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for the combustion of iron and steel process gases in CCGTs 4.2.2. NO X and CO emissions to air BAT 47. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of iron and steel process gases in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 48. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of iron and steel process gases in CCGTs, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 49. In order to prevent or reduce CO emissions to air from the combustion of iron and steel process gases, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 29 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of 100 % iron and steel process gases As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels will generally be: 4.2.3. SO X emissions to air BAT 50. In order to prevent or reduce SO X emissions to air from the combustion of iron and steel process gases, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given below. Table 30 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for SO 2 emissions to air from the combustion of 100 % iron and steel process gases 4.2.4. Dust emissions to air BAT 51. In order to reduce dust emissions to air from the combustion of iron and steel process gases, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 31 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust emissions to air from the combustion of 100 % iron and steel process gases 4.3. BAT conclusions for the combustion of gaseous and/or liquid fuels on offshore platforms Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of gaseous and/or liquid fuels on offshore platforms. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. BAT 52. In order to improve the general environmental performance of the combustion of gaseous and/or liquid fuels on offshore platforms, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 53. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air from the combustion of gaseous and/or liquid fuels on offshore platforms, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 54. In order to prevent or reduce CO emissions to air from the combustion of gaseous and/or liquid fuels in gas turbines on offshore platforms, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 32 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of gaseous fuels in open-cycle gas turbines on offshore platforms As an indication, the average CO emission levels over the sampling period will generally be: 5. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR MULTI-FUEL-FIRED PLANTS 5.1. BAT conclusions for the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry, individually, in combination, or simultaneously with other gaseous and/or liquid fuels. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 5.1.1. General environmental performance BAT 55. In order to improve the general environmental performance of the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given in BAT 6 and below. 5.1.2. Energy efficiency Table 33 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers 5.1.3. NO X and CO emissions to air BAT 56. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air while limiting CO emissions to air from the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 34 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from the combustion of 100 % process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels for existing plants operated ≥ 1 500 h/yr and for new plants will generally be < 5–30 mg/Nm 3 . 5.1.4. SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air BAT 57. In order to reduce SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 35 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for SO 2 emissions to air from the combustion of 100 % process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers Table 36 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for HCl and HF emissions to air from the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers 5.1.5. Dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air BAT 58. In order to reduce emissions to air of dust, particulate-bound metals, and trace species from the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 37 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust emissions to air from the combustion of mixtures of gases and liquids composed of 100 % process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers 5.1.6. Emissions of volatile organic compounds and polychlorinated dibenzo-dioxins and -furans to air BAT 59. In order to reduce emissions to air of volatile organic compounds and polychlorinated dibenzo-dioxins and -furans from the combustion of process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 6 and below. Table 38 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for PCDD/F and TVOC emissions to air from the combustion of 100 % process fuels from the chemical industry in boilers 6. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE CO-INCINERATION OF WASTE Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to the co-incineration of waste in combustion plants. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. When waste is co-incinerated, the BAT-AELs in this section apply to the entire flue-gas volume generated. In addition, when waste is co-incinerated together with the fuels covered by Section 2, the BAT-AELs set out in Section 2 also apply (i) to the entire flue-gas volume generated, and (ii) to the flue-gas volume resulting from the combustion of the fuels covered by that section using the mixing rule formula of Annex VI (part 4) to Directive 2010/75/EU, in which the BAT-AELs for the flue-gas volume resulting from the combustion of waste are to be determined on the basis of BAT 61. 6.1.1. General environmental performance BAT 60. In order to improve the general environmental performance of the co-incineration of waste in combustion plants, to ensure stable combustion conditions, and to reduce emissions to air, BAT is to use technique BAT 60 (a) below and a combination of the techniques given in BAT 6 and/or the other techniques below. BAT 61. In order to prevent increased emissions from the co-incineration of waste in combustion plants, BAT is to take appropriate measures to ensure that the emissions of polluting substances in the part of the flue-gases resulting from waste co-incineration are not higher than those resulting from the application of BAT conclusions for the incineration of waste. BAT 62. In order to minimise the impact on residues recycling of the co-incineration of waste in combustion plants, BAT is to maintain a good quality of gypsum, ashes and slags as well as other residues, in line with the requirements set for their recycling when the plant is not co-incinerating waste, by using one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 60 and/or by restricting the co-incineration to waste fractions with pollutant concentrations similar to those in other combusted fuels. 6.1.2. Energy efficiency BAT 63. In order to increase the energy efficiency of the co-incineration of waste, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given in BAT 12 and BAT 19, depending on the main fuel type used and on the plant configuration. The BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) are given in Table 8 for the co-incineration of waste with biomass and/or peat and in Table 2 for the co-incineration of waste with coal and/or lignite. 6.1.3. NO X and CO emissions to air BAT 64. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air while limiting CO and N 2 O emissions from the co-incineration of waste with coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 20. BAT 65. In order to prevent or reduce NO X emissions to air while limiting CO and N 2 O emissions from the co-incineration of waste with biomass and/or peat, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 24. 6.1.4. SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air BAT 66. In order to prevent or reduce SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 21. BAT 67. In order to prevent or reduce SO X , HCl and HF emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with biomass and/or peat, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 25. 6.1.5. Dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air BAT 68. In order to reduce dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 22. Table 39 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for metal emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with coal and/or lignite BAT 69. In order to reduce dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with biomass and/or peat, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 26. Table 40 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for metal emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with biomass and/or peat 6.1.6. Mercury emissions to air BAT 70. In order to reduce mercury emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with biomass, peat, coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 23 and BAT 27. 6.1.7. Emissions of volatile organic compounds and polychlorinated dibenzo-dioxins and -furans to air BAT 71. In order to reduce emissions of volatile organic compounds and polychlorinated dibenzo-dioxins and -furans to air from the co-incineration of waste with biomass, peat, coal and/or lignite, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given in BAT 6, BAT 26 and below. Table 41 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for PCDD/F and TVOC emissions to air from the co-incineration of waste with biomass, peat, coal and/or lignite 7. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR GASIFICATION Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section are generally applicable to all gasification plants directly associated to combustion plants, and to IGCC plants. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 7.1.1. Energy efficiency BAT 72. In order to increase the energy efficiency of IGCC and gasification units, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given in BAT 12 and below. Table 42 BAT-associated energy efficiency levels (BAT-AEELs) for gasification and IGCC units 7.1.2. NO X and CO emissions to air BAT 73. In order to prevent and/or reduce NO X emissions to air while limiting CO emissions to air from IGCC plants, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 43 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for NO X emissions to air from IGCC plants As an indication, the yearly average CO emission levels for existing plants operated ≥ 1 500 h/yr and for new plants will generally be < 5–30 mg/Nm 3 . 7.1.3. SO X emissions to air BAT 74. In order to reduce SO X emissions to air from IGCC plants, BAT is to use the technique given below. The BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for SO 2 emissions to air from IGCC plants of ≥ 100 MW th is 3–16 mg/Nm 3 , expressed as a yearly average. 7.1.4. Dust, particulate-bound metal, ammonia and halogen emissions to air BAT 75. In order to prevent or reduce dust, particulate-bound metal, ammonia and halogen emissions to air from IGCC plants, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 44 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust and particulate-bound metal emissions to air from IGCC plants 8. DESCRIPTION OF TECHNIQUES 8.1. General techniques 8.2. Techniques to increase energy efficiency 8.3. Techniques to reduce emissions of NO X and/or CO to air 8.4. Techniques to reduce emissions of SO X , HCl and/or HF to air 8.5. Techniques to reduce emissions to air of dust, metals including mercury, and/or PCDD/F 8.6. Techniques to reduce emissions to water ( 1 ) Commission Implementing Decision 2012/249/EU of 7 May 2012 concerning the determination of start-up and shut-down periods for the purposes of Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions (notified under document C(2012) 2948) ( OJ L 123, 9.5.2012, p. 44 ). ( 2 ) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations, 30-minute measurement is inappropriate, a suitable sampling period is employed. For PCDD/F, a sampling period of 6 to 8 hours is used. ( 3 ) The continuous measurement of the water vapour content of the flue-gas is not necessary if the sampled flue-gas is dried before analysis. ( 4 ) Generic EN standards for continuous measurements are EN 15267-1, EN 15267-2, EN 15267-3, and EN 14181. EN standards for periodic measurements are given in the table. ( 5 ) The monitoring frequency does not apply where plant operation would be for the sole purpose of performing an emission measurement. ( 6 ) In the case of plants with a rated thermal input of < 100 MW operated < 1 500 h/yr, the minimum monitoring frequency may be at least once every six months. For gas turbines, periodic monitoring is carried out with a combustion plant load of > 70 %. For co-incineration of waste with coal, lignite, solid biomass and/or peat, the monitoring frequency needs to also take into account Part 6 of Annex VI to the IED. ( 7 ) In the case of use of SCR, the minimum monitoring frequency may be at least once every year, if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 8 ) In the case of natural-gas-fired turbines with a rated thermal input of < 100 MW operated < 1 500 h/yr, or in the case of existing OCGTs, PEMS may be used instead. ( 9 ) PEMS may be used instead. ( 10 ) Two sets of measurements are carried out, one with the plant operated at loads of > 70 % and the other one at loads of < 70 %. ( 11 ) As an alternative to the continuous measurement in the case of plants combusting oil with a known sulphur content and where there is no flue-gas desulphurisation system, periodic measurements at least once every three months and/or other procedures ensuring the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality may be used to determine the SO 2 emissions. ( 12 ) In the case of process fuels from the chemical industry, the monitoring frequency may be adjusted for plants of < 100 MW th after an initial characterisation of the fuel (see BAT 5) based on an assessment of the relevance of pollutant releases (e.g. concentration in fuel, flue-gas treatment employed) in the emissions to air, but in any case at least each time that a change of the fuel characteristics may have an impact on the emissions. ( 13 ) If the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable, periodic measurements may be carried out each time that a change of the fuel and/or waste characteristics may have an impact on the emissions, but in any case at least once every year. For co-incineration of waste with coal, lignite, solid biomass and/or peat, the monitoring frequency needs to also take into account Part 6 of Annex VI to the IED. ( 14 ) In the case of process fuels from the chemical industry, the monitoring frequency may be adjusted after an initial characterisation of the fuel (see BAT 5) based on an assessment of the relevance of pollutant releases (e.g. concentration in fuel, flue-gas treatment employed) in the emissions to air, but in any case at least each time that a change of the fuel characteristics may have an impact on the emissions. ( 15 ) In the case of plants with a rated thermal input of < 100 MW operated < 500 h/yr, the minimum monitoring frequency may be at least once every year. In the case of plants with a rated thermal input of < 100 MW operated between 500 h/yr and 1 500 h/yr, the monitoring frequency may be reduced to at least once every six months. ( 16 ) If the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable, periodic measurements may be carried out each time that a change of the fuel and/or waste characteristics may have an impact on the emissions, but in any case at least once every six months. ( 17 ) In the case of plants combusting iron and steel process gases, the minimum monitoring frequency may be at least once every six months if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 18 ) The list of pollutants monitored and the monitoring frequency may be adjusted after an initial characterisation of the fuel (see BAT 5) based on an assessment of the relevance of pollutant releases (e.g. concentration in fuel, flue-gas treatment employed) in the emissions to air, but in any case at least each time that a change of the fuel characteristics may have an impact on the emissions. ( 19 ) In the case of plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, the minimum monitoring frequency may be at least once every six months. ( 20 ) In the case of plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, the minimum monitoring frequency may be at least once every year. ( 21 ) Continuous sampling combined with frequent analysis of time-integrated samples, e.g. by a standardised sorbent trap monitoring method, may be used as an alternative to continuous measurements. ( 22 ) If the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable due to the low mercury content in the fuel, periodic measurements may be carried out only each time that a change of the fuel characteristics may have an impact on the emissions. ( 23 ) The minimum monitoring frequency does not apply in the case of plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 24 ) Measurements are carried out with the plant operated at loads of > 70 %. ( 25 ) In the case of process fuels from the chemical industry, monitoring is only applicable when the fuels contain chlorinated substances. ( 26 ) TOC monitoring and COD monitoring are alternatives. TOC monitoring is the preferred option because it does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 27 ) he list of substances/parameters characterised can be reduced to only those that can reasonably be expected to be present in the fuel(s) based on information on the raw materials and the production processes. ( 28 ) This characterisation is carried out without prejudice of application of the waste pre-acceptance and acceptance procedure set in BAT 60(a), which may lead to the characterisation and/or checking of other substances/parameters besides those listed here. ( 29 ) The descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 8.6 ( 30 ) Either the BAT-AEL for TOC or the BAT-AEL for COD applies. TOC is the preferred option because its monitoring does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 31 ) This BAT-AEL applies after subtraction of the intake load. ( 32 ) This BAT-AEL only applies to waste water from the use of wet FGD. ( 33 ) This BAT-AEL only applies to combustion plants using calcium compounds in flue-gas treatment. ( 34 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range may not apply in the case of highly saline waste water (e.g. chloride concentrations ≥ 5 g/l) due to the increased solubility of calcium sulphate. ( 35 ) This BAT-AEL does not apply to discharges to the sea or to brackish water bodies. ( 36 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply in the case of units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 37 ) In the case of CHP units, only one of the two BAT-AEELs ‘Net electrical efficiency’ or ‘Net total fuel utilisation’ applies, depending on the CHP unit design (i.e. either more oriented towards electricity generation or towards heat generation). ( 38 ) The lower end of the range may correspondent to cases where the achieved energy efficiency is negatively affected (up to four percentage points) by the type of cooling system used or the geographical location of the unit. ( 39 ) These levels may not be achievable if the potential heat demand is too low. ( 40 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to plants generating only electricity. ( 41 ) The lower ends of the BAT-AEEL ranges are achieved in the case of unfavourable climatic conditions, low-grade lignite-fired units, and/or old units (first commissioned before 1985). ( 42 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEEL range can be achieved with high steam parameters (pressure, temperature). ( 43 ) The achievable electrical efficiency improvement depends on the specific unit, but an increase of more than three percentage points is considered as reflecting the use of BAT for existing units, depending on the original design of the unit and on the retrofits already performed. ( 44 ) In the case of units burning lignite with a lower heating value below 6 MJ/kg, the lower end of the BAT-AEEL range is 41,5 %. ( 45 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEEL range may be up to 46 % in the case of units of ≥ 600 MW th using supercritical or ultra-supercritical steam conditions. ( 46 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEEL range may be up to 44 % in the case of units of ≥ 600 MW th using supercritical or ultra-supercritical steam conditions. ( 47 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 48 ) In the case of coal-fired PC boiler plants put into operation no later than 1 July 1987, which are operated < 1 500 h/yr and for which SCR and/or SNCR is not applicable, the higher end of the range is 340 mg/Nm 3 . ( 49 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 50 ) The lower end of the range is considered achievable when using SCR. ( 51 ) The higher end of the range is 175 mg/Nm 3 for FBC boilers put into operation no later than 7 January 2014 and for lignite-fired PC boilers. ( 52 ) The higher end of the range is 220 mg/Nm 3 for FBC boilers put into operation no later than 7 January 2014 and for lignite-fired PC boilers. ( 53 ) In the case of plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the range is 200 mg/Nm 3 for plants operated ≥ 1 500 h/yr, and 220 mg/Nm 3 for plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 54 ) The higher end of the range may be up to 140 mg/Nm 3 in the case of limitations due to boiler design, and/or in the case of fluidised bed boilers not fitted with secondary abatement techniques for NO X emissions reduction. ( 55 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 56 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 57 ) In the case of plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range is 250 mg/Nm 3 . ( 58 ) The lower end of the range can be achieved with the use of low-sulphur fuels in combination with the most advanced wet abatement system designs. ( 59 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 220 mg/Nm 3 in the case of plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014 and operated < 1 500 h/yr. For other existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 205 mg/Nm 3 . ( 60 ) For circulating fluidised bed boilers, the lower end of the range can be achieved by using high-efficiency wet FGD. The higher end of the range can be achieved by using boiler in-bed sorbent injection. ( 61 ) The lower end of these BAT-AEL ranges may be difficult to achieve in the case of plants fitted with wet FGD and a downstream gas-gas heater. ( 62 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 20 mg/Nm 3 in the following cases: plants combusting fuels where the average chlorine content is 1 000 mg/kg (dry) or higher; plants operated < 1 500 h/yr; FBC boilers. For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 63 ) In the case of plants fitted with wet FGD with a downstream gas-gas heater, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 7 mg/Nm 3 . ( 64 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 7 mg/Nm 3 in the following cases: plants fitted with wet FGD with a downstream gas-gas heater; plants operated < 1 500 h/yr; FBC boilers. For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 65 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 66 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 67 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 28 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 68 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 25 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 69 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 12 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 70 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 20 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 71 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 14 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 72 ) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range can be achieved with specific mercury abatement techniques. ( 73 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply in the case of units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 74 ) In the case of CHP units, only one of the two BAT-AEELs ‘Net electrical efficiency’ or ‘Net total fuel utilisation’ applies, depending on the CHP unit design (i.e. either more oriented towards electricity generation or towards heat generation). ( 75 ) The lower end of the range may correspond to cases where the achieved energy efficiency is negatively affected (up to four percentage points) by the type of cooling system used or the geographical location of the unit. ( 76 ) These levels may not be achievable if the potential heat demand is too low. ( 77 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to plants generating only electricity. ( 78 ) The lower end of the range may be down to 32 % in the case of units of < 150 MW th burning high-moisture biomass fuels. ( 79 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 80 ) For combustion plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 81 ) For plants burning fuels where the average potassium content is 2 000 mg/kg (dry) or higher, and/or the average sodium content is 300 mg/kg or higher, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 200 mg/Nm 3 . ( 82 ) For plants burning fuels where the average potassium content is 2 000 mg/kg (dry) or higher, and/or the average sodium content is 300 mg/kg or higher, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 250 mg/Nm 3 . ( 83 ) For plants burning fuels where the average potassium content is 2 000 mg/kg (dry) or higher, and/or the average sodium content is 300 mg/kg or higher, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 260 mg/Nm 3 . ( 84 ) For plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014 and burning fuels where the average potassium content is 2 000 mg/kg (dry) or higher, and/or the average sodium content is 300 mg/kg or higher, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 310 mg/Nm 3 . ( 85 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 160 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 86 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 200 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 87 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 88 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 89 ) For existing plants burning fuels where the average sulphur content is 0,1 wt-% (dry) or higher, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 100 mg/Nm 3 . ( 90 ) For existing plants burning fuels where the average sulphur content is 0,1 wt-% (dry) or higher, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 215 mg/Nm 3 . ( 91 ) For existing plants burning fuels where the average sulphur content is 0,1 wt-% (dry) or higher, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 165 mg/Nm 3 , or 215 mg/Nm 3 if those plants have been put into operation no later than 7 January 2014 and/or are FBC boilers combusting peat. ( 92 ) For plants burning fuels where the average chlorine content is ≥ 0,1 wt-% (dry), or for existing plants co-combusting biomass with sulphur-rich fuel (e.g. peat) or using alkali chloride-converting additives (e.g. elemental sulphur), the higher end of the BAT-AEL range for the yearly average for new plants is 15 mg/Nm 3 , the higher end of the BAT-AEL range for the yearly average for existing plants is 25 mg/Nm 3 . The daily average BAT-AEL range does not apply to these plants. ( 93 ) The daily average BAT-AEL range does not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. The higher end of the BAT-AEL range for the yearly average for new plants operated < 1 500 h/yr is 15 mg/Nm 3 . ( 94 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 95 ) The lower end of these BAT-AEL ranges may be difficult to achieve in the case of plants fitted with wet FGD and a downstream gas-gas heater. ( 96 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 97 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 98 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 99 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 100 ) In the case of CHP units, only one of the two BAT-AEELs ‘Net electrical efficiency’ or ‘Net total fuel utilisation’ applies, depending on the CHP unit design (i.e. either more oriented towards electricity generation or towards heat generation). ( 101 ) These levels may not be achievable if the potential heat demand is too low. ( 102 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 103 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 104 ) For industrial boilers and district heating plants put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, which are operated < 1 500 h/yr and for which SCR and/or SNCR is not applicable, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 450 mg/Nm 3 . ( 105 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 110 mg/Nm 3 for plants of 100–300 MW th and plants of ≥ 300 MW th that were put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 106 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 145 mg/Nm 3 for plants of 100–300 MW th and plants of ≥ 300 MW th that were put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 107 ) For industrial boilers and district heating plants of > 100 MW th put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, which are operated < 1 500 h/yr and for which SCR and/or SNCR is not applicable, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 365 mg/Nm 3 . ( 108 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 109 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 110 ) For industrial boilers and district heating plants put into operation no later than 27 November 2003 and operated < 1 500 h/yr, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 400 mg/Nm 3 . ( 111 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 175 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 112 ) For industrial boilers and district heating plants put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, which are operated < 1 500 h/yr and for which wet FGD is not applicable, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 200 mg/Nm 3 . ( 113 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 114 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 115 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 25 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 116 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 15 mg/Nm 3 for plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014. ( 117 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 118 ) Net electrical efficiency BAT-AEELs apply to CHP units whose design is oriented towards power generation, and to units generating only power. ( 119 ) These levels may be difficult to achieve in the case of engines fitted with energy-intensive secondary abatement techniques. ( 120 ) This level may be difficult to achieve in the case of engines using a radiator as a cooling system in dry, hot geographical locations. ( 121 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr or to plants that cannot be fitted with secondary abatement techniques. ( 122 ) The BAT-AEL range is 1 150–1 900 mg/Nm 3 for plants operated < 1 500 h/yr and for plants that cannot be fitted with secondary abatement techniques. ( 123 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 124 ) For plants including units of < 20MW th combusting HFO, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range applying to those units is 225 mg/Nm 3 . ( 125 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 126 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 127 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 280 mg/Nm 3 if no secondary abatement technique can be applied. This corresponds to a sulphur content of the fuel of 0,5 wt-% (dry). ( 128 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 129 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 130 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 131 ) Net electrical efficiency BAT-AEELs apply to CHP units whose design is oriented towards power generation, and to units generating only power. ( 132 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to existing plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 133 ) For existing plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 134 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 135 ) In the case of CHP units, only one of the two BAT-AEELs ‘Net electrical efficiency’ or ‘Net total fuel utilisation’ applies, depending on the CHP unit design (i.e. either more oriented towards electricity generation or heat generation). ( 136 ) Net total fuel utilisation BAT-AEELs may not be achievable if the potential heat demand is too low. ( 137 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to plants generating only electricity. ( 138 ) These BAT-AEELs apply to units used for mechanical drive applications. ( 139 ) These levels may be difficult to achieve in the case of engines tuned in order to reach NO X levels lower than 190 mg/Nm 3 . ( 140 ) These BAT-AELs also apply to the combustion of natural gas in dual-fuel-fired turbines. ( 141 ) In the case of a gas turbine equipped with DLN, these BAT-AELs apply only when the DLN operation is effective. ( 142 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to existing plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 143 ) Optimising the functioning of an existing technique to reduce NO X emissions further may lead to levels of CO emissions at the higher end of the indicative range for CO emissions given after this table. ( 144 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to existing turbines for mechanical drive applications or to plants operated < 500 h/yr. ( 145 ) For plants with a net electrical efficiency (EE) greater than 39 %, a correction factor may be applied to the higher end of the range, corresponding to [higher end] x EE/39, where EE is the net electrical energy efficiency or net mechanical energy efficiency of the plant determined at ISO baseload conditions. ( 146 ) The higher end of the range is 80 mg/Nm 3 in the case of plants which were put into operation no later than 27 November 2003 and are operated between 500 h/yr and 1 500 h/yr. ( 147 ) For plants with a net electrical efficiency (EE) greater than 55 %, a correction factor may be applied to the higher end of the BAT-AEL range, corresponding to [higher end] x EE/55, where EE is the net electrical efficiency of the plant determined at ISO baseload conditions. ( 148 ) For existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 65 mg/Nm 3 . ( 149 ) For existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 55 mg/Nm 3 . ( 150 ) For existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 80 mg/Nm 3 . ( 151 ) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range for NO X can be achieved with DLN burners. ( 152 ) These levels are indicative. ( 153 ) For existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 60 mg/Nm 3 . ( 154 ) For existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 65 mg/Nm 3 . ( 155 ) Optimising the functioning of an existing technique to reduce NO X emissions further may lead to levels of CO emissions at the higher end of the indicative range for CO emissions given after this table. ( 156 ) These BAT-AELs do not apply to plants operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 157 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 158 ) These BAT-AELs only apply to spark-ignited and dual-fuel engines. They do not apply to gas-diesel engines. ( 159 ) In the case of engines for emergency use operated < 500 h/yr that could not apply the lean-burn concept or use SCR, the higher end of the indicative range is 175 mg/Nm 3 . ( 160 ) For existing plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 161 ) This BAT-AEL is expressed as C at full load operation. ( 162 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply in the case of units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 163 ) In the case of CHP units, only one of the two BAT-AEELs ‘Net electrical efficiency’ or ‘Net total fuel utilisation’ applies, depending on the CHP unit design (i.e. either more oriented towards electricity generation or towards heat generation). ( 164 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to plants generating only electricity. ( 165 ) The wide range of energy efficiencies in CHP units is largely dependent on the local demand for electricity and heat. ( 166 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply in the case of units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 167 ) In the case of CHP units, only one of the two BAT-AEELs ‘Net electrical efficiency’ or ‘Net total fuel utilisation’ applies, depending on the CHP unit design (i.e. either more oriented towards electricity generation or towards heat generation). ( 168 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to plants generating only electricity. ( 169 ) Plants combusting a mixture of gases with an equivalent LHV of > 20 MJ/Nm 3 are expected to emit at the higher end of the BAT-AEL ranges. ( 170 ) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range can be achieved when using SCR. ( 171 ) For plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, these BAT AELs do not apply. ( 172 ) In the case of plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 160 mg/Nm 3 . Furthermore, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range may be exceeded when SCR cannot be used and when using a high share of COG (e.g. > 50 %) and/or when combusting COG with a relatively high level of H 2 . In this case, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 220 mg/Nm 3 . ( 173 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 174 ) In the case of plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 70 mg/Nm 3 . ( 175 ) For existing plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, these BAT AELs do not apply. ( 176 ) For existing plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 177 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range may be exceeded when using a high share of COG (e.g. > 50 %). In this case, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 300 mg/Nm 3 . ( 178 ) For existing plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, these BAT-AELs do not apply. ( 179 ) For existing plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative ( 180 ) These BAT-AELs are based on > 70 % of baseload power available on the day. ( 181 ) This includes single fuel and dual fuel gas turbines. ( 182 ) The higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 250 mg/Nm 3 if DLN burners are not applicable. ( 183 ) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range can be achieved with DLN burners. ( 184 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to units operated < 1 500 h/yr. ( 185 ) In the case of CHP units, only one of the two BAT-AEELs ‘Net electrical efficiency’ or ‘Net total fuel utilisation’ applies, depending on the CHP unit design (i.e. either more oriented towards generation electricity or towards heat generation). ( 186 ) These BAT-AEELs may not be achievable if the potential heat demand is too low. ( 187 ) These BAT-AEELs do not apply to plants generating only electricity. ( 188 ) For plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, these BAT AELs do not apply. ( 189 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 190 ) For existing plants of ≤ 500 MW th put into operation no later than 27 November 2003 using liquid fuels with a nitrogen content higher than 0,6 wt-%, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 380 mg/Nm 3 . ( 191 ) For existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 180 mg/Nm 3 . ( 192 ) For existing plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 210 mg/Nm 3 . ( 193 ) For existing plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, these BAT-AELs do not apply. ( 194 ) For existing plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 195 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 196 ) In the case of plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 20 mg/Nm 3 . ( 197 ) In the case of plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 7 mg/Nm 3 . ( 198 ) For plants operated < 1 500 h/yr, these BAT-AELs do not apply. ( 199 ) For plants operated < 500 h/yr, these levels are indicative. ( 200 ) For plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 25 mg/Nm 3 . ( 201 ) For plants put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, the higher end of the BAT-AEL range is 15 mg/Nm 3 . ( 202 ) These BAT-AELs only apply to plants using fuels derived from chemical processes involving chlorinated substances.