COMMISSION REGULATION (EC) No 1516/2007 of 19 December 2007 establishing, pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council, standard leakage checking requirements for stationary refrigeration, air conditioning and heat pump equipment containing certain fluorinated greenhouse gases (Text with EEA relevance) THE COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on certain fluorinated greenhouse gases ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 3(7) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter and scope This Regulation establishes, pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 842/2006, the standard leakage checking requirements for working and temporarily out of operation stationary refrigeration, air conditioning and heat pump equipment containing 3 kg or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases. This Regulation shall not apply to equipment with hermetically sealed systems, which are labelled as such and contain less than 6 kg of fluorinated greenhouse gases. Article 2 Equipment records 1. The operator shall indicate his name, postal address and telephone number in the records referred to in Article 3(6) of Regulation (EC) No 842/2006, hereinafter ‘equipment records’. 2. The fluorinated greenhouse gas charge for the refrigeration, air conditioning or heat pump equipment shall be indicated in the equipment records. 3. Where the fluorinated greenhouse gas charge for refrigeration, air conditioning or heat pump equipment is not indicated in the manufacturer’s technical specifications or on the label of that system, the operator shall ensure that it is determined by certified personnel. 4. Where the cause of the leakage has been identified, it shall be indicated in the equipment records. Article 3 Checking equipment records 1. Before carrying out leakage checks, certified personnel shall check the equipment records. 2. Special attention shall be paid to relevant information on any repeating issues and problem areas. Article 4 Systematic checks The following parts of the refrigeration, air conditioning or heat pump equipment shall be systematically checked: Article 5 Choice of measuring method 1. Certified personnel shall apply a direct measuring method as specified in Article 6 or an indirect measuring method as specified in Article 7 when carrying out a leakage check in relation to refrigeration, air conditioning or heat pump equipment. 2. Direct measuring methods may always be applied. 3. Indirect measuring methods shall only be applied where the parameters of the equipment to be analysed, referred to in Article 7(1), give reliable information on the fluorinated greenhouse gas charge indicated in the records of the equipment and the likelihood of leakage. Article 6 Direct measuring methods 1. To identify leakage, certified personnel shall use one or more of the following direct measuring methods: 2. Gas detection devices referred to in paragraph 1(a) shall be checked every 12 months to ensure their proper functioning. The sensitivity of portable gas detection devices shall be at least five grams per year. 3. The application of UV detection fluid or suitable dye in the refrigeration circuit shall only be undertaken if the manufacturer of the equipment has approved that such detection methods are technically possible. The method shall only be undertaken by personnel certified to undertake activities which entail breaking into the refrigeration circuit containing fluorinated greenhouse gases. 4. Where the methods specified in paragraph 1 of this Article do not identify a leakage and the parts referred to in Article 4 show no sign of leakage, and the certified personnel deems that there is a leak, he shall inspect other parts of the equipment. 5. Prior to pressure testing with Oxygen-Free-Nitrogen (OFN) or another suitable pressure testing gas to check for leakage, fluorinated greenhouse gases shall be recovered from the whole system by personnel certified to recover fluorinated greenhouse gases from the specific type of equipment. Article 7 Indirect measuring methods 1. To identify a leakage, certified personnel shall carry out a visual and manual check of the equipment and analyse one or more of the following parameters: 2. Any presumption of fluorinated greenhouse gas leakage shall be followed by an examination for leakage using a direct method as specified in Article 6. 3. One or more of the following situations shall constitute a presumption of leakage: Article 8 Repair of leakage 1. The operator shall ensure that the repair is carried out by personnel certified to undertake that specific activity. Prior to repair, a pump-down or recovery shall be carried out, where necessary. 2. The operator shall ensure that a leakage test with Oxygen Free Nitrogen (OFN) or another suitable pressure testing and drying gas is carried out where necessary, followed by evacuation, recharge and leakage-test. Prior to pressure testing with Oxygen-Free-Nitrogen (OFN) or another suitable pressure testing gas, fluorinated greenhouse gases shall be recovered from the whole application where necessary. 3. The cause of the leakage shall be identified as far as possible, to avoid recurrence. Article 9 Follow-up check Certified personnel shall, when carrying out the follow-up check referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation (EC) No 842/2006, focus on those areas where leakages have been found and repaired as well as on adjacent areas in cases where stress has been applied during the repair. Article 10 Requirements for newly commissioned equipment Newly installed equipment shall be checked for leakage immediately after they have been put into service. Article 11 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 19 December 2007. For the Commission Stavros DIMAS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 161, 14.6.2006, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 244, 29.9.2000, p. 1 . Regulation as last amended by Commission Decision 2007/540/EC ( OJ L 198, 31.7.2007, p. 35 ).