DIRECTIVE 2008/56/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 17 June 2008 establishing a framework for community action in the field of marine environmental policy (Marine Strategy Framework Directive) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 175(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 2 ) , Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty ( 3 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter 1. This Directive establishes a framework within which Member States shall take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020 at the latest. 2. For that purpose, marine strategies shall be developed and implemented in order to: 3. Marine strategies shall apply an ecosystem-based approach to the management of human activities, ensuring that the collective pressure of such activities is kept within levels compatible with the achievement of good environmental status and that the capacity of marine ecosystems to respond to human-induced changes is not compromised, while enabling the sustainable use of marine goods and services by present and future generations. 4. This Directive shall contribute to coherence between, and aim to ensure the integration of environmental concerns into, the different policies, agreements and legislative measures which have an impact on the marine environment. Article 2 1. This Directive shall apply to all marine waters as defined in Article 3(1), and shall take account of the transboundary effects on the quality of the marine environment of third States in the same marine region or subregion. 2. This Directive shall not apply to activities the sole purpose of which is defence or national security. Member States shall, however, endeavour to ensure that such activities are conducted in a manner that is compatible, so far as reasonable and practicable, with the objectives of this Directive. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Directive the following definitions shall apply: Article 4 Marine regions or subregions 1. Member States shall, when implementing their obligations under this Directive, take due account of the fact that marine waters covered by their sovereignty or jurisdiction form an integral part of the following marine regions: 2. Member States may, in order to take into account the specificities of a particular area, implement this Directive by reference to subdivisions at the appropriate level of the marine waters referred to in paragraph 1, provided that such subdivisions are delimited in a manner compatible with the following marine subregions: Member States shall inform the Commission of any subdivisions by the date specified in the first subparagraph of Article 26(1) but may revise these upon completion of the initial assessment referred in Article 5(2), point (a)(i). Article 5 Marine strategies 1. Each Member State shall, in respect of each marine region or subregion concerned, develop a marine strategy for its marine waters in accordance with the plan of action set out in points (a) and (b) of paragraph 2. 2. Member States sharing a marine region or subregion shall cooperate to ensure that, within each marine region or subregion, the measures required to achieve the objectives of this Directive, in particular the different elements of the marine strategies referred to in points (a) and (b), are coherent and coordinated across the marine region or subregion concerned, in accordance with the following plan of action for which Member States concerned endeavour to follow a common approach: 3. Member States having borders on the same marine region or subregion covered by this Directive should, where the status of the sea is so critical as to necessitate urgent action, devise a plan of action in accordance with paragraph 1 which includes an earlier entry into operation of programmes of measures as well as possible stricter protective measures, provided that this does not prevent good environmental status from being achieved or maintained in another marine region or subregion. In these cases: Article 6 Regional cooperation 1. In order to achieve the coordination referred to in Article 5(2), Member States shall, where practical and appropriate, use existing regional institutional cooperation structures, including those under Regional Sea Conventions, covering that marine region or subregion. 2. For the purpose of establishing and implementing marine strategies, Member States shall, within each marine region or subregion, make every effort, using relevant international forums, including mechanisms and structures of Regional Sea Conventions, to coordinate their actions with third countries having sovereignty or jurisdiction over waters in the same marine region or subregion. In that context, Member States shall, as far as possible, build upon relevant existing programmes and activities developed in the framework of structures stemming from international agreements such as Regional Sea Conventions. Coordination and cooperation shall be extended, where appropriate, to all Member States in the catchment area of a marine region or subregion, including land-locked countries, in order to allow Member States within that marine region or subregion to meet their obligations under this Directive, using established cooperation structures prescribed in this Directive or in Directive 2000/60/EC. Article 7 Competent authorities 1. Member States shall, by 15 July 2010, for each marine region or subregion concerned, designate the authority or authorities competent for the implementation of this Directive with respect to their marine waters. By 15 January 2011, Member States shall provide the Commission with a list of the competent authorities designated, together with the items of information listed in Annex II. At the same time, Member States shall send to the Commission a list of their competent authorities as regards those international bodies in which they participate and which are relevant for the implementation of this Directive. Member States within the catchment area of each marine region or subregion shall also designate the authority or authorities competent for cooperation and coordination as referred to in Article 6. 2. Member States shall inform the Commission of any changes to the information provided pursuant to paragraph 1 within six months of such a change coming into effect. CHAPTER II MARINE STRATEGIES: PREPARATION Article 8 Assessment 1. In respect of each marine region or subregion, Member States shall make an initial assessment of their marine waters, taking account of existing data where available and comprising the following: 2. The analyses referred to in paragraph 1 shall take into account elements regarding coastal, transitional and territorial waters covered by relevant provisions of existing Community legislation, in particular Directive 2000/60/EC. They shall also take into account, or use as their basis, other relevant assessments such as those carried out jointly in the context of Regional Sea Conventions, so as to produce a comprehensive assessment of the status of the marine environment. 3. In preparing assessments pursuant to paragraph 1, Member States shall, by means of the coordination established pursuant to Articles 5 and 6, make every effort to ensure that: Article 9 Determination of good environmental status 1. By reference to the initial assessment made pursuant to Article 8(1), Member States shall, in respect of each marine region or subregion concerned, determine, for the marine waters, a set of characteristics for good environmental status, on the basis of the qualitative descriptors listed in Annex I. Member States shall take into account the indicative lists of elements set out in Table 1 of Annex III and, in particular, physical and chemical features, habitat types, biological features and hydro-morphology. Member States shall also take into account the pressures or impacts of human activities in each marine region or subregion, having regard to the indicative lists set out in Table 2 of Annex III. 2. Member States shall notify the Commission of the assessment made pursuant to Article 8(1) and of the determination made pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article within three months of completion of the latter. 3. Criteria and methodological standards to be used by the Member States, which are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be laid down, on the basis of Annexes I and III, in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3) by 15 July 2010 in such a way as to ensure consistency and to allow for comparison between marine regions or subregions of the extent to which good environmental status is being achieved. Before proposing such criteria and standards the Commission shall consult all interested parties, including Regional Sea Conventions. Article 10 Establishment of environmental targets 1. On the basis of the initial assessment made pursuant to Article 8(1), Member States shall, in respect of each marine region or subregion, establish a comprehensive set of environmental targets and associated indicators for their marine waters so as to guide progress towards achieving good environmental status in the marine environment, taking into account the indicative lists of pressures and impacts set out in Table 2 of Annex III, and of characteristics set out in Annex IV. When devising those targets and indicators, Member States shall take into account the continuing application of relevant existing environmental targets laid down at national, Community or international level in respect of the same waters, ensuring that these targets are mutually compatible and that relevant transboundary impacts and transboundary features are also taken into account, to the extent possible. 2. Member States shall notify the Commission of the environmental targets within three months of their establishment. Article 11 Monitoring programmes 1. On the basis of the initial assessment made pursuant to Article 8(1), Member States shall establish and implement coordinated monitoring programmes for the ongoing assessment of the environmental status of their marine waters on the basis of the indicative lists of elements set out in Annex III and the list set out in Annex V, and by reference to the environmental targets established pursuant to Article 10. Monitoring programmes shall be compatible within marine regions or subregions and shall build upon, and be compatible with, relevant provisions for assessment and monitoring laid down by Community legislation, including the Habitats and Birds Directives, or under international agreements. 2. Member States sharing a marine region or subregion shall draw up monitoring programmes in accordance with paragraph 1 and shall, in the interest of coherence and coordination, endeavour to ensure that: 3. Member States shall notify the Commission of the monitoring programmes within three months of their establishment. 4. Specifications and standardised methods for monitoring and assessment which take into account existing commitments and ensure comparability between monitoring and assessment results, and which are designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3). Article 12 Notifications and Commission’s assessment On the basis of all the notifications made pursuant to Articles 9(2), 10(2) and 11(3) in respect of each marine region or subregion, the Commission shall assess whether, in the case of each Member State, the elements notified constitute an appropriate framework to meet the requirements of this Directive and may ask the Member State concerned to provide any additional information that is available and necessary. In drawing up those assessments, the Commission shall consider the coherence of frameworks within the different marine regions or subregions and across the Community. Within six months of receiving all those notifications, the Commission informs Member States concerned whether, in its opinion, the elements notified are consistent with this Directive and provides guidance on any modifications it considers necessary. CHAPTER III MARINE STRATEGIES: PROGRAMMES OF MEASURES Article 13 Programmes of measures 1. Member States shall, in respect of each marine region or subregion concerned, identify the measures which need to be taken in order to achieve or maintain good environmental status, as determined pursuant to Article 9(1), in their marine waters. Those measures shall be devised on the basis of the initial assessment made pursuant to Article 8(1) and by reference to the environmental targets established pursuant to Article 10(1), and taking into consideration the types of measures listed in Annex VI. 2. Member States shall integrate the measures devised pursuant to paragraph 1 into a programme of measures, taking into account relevant measures required under Community legislation, in particular Directive 2000/60/EC, Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment ( 21 ) and Directive 2006/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 February 2006 concerning the management of bathing water quality ( 22 ) , as well as forthcoming legislation on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy, or international agreements. 3. When drawing up the programme of measures pursuant to paragraph 2, Member States shall give due consideration to sustainable development and, in particular, to the social and economic impacts of the measures envisaged. To assist the competent authority or authorities referred to in Article 7 to pursue their objectives in an integrated manner, Member States may identify or establish administrative frameworks in order to benefit from such interaction. Member States shall ensure that measures are cost-effective and technically feasible, and shall carry out impact assessments, including cost-benefit analyses, prior to the introduction of any new measure. 4. Programmes of measures established pursuant to this Article shall include spatial protection measures, contributing to coherent and representative networks of marine protected areas, adequately covering the diversity of the constituent ecosystems, such as special areas of conservation pursuant to the Habitats Directive, special protection areas pursuant to the Birds Directive, and marine protected areas as agreed by the Community or Member States concerned in the framework of international or regional agreements to which they are parties. 5. Where Member States consider that the management of a human activity at Community or international level is likely to have a significant impact on the marine environment, particularly in the areas addressed in paragraph 4, they shall, individually or jointly, address the competent authority or international organisation concerned with a view to the consideration and possible adoption of measures that may be necessary in order to achieve the objectives of this Directive, so as to enable the integrity, structure and functioning of ecosystems to be maintained or, where appropriate, restored. 6. By 2013 at the latest, Member States shall make publicly available, in respect of each marine region or subregion, relevant information on the areas referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5. 7. Member States shall indicate in their programmes of measures how the measures are to be implemented and how they will contribute to the achievement of the environmental targets established pursuant to Article 10(1). 8. Member States shall consider the implications of their programmes of measures on waters beyond their marine waters in order to minimise the risk of damage to, and if possible have a positive impact on, those waters. 9. Member States shall notify the Commission and any other Member State concerned of their programmes of measures, within three months of their establishment. 10. Subject to Article 16, Member States shall ensure that the programmes are made operational within one year of their establishment. Article 14 Exceptions 1. A Member State may identify instances within its marine waters where, for any of the reasons listed under points (a) to (d), the environmental targets or good environmental status cannot be achieved in every aspect through measures taken by that Member State, or, for reasons referred to under point (e), they cannot be achieved within the time schedule concerned: The Member State concerned shall identify such instances clearly in its programme of measures and shall substantiate its view to the Commission. In identifying instances a Member State shall consider the consequences for Member States in the marine region or subregion concerned. However, the Member State concerned shall take appropriate ad-hoc measures aiming to continue pursuing the environmental targets, to prevent further deterioration in the status of the marine waters affected for reasons identified under points (b), (c) or (d) and to mitigate the adverse impact at the level of the marine region or subregion concerned or in the marine waters of other Member States. 2. In the situation covered by paragraph 1(d), Member States shall ensure that the modifications or alterations do not permanently preclude or compromise the achievement of good environmental status at the level of the marine region or subregion concerned or in the marine waters of other Member States. 3. The ad-hoc measures referred to in the third subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall be integrated as far as practicable into the programmes of measures. 4. Member States shall develop and implement all the elements of marine strategies referred to in Article 5(2), but shall not be required, except in respect of the initial assessment described in Article 8, to take specific steps where there is no significant risk to the marine environment, or where the costs would be disproportionate taking account of the risks to the marine environment, and provided that there is no further deterioration. Where, for either of these reasons, a Member State does not take any steps, it shall provide the Commission with the necessary justification to substantiate its decision, while avoiding that the achievement of good environmental status be permanently compromised. Article 15 Recommendations for Community action 1. Where a Member State identifies an issue which has an impact on the environmental status of its marine waters and which cannot be tackled by measures adopted at national level, or which is linked to another Community policy or international agreement, it shall inform the Commission accordingly and provide a justification to substantiate its view. The Commission shall respond within a period of six months. 2. Where action by Community institutions is needed, Member States shall make appropriate recommendations to the Commission and the Council for measures regarding the issues referred to in paragraph 1. Unless otherwise specified in relevant Community legislation, the Commission shall respond to any such recommendation within a period of six months and, as appropriate, reflect the recommendations when presenting related proposals to the European Parliament and to the Council. Article 16 Notifications and Commission’s assessment On the basis of the notifications of programmes of measures made pursuant to Article 13(9), the Commission shall assess whether, in the case of each Member State, the programmes notified constitute an appropriate framework to meet the requirements of this Directive, and may ask the Member State concerned to provide any additional information that is available and necessary. In drawing up those assessments, the Commission shall consider the coherence of programmes of measures within the different marine regions or subregions and across the Community. Within six months of receiving all those notifications, the Commission informs Member States concerned whether, in its opinion, the programmes of measures notified are consistent with this Directive and provides guidance on any modifications it considers necessary. CHAPTER IV UPDATING, REPORTS AND PUBLIC INFORMATION Article 17 Updating 1. Member States shall ensure that, in respect of each marine region or subregion concerned, marine strategies are kept up to date. 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, Member States shall review, in a coordinated manner as referred to in Article 5, the following elements of their marine strategies every six years after their initial establishment: 3. Details of any updates made following the reviews provided for in paragraph 2 shall be sent to the Commission, to the Regional Sea Conventions and to any other Member States concerned within three months of their publication in accordance with Article 19(2). 4. Articles 12 and 16 shall apply mutatis mutandis to this Article. Article 18 Interim reports Member States shall, within three years of the publication of each programme of measures or update thereof in accordance with Article 19(2), submit to the Commission a brief interim report describing progress in the implementation of that programme. Article 19 Public consultation and information 1. In accordance with relevant existing Community legislation, Member States shall ensure that all interested parties are given early and effective opportunities to participate in the implementation of this Directive, involving, where possible, existing management bodies or structures, including Regional Sea Conventions, Scientific Advisory Bodies and Regional Advisory Councils. 2. Member States shall publish, and make available to the public for comment, summaries of the following elements of their marine strategies, or the related updates, as follows: 3. With regard to access to environmental information, Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to environmental information ( 23 ) shall apply. In accordance with Directive 2007/2/EC, Member States shall provide the Commission, for the performance of its tasks in relation to this Directive, in particular the review of the status of the marine environment in the Community under Article 20(3)(b), with access and use rights in respect of data and information resulting from the initial assessments made pursuant to Article 8 and from the monitoring programmes established pursuant to Article 11. No later than six months after the data and information resulting from the initial assessment made pursuant to Article 8 and from the monitoring programmes established pursuant to Article 11 have become available, such information and data shall also be made available to the European Environment Agency, for the performance of its tasks. Article 20 Commission reports 1. The Commission shall publish a first evaluation report on the implementation of this Directive within two years of receiving all programmes of measures and, in any case, by 2019 at the latest. The Commission shall publish further reports every six years thereafter. It shall submit the reports to the European Parliament and to the Council. 2. By 15 July 2012 at the latest, the Commission shall publish a report assessing the contribution of this Directive to the implementation of existing obligations, commitments and initiatives of the Member States or the Community at Community or international level in the sphere of environmental protection in marine waters. That report shall be submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council. 3. The reports provided for in paragraph 1 shall include the following: Article 21 Progress report on protected areas On the basis of the information provided by the Member States by 2013, the Commission shall report by 2014 on progress in the establishment of marine protected areas, having regard to existing obligations under applicable Community law and international commitments of the Community and the Member States. The report shall be submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council. Article 22 Community financing 1. Given the priority inherently attached to the establishment of marine strategies, the implementation of this Directive shall be supported by existing Community financial instruments in accordance with applicable rules and conditions. 2. The programmes drawn up by the Member States shall be co-financed by the EU in accordance with existing financial instruments. Article 23 Review of this Directive The Commission shall review this Directive by 15 July 2023 and shall, where appropriate, propose any necessary amendments. CHAPTER V FINAL PROVISIONS Article 24 Technical adaptations 1. Annexes III, IV and V may be amended in the light of scientific and technical progress in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 25(3), taking into account the periods for the review and updating of marine strategies laid down in Article 17(2). 2. In accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 25(2): Article 25 Regulatory Committee 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. The period laid down in Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at three months. 3. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1) to (4) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. Article 26 Transposition 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 15 July 2010 at the latest. They shall forthwith communicate to the Commission the text of those provisions. When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the texts of the main measures of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. 3. Member States without marine waters shall bring into force only those measures which are necessary to ensure compliance with requirements under Article 6 and Article 7. Where such measures are already in force in national legislation, Member States concerned shall communicate to the Commission the text of those measures. Article 27 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 28 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 17 June 2008. For the European Parliament The President H.-G. PÖTTERING For the Council The President J. LENARČIČ ( 1 ) OJ C 185, 18.8.2006, p. 20 . ( 2 ) OJ C 206, 29.8.2006, p. 5 . ( 3 ) Opinion of the European Parliament of 14 November 2006 ( OJ C 314 E, 21.12.2006, p. 86 ), Council Common Position of 23 July 2007 ( OJ C 242 E, 16.10.2007, p. 11 ) and Position of the European Parliament of 11 December 2007 (not yet published in the Official Journal). Council Decision of 14 May 2008. ( 4 ) OJ L 242, 10.9.2002, p. 1 . ( 5 ) OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 . Directive as last amended by Directive 2006/105/EC ( OJ L 363, 20.12.2006, p. 368 ). ( 6 ) OJ L 103, 25.4.1979, p. 1 . Directive as last amended by Directive 2006/105/EC. ( 7 ) OJ L 309, 13.12.1993, p. 1 . ( 8 ) OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1 . Directive as last amended by Directive 2008/32/EC ( OJ L 81, 20.3.2008, p. 60 ). ( 9 ) OJ L 179, 23.6.1998, p. 1 . ( 10 ) OJ L 73, 16.3.1994, p. 19 . ( 11 ) OJ L 104, 3.4.1998, p. 1 . ( 12 ) OJ L 118, 19.5.2000, p. 44 . ( 13 ) OJ L 240, 19.9.1977, p. 1 . ( 14 ) OJ L 322, 14.12.1999, p. 32 . ( 15 ) OJ L 67, 12.3.1983, p. 1 . ( 16 ) OJ L 322, 14.12.1999, p. 18 . ( 17 ) OJ L 108, 25.4.2007, p. 1 . ( 18 ) OJ L 358, 31.12.2002, p. 59 . Regulation as amended by Regulation (EC) No 865/2007 ( OJ L 192, 24.7.2007, p. 1 ). ( 19 ) OJ C 364, 18.12.2000, p. 1 . ( 20 ) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 . Decision as amended by Decision 2006/512/EC ( OJ L 200, 22.7.2006, p. 11 ). ( 21 ) OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 . Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 284, 31.10.2003, p. 1 ). ( 22 ) OJ L 64, 4.3.2006, p. 37 . ( 23 ) OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26 . ANNEX I Qualitative descriptors for determining good environmental status (referred to in Articles 3(5), 9(1), 9(3) and 24) To determine the characteristics of good environmental status in a marine region or subregion as provided for in Article 9(1), Member States shall consider each of the qualitative descriptors listed in this Annex in order to identify those descriptors which are to be used to determine good environmental status for that marine region or subregion. When a Member State considers that it is not appropriate to use one or more of those descriptors, it shall provide the Commission with a justification in the framework of the notification made pursuant to Article 9(2). ANNEX II Competent authorities (referred to in Article 7(1)) ANNEX III Indicative lists of characteristics, pressures and impacts (referred to in Articles 8(1), 9(1), 9(3), 10(1), 11(1) and 24) Table 1 Characteristics Table 2 Pressures and impacts ANNEX IV Indicative list of characteristics to be taken into account for setting environmental targets (referred to in Articles 10(1) and 24) ANNEX V Monitoring programmes (referred to in Articles 11(1) and 24) ANNEX VI Programmes of measures (referred to in Articles 13(1) and 24)