COOPERATION AGREEMENT on the implementation of Commission Decision C(2010) 7499 between the European Commission and the European Investment Bank 2010/C 358/01 TABLE OF CONTENTS This Cooperation Agreement is entered into between: the European Commission (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Commission’), Rue de la Loi/Wetstraat 200, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË, represented for the purposes of the signature of this Agreement by Mr Jos DELBEKE, Director-General, Directorate-General for Climate Action, of the one part, and the European Investment Bank (hereinafter referred to as the ‘EIB’), established at 98-100, boulevard Konrad Adenauer, 2950 Luxembourg, LUXEMBOURG, represented for the purposes of the signature of this Agreement by Mr Simon BROOKS, Vice-President, of the other part, (hereinafter the Commission and the EIB jointly referred to as the ‘Parties’), Whereas: THE PARTIES HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: SECTION 1 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS Article 1 Definitions 1. In this Agreement, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 2. In this Agreement, unless the context otherwise requires, Article 2 Purpose This Agreement sets out the specific terms and conditions for the performance of the tasks by the EIB pursuant to the Decision in respect of project selection, the monetisation of allowances and the management and disbursement of revenues and certain related tasks by the Commission pursuant to the Decision. Article 3 Principles and framework for cooperation 1. While reinforcing dialogue and coordination in the achievement of common goals in furtherance of EU policies, the Commission and the EIB will each maintain its own specific and autonomous character in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The Commission and the EIB have their own specific objectives and working methods, including separate hierarchies and decision-making processes. 2. The Commission and the EIB recognise each other's characteristics and constraints, but emphasise the importance of working in partnership and in a complementary way so as to combine their separate capabilities, resources and know-how, in the achievement of the tasks and objectives laid out in the Decision. Article 4 Role of the EIB The EIB shall perform its tasks on the request of, on behalf of and for the account of the Commission, which shall be responsible vis-à-vis third parties. The EIB shall perform its tasks in accordance with the Decision and the terms and conditions laid out in the Agreement and with its own rules and procedures, good banking practice and appropriate management and control measures. Article 5 Role of the Commission The Commission shall have overall responsibility for the NER 300 process and for the implementation of the Decision, including in respect of the preparation, launch and management of the calls for proposals, authorisation and final selection of projects and for the award of contracts. Article 6 Overview of tasks 1. Within the timelines set out in Annex 1, the EIB shall: 2. Within the timelines set out in Annex 2, the Commission shall: SECTION 2 PROJECT SELECTION Article 7 Preparation of tender documentation The EIB shall assist the Commission in the supervision and quality control of the work carried out by consultants contracted by the Commission in respect of preparing the project selection tender documentation with specific focus on the following: Article 8 Procedures manual 1. The Commission shall prepare a procedures manual for project evaluation setting out the evaluation methodologies to be applied during the due diligence assessment, which will be based on the EIB's due diligence procedures. 2. The EIB shall assist the Commission in the preparation of the procedures manual. 3. The procedures manual shall be agreed by both Parties. Article 9 Preparation of the calls for proposals In preparation of the calls for proposals, the EIB shall: Article 10 Proposal evaluation and follow-up 1. The EIB shall: 2. The Commission shall: SECTION 3 MONETISATION OF ALLOWANCES, MANAGEMENT AND DISBURSEMENT OF REVENUES Article 11 Transfer of allowances to the EIB The Commission shall ensure that the 300 million allowances are transferred to the EIB and made available for the settlement of transactions once the Union registry is operational. Article 12 Monetisation of allowances 1. Within one month after the 300 million allowances have been transferred to the EIB and made available for the settlement of transactions, the EIB shall commence to monetise the allowances. This shall be done by selling them either on exchange, in privately negotiated (so-called over-the-counter) transactions with one or more counterparties or by means of auctions, provided such auctions are conducted in a manner compatible with the objectives and principles laid down in Article 10(4) of Directive 2003/87/EC and its implementing provisions. 2. The EIB shall monetise the allowances for settlement in December 2013 at the earliest. The EIB shall not require payment from its counterparties except on delivery of the allowances. 3. The EIB shall perform the monetisation of allowances with the objective of minimising any impact on the market for EU emission allowances. The EIB will determine a monetisation method which shall include the timing and scheduling of monetisation as well as the distribution of the volumes over the monetisation period and over the means of monetisation (exchanges or other). The monetisation method shall respect the following principles: 4. The main elements of the monetisation method including the defined monetisation period and the expected total volume of monetisation shall be published on the EIB's website as soon as possible and prior to the start of the monetisation; any significant adjustment shall to the extent practicable be announced at least one month in advance as well. 5. With a view to minimising execution risk, the EIB shall apply a selection process which aims at ensuring the selection of a professional counterparty or counterparties with a rating acceptable to the EIB in its ordinary business. Moreover, the EIB shall, to the extent required by its normal guidelines and operating procedures, require counterparties to post collateral as a guarantee of execution. Article 13 Management of the revenues The EIB shall manage the revenues from the monetisation of the allowances in accordance with the asset management principles laid out in Annex 3 and with appropriate standards of due diligence. The interest earned and remaining after the deduction of the EIB's fees shall be reinvested in accordance with these asset management principles until their final disbursement to the Member States. Article 14 Disbursement of the revenues 1. The EIB shall: 2. The payment schedules forming part of the award decisions shall be agreed by the Commission with the EIB with a view to ensuring liquidity and availability of revenues. SECTION 4 FINAL PROVISIONS Article 15 Liabilities 1. In accordance with the role of the EIB, the liability of the EIB under the Agreement and any other document referred to in it shall be limited to the performance of its duties and obligations as specifically set out in the Agreement. 2. The EIB shall be held harmless and indemnified by the Commission for any liabilities, losses, damages, costs or expenses incurred by the EIB, its delegates, servants or agents as a result of performing its tasks under the Agreement and any other document referred to in it otherwise than by reason of the EIB's negligent actions or omissions or wilful misconduct, provided that adequate evidence of such liability, loss, damages, costs, claims or expenses is provided by the EIB and that, where applicable, the EIB has diligently defended such claim. 3. Any liabilities, losses, damages, costs or expenses incurred by the EIB pursuant to the preceding paragraph, including any liabilities, losses, damages, costs or expenses arising further to investment risk or execution risk (collectively being ‘liabilities incurred by the EIB’) that are not wilfully or negligently caused by the Commission shall be deducted from the revenues generated from the monetisation of the allowances and in priority to all other payments due to be made with such revenues. Before the deduction of any such payment which is not related to losses, damages, costs or expenses arising further to investment risk or execution risk, the EIB shall send an invoice to the Commission, which shall be agreed to by the Commission before the payment is executed, such agreement not to be unreasonably withheld. 4. However, notwithstanding the above and anything in the Agreement, the Commission shall not be responsible for any liability incurred by the EIB that exceeds revenues generated, or to be generated, from the monetisation of the allowances, except if such liability incurred by the EIB is wilfully or negligently caused by the Commission. Article 16 Fees and expenses 1. The EIB will be remunerated for the performance of its tasks under the Agreement. Subject to a revision of fees and timelines pursuant to Article 17, the EIB's fees will not exceed a maximum amount of EUR 45 000 000 (forty-five million euro). 2. Subject to a revision of fees and timelines pursuant to Article 17, the payment schedule for the fees shall be as follows: 3. The EIB shall be paid interest on fees accrued at the rate of three-month EURIBOR plus 10 basis points, compounded quarterly. 4. The EIB's fees shall be deducted from the income generated from the management of the revenues and in priority to all other payments due to be made with income generated from the management of the revenues. The income generated from the management of the revenues shall include, without limitation, the income generated from the management of the revenues in respect of the reference price, defined as any excess of the price at which the EIB has agreed to monetise allowances over the reference price. 5. Any expenses incurred by the EIB shall be deducted from the revenues generated from the monetisation of the allowances and in priority to all other payments due to be made with such revenues. Where counterparties are appointed by the EIB, the relevant expenses shall be determined at the time of selection of such counterparties. 6. Before deduction of any payment of fees, the EIB shall send a fee invoice to the Commission which shall be agreed by the Commission before the payment is executed. Article 17 Revision of fees and timelines An appropriate and proportionate revision of the provisions of the Agreement relating to fees and timelines shall be agreed between the Parties within the shortest possible delays in the following cases: Article 18 EIB loans The EIB may provide loans to projects and will assess such projects and conduct due diligence assessments for the purposes of such loans in accordance with its own rules, principles and procedures. Article 19 Reporting The EIB shall provide the Commission with the following reports: Article 20 The EIB shall respond to any request by the Commission to clarify or verify specific financial or accounting reporting provided by the EIB pursuant to the Agreement. If the Commission requests that such verifications are carried out by an external auditor, the EIB shall appoint its external auditors for such purposes. The EIB shall have the right to recover any reasonable costs relating to EIB external auditors incurred further to a Commission request in the same manner as, and in addition to, its expenses pursuant to Article 16(5). Article 21 Steering Committee 1. The implementation of this Agreement shall be supervised by a Steering Committee which shall consist of at least: 2. The Steering Committee shall: 3. The Steering Committee shall act by consensus. 4. The members of the Steering Committee shall act on behalf of and on instructions of the Party appointing them. 5. They shall not be remunerated for their participation in the Steering Committee meetings. 6. The Commission shall provide the Secretariat of the Steering Committee (hereinafter the ‘Secretariat’). 7. The Secretariat shall carry out the following tasks: 8. Communications between the Parties concerning the Steering Committee shall be channelled through the Secretariat. 9. The Steering Committee shall convene at the request of any of its members, but shall meet at least twice yearly. Meetings of the Steering Committee shall be organised by the Secretariat. 10. The Steering Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure, upon a proposal of the Secretariat. 11. The Steering Committee shall elect its Chairman, which shall be a representative of the Commission. Article 22 Confidentiality Without prejudice to the confidentiality obligations assumed by the EIB towards third parties, and subject to Article 23, the Commission and the EIB undertake to keep confidential and to abstain from divulging to a third party, without prior written consent, any document, information or other material directly related to the Agreement and any other document referred to in it or obtained in connection with the tasks carried out and duly classified as confidential. This undertaking shall not affect, however, any communication of information which is required by a rule of law or by an order of a court having jurisdiction in the matter, which may include communication of information to the European Parliament or the Council in relation to the Agreement and, in particular, to the European Court of Auditors. Article 23 Transparency The Parties shall endeavour to coordinate publication of the Agreement within the shortest possible delay upon its entry into force. The EIB shall perform its tasks under the Agreement in accordance with the EIB Transparency Policy. Article 24 Entry into force The Agreement shall enter into force on the later of the date of the last signature of the Agreement by the Parties and the date on which the Decision enters into force. Article 25 Termination 1. The Agreement shall be terminated in the following cases: 2. At the end of disbursement pursuant to (a) above, the EIB shall pass to the Member States the funds which have not been disbursed to projects in accordance with decisions to be taken by the Commission based on the principles laid down in Article 10a(7) of Directive 2003/87/EC. 3. Upon early termination of the Agreement pursuant to (b) or (c) above, any unmonetised allowances held by the EIB, all revenues from monetised allowances, and all income generated from the management of the revenues other than revenues or income needed to cover the EIB's fees, expenses, costs, losses or liabilities, shall be passed to the Commission (acting on behalf of the Member States). Termination of the Agreement shall not affect the duty of the Parties to continue to perform their obligations under the Agreement in respect of allowances which have been monetised pursuant to contracts with third parties. 4. Upon early termination of the Agreement, a Party shall hold the other Party harmless and indemnify it for any cost, loss or liability incurred due to early termination of the Agreement, where and to the extent that early termination is due to the first Party's negligent actions or omissions or wilful misconduct or termination of the Agreement due to the first Party's failure to perform any of its material obligations under the Agreement. Article 26 Governing law and settlement of disputes The Agreement shall be governed by general principles of Union law. Any dispute between the Parties as to the interpretation, application or performance of the Agreement and any other document referred to in it, including its existence, validity or termination not settled amicably after the involvement of the Steering Committee shall be submitted to the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union. Article 27 Amendments, waivers and consents Any amendments, waivers or consents in respect of the Agreement are to be made in writing and signed by authorised representatives of each of the Parties. Article 28 Assignment Neither Party may assign, in whole or in part, its rights or obligations under the Agreement without the prior written consent of the other Party. Article 29 Communications 1. All notices and other communications relating to this Agreement from one Party to the other Party shall be sent to the following addresses: 2. Any change made to the aforementioned addresses shall have effect only after it has been notified to the other Party. Article 30 Annexes The recitals and following Annexes form an integral part of this Agreement: This Agreement has been executed in four originals in the English language, each Party taking two copies as of the day and year written below. Brussels, 3 November 2010. London, 4 November 2010. For and on behalf of the European Commission Jos DELBEKE Director-General For and on behalf of the European Investment Bank Simon BROOKS Vice-President ( 1 ) OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 . ANNEX I Timelines for the EIB Subject to a revision of fees and timelines pursuant to Article 17, the timelines for the EIB are shown in the following two tables. The timelines below are on the basis that the estimated total number of project proposals for both calls for proposals is 165, of which: 1.(a) First call for proposals 1.(b) Second call for proposals General Monetisation and asset management ANNEX 2 Timelines for Commission ANNEX III ASSET MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF REVENUES GENERATED FROM THE MONETISATION OF THE ALLOWANCES For the purpose of managing the proceeds the EIB has to perform an asset allocation exercise in order to ensure on one side that the maximum economic benefit from managing proceeds is achieved and on the other side that the risk of capital losses due to market movements is sufficiently low. In order to perform this asset allocation the EIB has to adopt an assumption regarding the future disbursement cash flow. By default the cash buffer (from which the disbursement payments would be made) would correspond to a linear disbursement in five years, meaning a 20 % disbursement per year, whereas the amounts not disbursed in the previous years would be added to the liquidity buffer foreseen for the current year. For example, the cash buffer foreseen for the first year would amount to 20 % of the assets constituting the portfolio. If within the first year only 10 % of the initial size of the portfolio would be disbursed, the liquidity buffer for the second year would amount to 30 % (being a sum of 20 % originally foreseen for the second year and of 10 % remaining from the first year) etc. However, based on the actual and forecasted disbursement pattern, the EIB can adjust yearly this assumption in order to optimise the asset allocation process Within the constraint specifying the minimum liquidity buffer and maximum available maturity of the investment portfolio (which would initially equal five years) the EIB would decide the maturity at which the investment assets are deployed. In particular cases the EIB would be authorized to maintain a liquidity buffer at a level higher than the minimum requirement. 1. Introduction 1.1. The EIB Treasury shall manage all assets subject to this agreement. 1.2. While executing transactions on behalf of the mandate, the Treasury shall apply the same standards of due diligence and care it applies when managing the EIB's own Treasury portfolios or to its other mandates. 2. General Management Principles 2.1. The assets of the portfolio shall be invested only in euro-denominated instruments. 2.2. Management of the portfolio of assets shall be based on the best practice of the asset management industry and on traditional prudential rules applied in financial activities. Particular care shall need to be taken to ensure that the managed assets provide sufficient liquidity while optimising the return that is compatible with the risk limitations set out under these principles. 2.3. The management of the portfolio assets shall be guided by the following principles: 2.4. Securities transactions shall be based on the principle of ‘delivery versus payment’ with Euroclear, Clearstream and/or recognized domestic settlement systems. 3. Types of investment 3.1. Eligible investment spectrum Liquidity portfolio Investment portfolio 3.2. Credit limits Credit limits will be defined per counterparty taking into consideration the individual ratings and the evolution of the total size of the portfolio under management. 3.3. Concentration limits on investments Liquidity portfolio Investment portfolio 4. Automated securities lending Automated securities lending administered by a custodian is authorised. 5. External Audit and Custodian The portfolio will be subject to an external audit on an annual basis. Securities allocated to the portfolio will be held in an account with one or more custodians in the name of the EIB. Audit and custody fees will be charged in full to the portfolio as and when incurred. 6. Reporting A six monthly report shall be provided by the EIB. The details of such reporting shall be agreed by the Parties at a later stage. 7. Final provisions The EIB shall propose and the Parties shall agree the detailed investment strategy, investment benchmarks and credit limits at least 3 months before actual investment takes place. The investment strategy, investment benchmarks and credit limits are to be updated annually or whenever necessary thereafter.