COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2019/318 of 19 February 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 and Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on type-approval of motor vehicles and engines with respect to emissions from heavy duty vehicles (Euro VI) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information and amending Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 and Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directives 80/1269/EEC, 2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 4(3) and Article 5(4)(e) thereof, Having regard to Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles (Framework Directive) ( 2 ) , and in particular Article 39(7) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Amendments to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: Article 2 Amendments to Directive 2007/46/EC Annexes I, IV and IX to Directive 2007/46/EC are amended in accordance with Annex XI to this Regulation. Article 3 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 2 shall apply as of 1 September 2019. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 19 February 2019. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 188, 18.7.2009, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1 . ( 3 ) Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 of 12 December 2017 implementing Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles and amending Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulation (EU) No 582/2011 ( OJ L 349, 29.12.2017, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the monitoring and reporting of CO 2 emissions from and fuel consumption of new heavy-duty vehicles ( OJ L 173, 9.7.2018, p. 1 ). ANNEX I Table 1 of Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is replaced by the following: ‘ Table 1 Vehicle groups for vehicles of category N ( ** ) In these vehicle classes tractors are treated as rigid lorries but with specific curb weight of tractor ( *** ) Sub-group “v” of vehicle groups 4, 5, 9 and 10: these mission profiles are exclusively applicable to vocational vehicles ANNEX II Annex III to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: ( 1 ) In case of multiple PTOs mounted to the transmission, only the component with the highest losses according to point 3.6 of Annex IX, for its combination of criteria “PTOShaftsGearWheels” and “PTOShaftsOtherElements”, shall be declared.’; ANNEX III Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: ANNEX IV Annex V to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: ANNEX V Annex VI to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: ( 1 ) DCT shall be declared as transmission type AMT.’ ANNEX VI Annex VII to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: ANNEX VII Annex VIII to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: string … sequence of characters in ISO8859-1 encoding token … sequence of characters in ISO8859-1 encoding, no leading/trailing whitespace date … date and time in UTC time in the format: YYYY-MM-DD T HH:MM:SS Z with italic letters denoting fixed characters e.g. “2002-05-30T09:30:10Z” integer … value with an integral data type, no leading zeros, e.g. “1800” double, X … fractional number with exactly X digits after the decimal sign (“.”) and no leading zeros e.g. for “double, 2”: “2345.67”; for “double, 4”: “45.6780” Set of input parameters Table 1 Input parameters “AirDrag” In case standard values in accordance with Appendix 7 shall be used in the simulation tool, no input data for air drag component shall be provided. The standard values are allocated automatically in accordance with the vehicle group scheme. ANNEX VIII Annex IX to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: ANNEX IX Annex X to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: ( 1 ) “delete as appropriate” ANNEX X ‘ANNEX Xa Conformity of simulation tool operation and of CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of components, separate technical units and systems: verification testing procedure 1. Introduction This Annex sets out the requirements for the verification testing procedure which is the test procedure for verifying the CO 2 emissions of new heavy-duty vehicles. The verification testing procedure consists of an on-road test to verify the CO 2 emissions of new vehicles after production. It shall be carried out by the vehicle manufacturer and verified by the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool. During the verification testing procedure the torque and speed at the driven wheels, the engine speed, the fuel consumption, the engaged gear of the vehicle and the other relevant parameters listed in point 6.1.6 shall be measured. The measured data shall be used as input to the simulation tool, which uses the vehicle-related input data and the input information from the determination of the CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption of the vehicle. For the verification testing procedure simulation, the instantaneously measured wheel torque and the rotational speed of the wheels as well as the engine speed shall be used as input, as described in Figure 1 instead of the vehicle speed, in accordance with point 6.1.6. The fan power during the verification testing procedure shall be calculated in accordance with the measured fan speed. The measured fuel consumption shall be within the tolerances set out in point 7 and compared to the fuel consumption simulated with the verification data set to pass the verification testing procedure. As part of the verification testing procedure, the correctness of the vehicle input data set from the certification of CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of the components, separate technical units and systems shall also be reviewed to check the data and the data handling process. The correctness of the input data relating to components, separate technical units and systems relevant for air drag and for rolling resistance of the vehicle shall be verified in accordance with point 6.1.1. Figure 1 Schematic picture of the verification testing procedure method 2. Definitions For the purposes of this Annex the following definitions shall apply: 3. Vehicle selection The number of new vehicles to be tested per year of production ensures that the relevant variations of components, separate technical units or systems used are covered by the verification testing procedure. The vehicle selection for the verification test shall be based on following requirements: 4. Vehicle conditions Each vehicle for the verification test shall be in series conditions as typically delivered to the customer. No changes in hardware such as lubricants or in the software such as auxiliary controllers are allowed. 4.1. Vehicle run in Run in of the vehicle is not mandatory. If the total mileage of the test vehicle is less than 15 000 km, an evolution coefficient for the test result shall be applied as defined in point 7. The total mileage of the test vehicle shall be the odometer reading at start of the fuel consumption measurement. The maximum mileage for the verification testing procedure shall be 20 000 km. 4.2. Fuel and lubricants All lubricants shall be in line with the series configuration of the vehicle. For the fuel consumption measurement as described in point 6.1.5, reference fuel as set out in point 3.2 of Annex V shall be used. The fuel tank shall be full at start of the fuel consumption measurement run. 5. Measurement equipment All laboratory reference measurement equipment, used for calibration and verification, shall be traceable to national (international) standards. The calibration laboratory shall comply with the requirements of ISO 9000 series and either ISO/TS 16949 or ISO/IEC 17025. 5.1. Torque The direct torque at all driven axles shall be measured with one of the following measurement systems fulfilling the requirements listed in Table 2: The calibrated range shall be at least 10 000 Nm; the measurement range shall cover the entire range of torque occurring during the verification testing procedure of the tested vehicle. The drift shall be measured during the verification test described in point 6 by zeroing the torque measurement system in accordance with point 6.1.5 after the pre-conditioning phase by lifting the axle and measuring the torque at lifted axle directly after the verification test again. For a valid test result a maximum drift of the torque measurement system over the verification testing procedure of 150 Nm (sum of both wheels) shall be proven. 5.2. Vehicle speed The vehicle speed shall be used for possible plausibility checks of the gear signal later on and shall be based on the CAN signal. 5.3. Gear engaged The engaged gear does not need to be measured but shall be calculated by the simulation tool based on measured engine speed, the vehicle speed and the tyre dimensions and transmission ratios of the vehicle in accordance with point 7. The gear position may be provided also from the CAN signal to check possible deviations from the gear position calculated by the simulation tool. In case of deviations of the gear position in more than 5 % of the test duration, the reasons for the deviation shall be investigated and reported by the vehicle manufacturer. The input data on gear position shall be used in the simulation tool to compute the gear dependent losses in the gear box. The engine speed shall be taken by the simulation tool from the input data as defined in point 5.4. 5.4. Rotational speed of the engine The signal from the connection with the vehicle electronic control unit via the open on-board diagnostic interface shall be used to measure the engine speed. Alternative measurement systems are allowed if they fulfil the requirements set out in Table 2. 5.5. Rotational speed of the wheels at the driven axle The measurement system for the rotational speed of left and right wheel at the driven axle for the assessment of the power demand at the wheels as input to the simulation tool for the verification test simulation shall fulfil the requirements set out in Table 2. 5.6. Rotational speed of fan The CAN signal for the fan speed may be used, if available. Alternatively an external sensor fulfilling the requirements set out in Table 2 may be used. 5.7. Fuel measurement system The fuel consumed shall be measured on-board with a measurement device reporting the total amount of fuel consumed in kilograms. The fuel measurement system shall be based on one of the following measurement methods: 5.8. Vehicle weight The following masses of the vehicle shall be measured with equipment fulfilling the requirements set out in Table 2: 5.9. General requirements for the on-board measurements All data shall be recorded at least in 2 Hz frequency or at recommended frequency from the equipment maker, whichever is the higher value. The input data for the simulation tool may be composed from different recorders. The following input data shall be provided from measurements: The torque and rotational speed at the wheels shall be recorded in one data-logging system. If different data-logging systems are used for the other signals, one common signal, such as vehicle speed, shall be recorded to ensure correct time alignment of the signals. The accuracy requirements set out in Table 2 shall be met by all measurement equipment used. Any equipment not listed in Table 2 shall fulfil the accuracy requirements set out in Table 2 of Annex V. Table 2 Requirements of measurement systems The maximum calibration values shall be at least 1,1 times the maximum predicted value expected during all test runs for the respective measurement system. For the torque measurement system the maximum calibration may be limited to 10 kNm. Accuracy given shall be met by the sum of all single accuracies in the case more than one scale is used. 6. Test procedure 6.1. Vehicle preparation The vehicle shall be taken from the series production and selected as set out in point 3. 6.1.1. Validation of input data The manufacturer's records file for the vehicle selected shall be used as basis for validating the input data. The vehicle identification number of the vehicle selected shall be the same as the vehicle identification number in the customer information file. Upon request by the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool, the vehicle manufacturer shall provide, within 15 working days, the manufacturer's records file, the input information and input data necessary to run the simulation tool as well as the certificate of CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties for all relevant components, separate technical units or systems. 6.1.1.1. Verification of components, separate technical units or systems and input data and information The following checks shall be performed for the components, separate technical units and systems mounted on the vehicle: 6.1.1.2. Verification of the vehicle mass If requested by the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool, a verification of the corrected actual mass of the vehicle shall be included into the verification of input data. For the verification of the mass, the mass in running order of the vehicle shall be verified in accordance with point 2 of Appendix 2 to Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1230/2012. 6.1.1.3. Actions to be taken In case of discrepancies in the certification number or the cryptographic hash of one or more files regarding the components, separate technical units or systems listed in subpoints (d)(i) to (vii) of point 6.1.1.1 the correct input data file fulfilling the checks in accordance with points 6.1.1.1 and 6.1.1.2 shall replace the incorrect data for all further actions. If no complete input data set with correct certificates of CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties is available for the components, separate technical units or systems listed in subpoints (d)(i) to (vii) of point 6.1.1.1 the verification test shall end and the vehicle fails the verification testing procedure. 6.1.2. Run in phase After the validation of input data in accordance with point 6.1.1, a run in phase up to maximum 15 000 km odometer reading may take place, with no need to use the reference fuel, if the odometer reading of the vehicle selected is below 15 000 km. In case of damage of any of the components, separate technical units or systems listed in point 6.1.1.1, the component, separate technical units or systems may be replaced by an equivalent component, separate technical units or systems with the same certification number. The replacement shall be documented in the test report. All relevant components, separate technical units or systems shall be checked before the measurements to exclude unusual conditions, such as incorrect oil fill levels, plugged air filters or on-board diagnostic warnings. 6.1.3. Set up of measurement equipment All measurement systems shall be calibrated in accordance with the provisions of the equipment maker. If no provisions exist, the recommendations from the equipment maker shall be followed for calibration. After the run in phase, the vehicle shall be equipped with the measurement systems set out in point 5. 6.1.4. Set up of the test vehicle for the fuel consumption measurement Tractors of the vehicle groups defined in Table 1 of Annex I shall be tested with any type of semitrailer, providing the loading defined below can be applied. Rigid lorries of the vehicle groups defined in Table 1 of Annex I shall be tested with trailer, if a trailer connection is mounted. Any body type or other device to carry the loading set out below can be applied. The bodies of the vehicles may differ from the standard bodies set out in Table 1 of Annex I for the certification of CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of component, separate technical units or systems. The vehicle payload shall be at minimum to a mass leading to a total test weight of 90 % of the maximum gross combined weight or gross vehicle weight for rigid lorries without trailer. The tyre inflation pressure shall be in line with the recommendation of the manufacturer. The tyres of the semitrailer may differ from the standard tyres set out in Table 2 of Part B of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 661/2009 for the CO 2 certification of tyres. All settings influencing the auxiliary energy demand shall be set to minimum reasonable energy consumption where applicable. The air conditioning shall be switched off and venting of the cabin shall be set lower than medium mass flow. Additional energy consumers not necessary to run the vehicle shall be switched off. External devices to provide energy on board, such as external batteries, are allowed only for running the extra measurement equipment for the verification testing procedure listed in Table 2 but shall not provide energy to serial vehicle equipment. A particle filter regeneration may be initiated and shall be achieved before the verification test. If an initiated particle filter regeneration cannot be achieved before the verification test, the test is invalid and shall be repeated. 6.1.5. Verification test 6.1.5.1. Route selection The route selected for the verification test shall fulfil the requirements set out in Table 3. The routes may include both public and private tracks. 6.1.5.2. Vehicle pre conditioning No specific pre-conditioning of the vehicle is required. 6.1.5.3. Vehicle warm up Before the fuel consumption measurement starts, the vehicle shall be driven for warm up as set out in Table 3. The warm up phase shall not be considered in the evaluation of the verification test. 6.1.5.4. Zeroing of the torque measurement equipment Zeroing of the torque measurement equipment shall follow the instruction of the equipment maker. It shall be ensured for zeroing, that the torque on the driven axle is zero. For zeroing, the vehicle shall be stopped directly after the warm up phase and zeroing shall be performed directly after the vehicle stop to minimise cool down effects. Zeroing shall be finished within less than 20 minutes. 6.1.5.5. Fuel consumption measurement The fuel consumption measurement shall start directly after the zeroing of the wheel-torque measurement equipment at vehicle stand still and engine idling. The vehicle shall be driven during the measurement in a driving style avoiding unnecessary braking of the vehicle, gas pedal pumping and aggressive cornering. The setting for the electronic control systems which is activated automatically at vehicle start shall be used, and gear shifts shall be performed by the automated system if applicable. If only manual settings for the electronic control systems are available, the settings leading to higher fuel consumption per kilometre shall be selected. The duration of the fuel consumption measurement shall be within the tolerances set out in Table 3. The fuel consumption measurement shall end also at vehicle stand still in idling condition directly before the measurement of the drift of the torque measurement equipment. 6.1.5.6. Measurement of the drift of the torque measurement equipment Directly after the fuel consumption measurement, the drift of the torque measurement equipment shall be recorded by measuring the torque at the same vehicle conditions as during the zeroing process. If the fuel consumption measurement does not end at zero vehicle speed, the vehicle shall be stopped for the drift measurement in moderate deceleration. 6.1.5.7. Boundary conditions for the verification test The boundary conditions to be met for a valid verification test are set in Table 3. If the vehicle passes the verification test in accordance with point 7, the test shall be set valid even if the following conditions are not met: Table 3 Parameters for a valid verification test In case of extraordinary traffic conditions, the verification test shall be repeated. 6.1.6. Data reporting The data recorded during the verification testing procedure shall be reported to the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool as follows: Table 4 Data reporting format for measured data for the simulation tool in the verification test 7. Test evaluation The simulated fuel consumption shall be compared to the measured fuel consumption using the simulation tool. 7.1. Simulation of the fuel consumption The input data and input information for the simulation tool for the verification test shall be the following: The power calculated by the simulation tool by the equations of longitudinal dynamics from the measured vehicle speed and road gradient course may be used for plausibility checks to test if the total simulated cycle work is similar to the measured value. The simulation tool shall calculate the gears engaged during the verification test by calculating the engine speeds per gear at the actual vehicle speed and selecting the gear that provides the engine speed closest to the measured engine speed. The measured wheel power shall replace in the verification test mode of the simulation tool the simulated power demand at the wheels. The measured engine speed and the gear defined in the verification test input data shall replace the corresponding simulation part. The standard fan power in the simulation tool shall be replaced by the fan power calculated from the measured fan speed in the simulation tool as follows: where: The steering pump, compressor and generator shall be attributed standard values in accordance with Annex IX. All other simulation steps and data handling concerning axle, transmission and engine efficiency shall be identical to the application of the simulation tool to determine and declare the CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption of new vehicles. The simulated fuel consumption value shall be the total fuel flow over the verification test relevant test distance, from the end of the zeroing after the warm up phase to the end of the test. The total verification test relevant test distance shall be calculated from the vehicle speed signal. The results from the simulation tool for the verification test shall be calculated as follows: where: 7.2. Calculation of the measured fuel consumption The measured fuel flow shall be integrated for the same time span as the simulated fuel consumption. The measured fuel consumption for the total test shall be calculated as follows: where: The measured fuel consumption values shall be corrected for the net calorific value (NCV) as set out in point 3 of Annex V to calculate the verification test results. where: 7.3. Pass/Fail check The vehicle shall pass the verification test if the ratio of corrected measured fuel consumption to simulated fuel consumption is below the tolerances set out in Table 5. In the case of a shorter run-in phase than 15 000 km the influence on the fuel efficiency of the vehicle may be corrected with the following evolution coefficient: where: For vehicle odometer reading above 15 000 km, no correction shall be applied. The ratio of measured and simulated fuel consumption for the total verification test relevant trip shall be calculated as verification test ratio in accordance with the following equation: Where: For a comparison with the declared CO 2 emissions of the vehicle in accordance with Article 9, the verified CO 2 emissions of the vehicle are determined as follows: where: If a first vehicle fails the tolerances for C VTP , two more tests may be performed on the same vehicle or two more similar vehicles may be tested on request of the vehicle manufacturer. For the evaluation of the pass criterion set out in Table 5, the averages of the verification testing procedure ratio from the up to three tests shall be used. If the pass criterion is not reached, the vehicle fails the verification testing procedure. Table 5 Pass fail criterion for the verification test 8. Reporting procedures The test report shall be established by the vehicle manufacturer for each vehicle tested and shall include at least the following results of the verification test: 8.1. General 8.1.1. Name and address of the vehicle manufacturer 8.1.2. Address(es) of assembly plant(s) 8.1.3. The name, address, telephone and fax numbers and email address of the vehicle manufacturer's representative 8.1.4. Type and commercial description 8.1.5. Selection criteria for vehicle and CO 2 relevant components (text) 8.1.6. Vehicle owner 8.1.7. Odometer reading at test start of the fuel consumption measurement (km) 8.2. Vehicle information 8.2.1. Vehicle model 8.2.2. Vehicle identification number (VIN) 8.2.3. Vehicle category (N 2 , N 3 ) 8.2.4. Axle configuration 8.2.5. Maximum gross vehicle weight (t) 8.2.6. Vehicle group 8.2.7. Corrected actual mass of the vehicle (kg) 8.2.8. Cryptographic hash of the manufacturer's records file 8.2.9. Vehicle combination's gross combined weight in the verification test (kg) 8.3. Main engine specifications 8.3.1. Engine model 8.3.2. Engine certification number 8.3.3. Engine rated power (kW) 8.3.4. Engine capacity (l) 8.3.5. Engine reference fuel type (diesel/LPG/CNG …) 8.3.6. Hash of the fuel map file/document 8.4. Main transmission specifications 8.4.1. Transmission model 8.4.2. Transmission certification number 8.4.3. Main option used for generation of loss maps (Option1/Option2/Option3/Standard values) 8.4.4. Transmission type 8.4.5. Number of gears 8.4.6. Transmission ratio final gear 8.4.7. Retarder type 8.4.8. Power take off (yes/no) 8.4.9. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.5. Main retarder specifications 8.5.1. Retarder model 8.5.2. Retarder certification number 8.5.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.5.4. Hash of the retarder efficiency map file/document 8.6. Torque converter specification 8.6.1. Torque converter model 8.6.2. Torque converter certification number 8.6.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.6.4. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.7. Angle drive specifications 8.7.1. Angle drive model 8.7.2. Axle certification number 8.7.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.7.4. Angle drive ratio 8.7.5. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.8. Axle specifications 8.8.1. Axle model 8.8.2. Axle certification number 8.8.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.8.4. Axle type (e.g. standard single driven axle) 8.8.5. Axle ratio 8.8.6. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.9. Aerodynamics 8.9.1. Model 8.9.2. Certification option used for generation of CdxA (standard values/measurement) 8.9.3. CdxA Certification number (if applicable) 8.9.4. CdxA value 8.9.5. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.10. Main tyre specifications 8.10.1. Tyre certification number on all axles 8.10.2. Specific rolling resistance coefficient of all tyres on all axles 8.11. Main auxiliary specifications 8.11.1. Engine cooling fan technology 8.11.2. Steering pump technology 8.11.3. Electric system technology 8.11.4. Pneumatic system technology 8.12. Test conditions 8.12.1. Actual mass of the vehicle (kg) 8.12.2. Actual mass of the vehicle with payload (kg) 8.12.3. Warm up time (minutes) 8.12.4. Average velocity at warm up (km/h) 8.12.5. Fuel consumption measurement duration (minutes) 8.12.6. Distance based share urban driving (%) 8.12.7. Distance based share rural driving (%) 8.12.8. Distance based share motorway driving (%) 8.12.9. Time share of idling at stand still (%) 8.12.10. Average ambient temperature (°C) 8.12.11. Road condition (dry, wet, snow, ice, others please specify) 8.12.12. Maximum seal level of the route (m) 8.12.13. Maximum duration of continuous idling at stand still (minutes) 8.13. Results of the verification test 8.13.1. Average fan power calculated for the verification test by the simulation tool (kW) 8.13.2. Work over the verification test calculated by the simulation tool (kW) 8.13.3. Work over the verification test measured (kW) 8.13.4. NCV of the fuel used in the verification test (MJ/kg) 8.13.5. Fuel consumption in the verification test measured (g/km) 8.13.6. Fuel consumption in the verification test measured, corrected (g/kWh) 8.13.7. Fuel consumption in the verification test simulated (g/km) 8.13.8. Fuel consumption in the verification test simulated (g/kWh) 8.13.9. Mission profile (long haul/long haul(EMS)/regional/regional(EMS)/urban/municipal/construction) 8.13.10. Verified CO 2 emissions of the vehicle (g/tkm) 8.13.11. Declared CO 2 emissions of the vehicle (g/tkm) 8.13.12. Ratio of fuel consumption measured and simulated in the verification testing procedure in (-) 8.13.13. Passed the verification test (yes/no) 8.14. Software and user information 8.14.1. Simulation tool version (X.X.X) 8.14.2. Date and time of the simulation ( 1 ) Rise time means the difference in time between the 10 percent and 90 percent response of the final analyser reading (t90 – t10). ( 2 ) The accuracy shall be met for the integral fuel flow over 100 minutes. ( 3 ) Or maximum vehicle speed if lower than 70 km/h ANNEX XI Annexes I, IV and IX to Directive 2007/46/EC are amended as follows: