COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2022/1440 of 31 August 2022 amending Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 as regards the information to be submitted for plant protection products and the specific data requirements for plant protection products containing micro-organisms (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and repealing Council Directives 79/117/EEC and 91/414/EEC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 78(1), point (b), thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Amendments to Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 The Annex to Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 is amended as follows: Article 2 Transitional measures as regards certain procedures concerning plant protection products containing active substances that are micro-organisms 1. Applicants shall submit data, in the context of applications for authorisation of plant protection products within the meaning of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 containing one or more active substances that are micro-organisms, in accordance with Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 as it stood before being amended by this Regulation in either of the following cases: 2. As a derogation from paragraph 1, applicants may choose, from 21 November 2022 to submit data in accordance with Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 as amended by this Regulation. 3. Where applicants choose to apply the option provided for in paragraph 2, they shall specify that choice in writing when submitting the application concerned. Such choice shall be irrevocable for the procedure concerned. Article 3 Transitional measures as regards certain procedures concerning active substances that are micro-organisms and are contained in plant protection products Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 as it stood before being amended by this Regulation shall continue to apply as regards data required on one or more representative uses of a plant protection product, submitted before 21 May 2023 to fulfil the requirements of one of the following provisions: Article 4 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 21 November 2022. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in the Member States in accordance with the Treaties. Done at Brussels, 31 August 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 of 1 March 2013 setting out the data requirements for plant protection products, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market ( OJ L 93, 3.4.2013, p. 85 ). ( 3 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – A Farm to Fork Strategy for a fair, healthy and environmentally-friendly food system (COM/2020/381 final, ( 4 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 of 1 March 2013 setting out the data requirements for active substances, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market ( OJ L 93, 3.4.2013, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Commission Regulation (EU) 2022/1441 of 31 August 2022 amending Regulation (EU) No 546/2011 as regards specific uniform principles for evaluation and authorisation of plant protection products containing micro-organisms (see page 70 of this Official Journal). ( 6 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 844/2012 of 18 September 2012 setting out the provisions necessary for the implementation of the renewal procedure for active substances, as provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market ( OJ L 252, 19.9.2012, p. 26 ). ( 7 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1740 of 20 November 2020 setting out the provisions necessary for the implementation of the renewal procedure for active substances, as provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 844/2012 ( OJ L 392, 23.11.2020, p. 20 ). ANNEX I ‘INTRODUCTION Information to be submitted, its generation and its presentation 3. Good laboratory practice (GLP) 4. Test material 5. Tests on vertebrate animals ( 1 ) Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2010 on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes ( OJ L 276, 20.10.2010, p. 33 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 of 1 March 2013 setting out the data requirements for active substances, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market ( OJ L 93, 3.4.2013, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2004/10/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of the principles of good laboratory practice and the verification of their applications for tests on chemical substances ( OJ L 50, 20.2.2004, p. 44 ). ANNEX II ‘PART B PLANT PROTECTION PRODUCTS CONTAINING AN ACTIVE SUBSTANCE THAT IS A MICRO-ORGANISM INTRODUCTION TO PART B 1. IDENTITY OF THE APPLICANT, IDENTITY OF THE PLANT PROTECTION PRODUCT AND MANUFACTURING INFORMATION The information provided, taken together with that provided for the active substance that is a micro-organism, shall be sufficient to precisely identify and define plant protection products. The information provided, shall be sufficient to identify if any factor could alter the properties of the active substance that is a micro-organism as a plant protection product, in comparison to the active substance as such, which is treated in Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013. The information and data referred to, unless otherwise specified, are required for all plant protection products. 1.1. Applicant The name and address of the applicant shall be provided as well as the name, address, telephone number and email address of the contact point. 1.2. Producer of the preparation and the micro-organism(s) The name and address of the producer of the preparation and of each active substance that is a micro-organism in the preparation shall be provided, as well as the name and address of each manufacturing plant in which the preparation and active substance that is a micro-organism are manufactured. If the producer contracts a third party for the manufacturing process, same information shall be provided for such third party. A contact point (preferable a central contact point, to include name, telephone number, email address and fax number) shall be provided for each producer. If the active substance that is a micro-organism is manufactured by a producer whose data have not been submitted in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 283/2013, data to address the relevant requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided. 1.3. Trade name or proposed trade name, and producer’s development code number of the preparation if appropriate All former and current trade names and proposed trade names and development code numbers of the preparation referred to in the dossier as well as the current names and numbers shall be provided. Full detail of any differences shall be provided. The proposed trade name shall not give rise to confusion with the trade name of already authorised plant protection products. 1.4. Detailed quantitative and qualitative information on the composition of the preparation 1.5. Physical state and nature of the preparation The type and code of preparation shall be designated in accordance with relevant guidance documents. Where a particular preparation is not defined precisely in relevant guidance documents, a full description of the physical nature and state of the preparation shall be provided, together with a proposal for a suitable description of the type of preparation and a proposal for its definition. 1.6. Method of production of the preparation and quality control Full information on how the plant protection product is produced in bulk shall be provided for all the steps of the manufacturing process. The type of manufacturing process (e.g. continuous or batch process) shall be indicated. 1.7. Packaging and compatibility of the preparation with proposed packaging materials 2. PHYSICAL, CHEMICAL AND TECHNICAL PROPERTIES OF THE PLANT PROTECTION PRODUCT 2.1. Appearance (colour and odour) A description of the colour and the odour, if any, and the physical state of the preparation shall be provided. 2.2. Explosivity and oxidising properties Explosivity and oxidising properties shall be reported as provided for under point 2.2 of Part A, unless it can be justified that it is technically or scientifically not necessary to perform such studies. 2.3. Flash point and other indications of flammability or spontaneous ignition Flash point and flammability shall be reported, as provided for under point 2.3 of Part A, unless it can be justified that it is technically or scientifically not necessary to perform such studies. 2.4. Acidity, alkalinity and if necessary pH value Acidity, alkalinity and pH (before and after storage at the recommended conditions) shall be reported, as provided for under point 2.4 of Part A, unless it can be justified that it is technically or scientifically not necessary to perform such studies. 2.5. Viscosity and surface tension Viscosity and surface tension shall be reported, as provided for under point 2.5 of Part A, unless it can be justified that it is technically or scientifically not necessary to perform such studies. 2.6. Storage stability and shelf life 2.6.1. Use concentration The appropriate minimum and maximum use concentrations of the plant protection product, justifying the volume of the commercial packaging used in line with a reasonable storage period, shall be indicated, as well as the nature of the packaging material in line with the recommended storage conditions. 2.6.2. Effects of temperature and packaging The optimal temperature and packaging to ensure the storage stability of the plant protection product in line with the recommended maximal shelf life shall also be stated. Where shelf life is less than two years, the shelf life in months, shall be reported. At these conditions, information shall be provided on: 2.6.3. Other factors affecting stability Effect of exposure to air, light, etc., on the plant protection product’s stability shall be reported. The optimal moisture conditions to ensure the storage stability of the plant protection product shall be stated. For dry preparations also the effects of contaminating water on viability of the micro-organism shall be described. This information may be provided by direct measurement of moisture content before and after storage or by describing packaging integrity and viability of the micro-organism before and after storage. 2.7. Technical characteristics of the plant protection product The technical characteristics of plant protection products shall be determined and reported at appropriate concentrations. 2.7.1. Wettability The wettability of solid plant protection products which are diluted for use (e.g. wettable powders and water dispersible granules), shall be determined and reported. 2.7.2. Persistent foaming The persistence of foaming of plant protection products to be diluted with water shall be determined and reported. 2.7.3. Suspensibility, spontaneity of dispersion and dispersion stability The suspensibility of water dispersible plant protection products (e.g. wettable powders, water dispersible granules, suspension concentrates) shall be determined and reported. The spontaneity of dispersion of water dispersible plant protection products (e.g. suspension concentrates and water dispersible granules) shall be determined and reported. The dispersion stability of plant protection products such as aqueous suspo-emulsions (SE), oil-based suspension concentrates (OD) or emulsifiable granules (EG) shall be determined and reported. 2.7.4. Dry sieve test and wet sieve test In order to ensure that dustable powders have a suitable particle size distribution for ease of application, a dry sieve test shall be conducted and reported. In the case of water dispersible plant protection products, a wet sieve test shall be conducted and reported. The nominal size range of granules shall be determined and reported. 2.7.5. Particle size distribution (dustable and wettable powders, granules), content of dust/fines (granules), attrition and friability (granules) 2.7.6. Emulsifiability, re-emulsifiability and emulsion stability 2.7.7. Flowability, pourability (rinsability) and dustability 2.8. Physical and chemical compatibility with other plant protection products including plant protection products with which its use is to be authorised 2.8.1. Physical compatibility If in the label claim a use in a mixture with other plant protection products or adjuvants is indicated, the physical compatibility of the plant protection product with different plant protection products and adjuvants, which are indicated in the label claim, to be used in the same recommended tank mixes shall be determined and reported. 2.8.2. Chemical compatibility If in the label claim a use in a mixture with other plant protection products or adjuvants is indicated, the chemical compatibility of the plant protection product with different plant protection products or adjuvants in the same recommended tank mixes shall be determined and reported, except where after examination of the individual properties of the plant protection product it is established that there is no possibility of reaction taking place. In such cases, it is sufficient to provide that information as justification for not practically determining the chemical compatibility. 2.9. Adherence and distribution to seeds In the case of plant protection products for seed treatment, distribution and adhesion of the plant protection product to the seeds shall be investigated and reported. 3. DATA ON APPLICATION 3.1. Field of use envisaged The field(s) of use, existing and proposed, for plant protection product containing the micro-organism shall be specified as: 3.2. Mode of action on the target organism The information required in accordance with point 2.3 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product. Additional information on the mode of action on the target organism shall be provided in case the chemical components (e.g. co-formulants) may have a relevant effect on efficacy, human and animal health or the environment. 3.3. Function, target organisms and plants or plants products to be protected and possible risk mitigation measures The biological function shall be given as one of the following: Details of the target organisms and plants or plant products to be protected shall be provided. 3.4. Application rate For each method of application and each use, the rate of application per unit treated, in terms of g, kg, ml or l for the plant protection product and in terms of appropriate units for the micro-organism (e.g. number of active units, colony forming units (CFU) or international units per volume or weight) shall be provided. For protected crops and home gardening use rates shall be expressed in g or kg/100 m 2 , or g or kg/m 3 , ml or l/100 m 2 , or ml or l/m 3 . 3.5. Content of micro-organism in material used (e.g. in the diluted spray, baits or treated seed) The content of micro-organism shall be reported, as appropriate, such as number of active unit per volume or weight, colony forming units (CFU) or international units per volume or weight, or any other manner that is relevant to the micro-organism. 3.6. Method of application The method of application proposed shall be described, indicating the type of equipment to be used, if any, as well as the type and volume of diluent to be used per unit of area of application, or volume of plant protection product. 3.7. Number and timing of applications on the same crop, duration of protection and waiting period(s) The maximum number of applications to be used on the same crop and their timing shall be reported. Where relevant, the growth stages of the crops to be protected and the development stages of the target organisms shall be indicated. Where applicable, the interval between applications, in days, shall be stated. The duration of protection afforded both by each application and by the maximum number of applications to be used shall be indicated. 3.8. Proposed instructions for use The proposed instructions for use of the plant protection product to be printed on labels and leaflets shall be provided. Details on the risk mitigation measures (if relevant) shall be provided. 3.9. Safety intervals and other precautions to protect human health, animal health and the environment The information provided shall follow from and be supported by the data provided for the micro-organism(s) and that provided under Sections 7 to 10. 4. FURTHER INFORMATION ON THE PLANT PROTECTION PRODUCT 4.1. Procedures for cleaning and decontaminating of application equipment Cleaning and decontaminating procedures for application equipment and protective clothing shall be described. Such procedures shall aim at inactivating or destroying the active substance that is a micro-organism and at removing residues of the plant protection product (including metabolites of concern, if any were identified in accordance with point 2.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013). Sufficient data shall be submitted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the cleaning and decontaminating procedures. 4.2. Recommended methods and precautions concerning: handling, storage, transport, fire or use The recommended methods and precautions concerning (detailed) handling procedures for the storage, at both warehouse and user level of plant protection products, for their transport and in the event of fire shall be provided. Where relevant, information on combustion products shall be provided. The hazards likely to arise and the methods and procedures to minimise the risks shall be specified. Procedures to preclude or minimize the generation of waste or leftovers shall be provided. Where relevant, an assessment of the procedures shall be provided. The nature and characteristics of protective clothing and equipment proposed shall be provided. The data provided shall be sufficient to evaluate obtainability, suitability and effectiveness under realistic conditions of use (e.g. field or greenhouse circumstances), resistance and compatibility with the plant protection product. 4.3. Measures in case of accident Whether arising during transport, storage or use, detailed procedures to be followed in the event of an accident shall be provided and include: 4.4. Procedures for destruction or decontamination of the plant protection product and its packaging Procedures for destruction and decontamination shall be developed and described for both small quantities (e.g. user level) and large quantities (e.g. warehouse level). The procedures shall be consistent with provisions in place relating to the disposal of waste and of toxic waste. The means of disposal proposed shall be without unacceptable effects on the environment and be the most cost effective and practical means of disposal feasible. 4.4.1. Controlled incineration The applicant shall provide detailed instructions for safe disposal, taking into consideration that, in many cases, the preferred or sole means to safely dispose of plant protection products and in particular the co-formulants contained in it, contaminated materials, or contaminated packaging, is through controlled incineration in a licensed incinerator. 4.4.2. Others Other methods for destruction or decontamination of plant protection products, packaging and contaminated materials, where proposed, shall be described. Data shall be provided for such methods. 5. ANALYTICAL METHODS Introduction Both production and the resulting plant protection product shall be subject to a continuous quality control by the applicant. The quality criteria for the plant protection product shall be submitted. Descriptions of methods shall be provided and include details of equipment, materials and conditions used. The applicability of internationally recognised methods shall be reported. On request of competent authorities, the following samples shall be provided: As far as practicable, the post-authorisation methods shall employ the simplest approach, involve the minimum cost and require commonly available equipment. 5.1. Methods for the analysis of the preparation The following methods shall be described: 5.2. Methods to determine and quantify residues Analytical methods for the determination of densities of the micro-organism and residues, as provided for under point 4.2 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013, shall be submitted, unless the information already submitted in accordance with the requirements of point 4.2 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 is sufficient. 6. EFFICACY DATA Introduction The data supplied shall be sufficient to permit an evaluation of the plant protection product to be made. In particular, it shall be possible to evaluate the nature and extent of benefits that accrue following use of the plant protection product, in comparison to suitable reference products where they exist, and/or an untreated control, damage thresholds, and to define its conditions of use. The design, analysis, conduct and reporting of trials shall be in accordance with the relevant standards, where available. Deviations from available relevant standards may only be acceptable if the trials design meets the minimum requirements of the relevant standards and it is described and justified. The report shall include a detailed and critical assessment of the data. The number of trials to be conducted and reported shall depend on factors such as the extent to which the properties of the active substance that is a micro-organism in the plant protection product are known. This number may depend also on the variability of conditions that arise in the trials (e.g. variability of plant health or climatic conditions), on the range of agricultural practices, the uniformity of the crops, the mode of application, the type of target organism, the climatic region and the type of plant protection product. Data submitted shall be sufficient to be representative for the regions and the range of conditions of use encountered in practice concerning the uses of the plant protection product. If properly justified and relevant based on case-by-case approach and expert judgement, the applicant may read-across data to support the application, including data generated on other relevant uses, crops, European environments or other relevant conditions. If read-across cannot be applied in order to assess seasonal differences, if any, sufficient data shall be generated and submitted to confirm the efficacy of the plant protection product in each agronomically and climatically different region for each particular crop (or commodity)/target organism combination. Trials on efficacy or phytotoxicity, where relevant, in at least two growing seasons shall be reported. Any effects, positive or negative, on any non-target organism, which are observed in the tests performed in accordance with the requirements of this Section, shall be reported. 6.1. Preliminary tests When requested by the competent authority, summary reports of preliminary tests shall be submitted, including laboratory, greenhouse and field studies, used to assess the biological activity, mode of action and dose-range finding of the plant protection product and the active substance(s) it contains. These reports shall provide justification on the combination of several active substances, safeners and/or synergists, if applicable, and they shall provide additional information for the competent authority when it evaluates the plant protection product. Where this information is not submitted, a justification, which is acceptable to the competent authority, shall be provided. 6.2. Minimum effective dose The minimum effective dose shall be reported, or a range of minimum doses, necessary to achieve with sufﬁcient efﬁcacy the claimed plant protection action, across the broad range of situations in which that plant protection product is to be applied. 6.3. Testing effectiveness The tests shall provide sufficient data to permit an evaluation of the level, duration and consistency of intended effects of the plant protection product. Also, possible beneficial effects on treated crops shall be reported. Tests shall include an untreated control. In case of availability of suitable reference products, a comparison shall be performed between the plant protection product subject of the application and the reference product. Trials shall be designed to investigate specified issues, to minimise the effects of random variation between different parts of each testing site and to enable statistical analysis to be applied to results amenable to such analysis. The design, analysis and reporting of trials shall be in accordance with relevant standards or with guidelines satisfying at least the requirements of the corresponding relevant standards. The report shall include a detailed and critical assessment of the data. A statistical analysis of results amenable to such analysis shall be carried out. Where necessary, the test guideline used shall be adapted to enable such analysis. 6.4. Information on possible development of resistance in target organisms Data on the occurrence and development of resistance or cross-resistance in populations of target organisms to the active substance that is a micro-organism shall be provided, unless the applicant shows that the data and information already submitted for the active substance under point 3.4 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 are sufficient to permit an assessment to be performed. If provision of data is required, such data may be generated in experimental studies (either in laboratories or under field condition) or retrieved from available scientific literature. If provision of data is required and information is available for uses not directly relevant to the uses for which authorisation is sought or to be renewed, including information on different species of target organism or different crops, this information shall also be provided. Where there is evidence or information to suggest that, in commercial use, the development of resistance is likely, evidence shall be generated and submitted as to the sensitivity of the population of the target organism concerned to the plant protection product. In such cases, a management strategy designed to minimise the likelihood of resistance or cross-resistance developing in target species shall be provided. 6.5. Adverse effects on treated crops 6.5.1. Phytotoxicity to target plants (including different cultivars) or to target plant products For herbicides and for other plant protection products for which adverse effects, however transitory, are seen during the trials, the margins of selectivity on target crops shall be established, using twice the recommended rate of application. In this case, tests shall be performed to provide sufficient data to permit an evaluation of the possible occurrence of phytotoxicity after treatment with the plant protection product. Where serious phytotoxic effects are seen, an intermediate application rate shall also be investigated. Where adverse effects occur, but are claimed to be unimportant in comparison with the benefits of use or transient, evidence to support that claim is required. If necessary, yield measurement shall be submitted. If testing is required, the safety of the plant protection product to the main cultivars of the main crops for which it is recommended shall be demonstrated, including effects of crop growth stage, vigour and other factors, which may influence susceptibility to damage or injury. The extent of investigation necessary on other crops shall depend on their degree of similarity to the main crops already tested, the quantity and quality of data available on those main crops and how far the manner of use of the plant protection product, if relevant, is similar. The test may be performed with the main preparation type to be authorised. Where proposed label claims include recommendations for the use of the plant protection product with other plant protection product(s), the provisions laid down in this point shall apply for the mixture. Where phytotoxic effects are seen, they shall be accurately assessed and recorded in accordance with the relevant EPPO standards or, when a Member State requires so and when the test is carried out on the territory of that Member State, with guidelines satisfying at least the requirements of the relevant EPPO guideline. 6.5.2. Effects on the yield of treated plants or plant products Tests shall be performed to provide sufficient data to permit an evaluation of the efficacy of the plant protection product and of possible occurrence of yield reduction or loss in storage of treated plants or plant products. The effects of plant protection products on the yield or yield components of treated plant products shall be determined, unless the applicant can properly justify that such data is not relevant. When treated plants or plant products are likely to be stored, possible effects on the yield after storage, including data on storage life, shall be reported. 6.5.3. Effects on the quality of plants or plant products Appropriate observations of quality parameters may be required for individual crops (for example, cereal grain quality and sugar content). Such information may be gathered from appropriate assessments in trials described under points 6.3 and 6.5.1. Where relevant, taint testing shall be conducted. 6.5.4. Effects on transformation processes The tests shall provide sufficient data to permit an evaluation of the possible occurrence of adverse effects after treatment with the plant protection product on transformation processes or on the quality of their products, and they are required when all of the following circumstances apply: When the test is required, it may be performed with the main preparation type to be authorised. The possibility of the occurrence of adverse effects on transformation processes shall be investigated and reported. The tests shall provide sufficient data to permit an evaluation of the possible occurrence of adverse effects after treatment with the plant protection product on transformation processes or on the quality of their products. 6.5.5. Impact on treated plants or plant propagating material Sufficient data shall be reported to permit an evaluation of possible adverse effects of a treatment with the plant protection product on plants or plant products to be used for propagation, except where the proposed uses preclude use on crops intended for production of seeds, cuttings, runners or tubers for planting, as appropriate. Observations shall be submitted for: Seeds testing shall be done in accordance with the relevant standards or with guidelines satisfying at least their requirements. 6.6. Observations on undesirable or unintended side-effects on succeeding crops and other plants 6.6.1. Impact on succeeding crops The provision laid down in this point shall apply only for: Sufficient data shall be reported to permit an evaluation of possible adverse effects of a treatment with the plant protection product on succeeding crops. Minimum waiting periods between the last application and sowing or planting of succeeding crops shall be stated. Limitations on choice of succeeding crops, if any, shall be stated. The duration of protection brought both by each application and by the maximum number of applications to be used shall be indicated. 6.6.2. Impact on other plants, including adjacent crops Sufficient data shall be reported to permit an evaluation of possible adverse effects of a treatment with the plant protection product on other plants, including adjacent crops. Observations shall be submitted on adverse effects on other plants, including the normal range of adjacent crops, when there are indications that the plant protection product could affect these plants via drift. 6.7. Compatibility in plant protection programmes Where the proposed label claim includes requirements for the use conditions with other plant protection products in tank mix, spray sequences or other relevant types of applications, potential effects (e.g. antagonism, fungicidal effects) on the activity of the micro-organism after mixing, spraying in sequence, or employing other relevant types of applications with other plant protection products shall be investigated. Appropriate information shall be provided. A general precautionary statement shall be proposed on the label, alerting the user about possible loss of efficacy of the micro-organism due to interaction in tank mix, spray sequences or other relevant types of applications with plant protection products other than those indicated in the label. Known biological incompatibilities with other plant protection products shall be reported on the label. Appropriate recommendations (e.g. intervals between application of the plant protection product and other products) shall be specified, where necessary to avoid potential negative effects on the activity of the micro-organism. Appropriate information supporting the recommendations shall be provided. If relevant, potential adverse effects of the plant protection product on natural enemies (e.g. released biological control agents) or other practices (e.g. conservation biological control) under the expected condition of use of the plant protection product shall be reported. The assessment of those potential adverse effects shall be based on information provided on one or more of the following: 7. EFFECT ON HUMAN HEALTH Introduction For proper evaluation of risks for human and animal (i.e. species normally fed and kept by humans or food-producing animals) health linked to the use of a plant protection product containing an active substance that is a micro-organism, the infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism have been already assessed in accordance with Section 5 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013. This assessment includes the micro-organism and any metabolite(s) of concern for human and animal health identified in accordance with point 2.8 of Part B of the Annex to that Regulation. This Section identifies the relevant additional tests to be carried out to determine the classification and labelling of the plant protection product and the acceptability of the risks related to its use. In some cases, already existing information on toxicity of co-formulants and other non-active ingredients of the plant protection product may be sufficient to conclude on the toxicity of the plant protection product. In view of determining the classification and labelling of the plant protection product, as well as the risks associated with its use, information on intrinsic toxicological properties of the co-formulants, safeners and synergists, shall be provided. Possible adverse synergistic effects and/or interaction among chemical substances present in the plant protection product (e.g. co-formulants, other active substance(s) and its/their impurities present in the same plant protection product) shall also be investigated. Available data concerning any possible adverse effect on human health shall be reported. The information provided shall be sufficient to allow an evaluation of the risks to human health associated with the use of the plant protection products (e.g. operators, workers, bystanders, residents and consumers), the risks for human health handling treated crops, as well as the risk for human health and animals arising from residual traces remaining in food, feed and water. In addition, the information provided shall be sufficient to: In the context of the possible contribution that relevant impurities and other components can have on the toxicological profile of the plant protection product, for each study submitted, a detailed description of the material used shall be provided. Tests shall be conducted using the plant protection product to be authorised. In particular, the information provided shall demonstrate that the micro-organism used in the plant protection product and the conditions of culturing it are the same for which information and data are submitted in accordance with Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013. While performing toxicology studies, all signs of adverse effects shall be reported. Based on the information submitted, proposals for the classification and labelling of the plant protection product, using CLP calculation rules in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008, where applicable, shall be submitted and justified, including: Where the information available is considered not to be robust enough to exclude possible adverse synergistic effects of substances present in the plant protection product (e.g. co-formulants, other active substance(s) and its/their impurities present in the same plant protection product), toxicological studies on possible adverse synergistic effects shall be required by the competent authority, as described under points 7.4 and 7.7. 7.1. Medical data Any available information on possible adverse effect on human health shall be reported, including sensitisation and allergenic response of humans exposed to the plant protection product. In the case of adverse effects, special attention shall be paid to whether the individual’s susceptibility may have been affected by e.g. pre-existing disease, medication, compromised immunity, pregnancy or breast-feeding. The information provided shall include details of level and duration of exposure, symptoms observed and other relevant clinical observation. 7.2. Assessment of potential toxicity of the plant protection product Possible human health hazards related to pathogenic events linked to the use of the plant protection product are addressed through data on infectivity, pathogenicity, and clearance of the active substance that is a micro-organism in accordance with Section 5 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013. Studies to determine the potential toxicity of the plant protection product shall be performed as required in point 7.3, unless the applicant demonstrates by following a weight of evidence approach, based on the information provided under Sections 2, 3, 4 and point 7.1 or retrieved from any other reliable sources (e.g. Integrated Approach to Testing and Assessment – IATA, CLP calculation rules in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 or read-across data from similar preparations) that no such effects are to be expected. An assessment of the potential toxicity of the plant protection product shall be submitted, taking into consideration information on the intrinsic properties of co-formulants, metabolites of concern identified in accordance with point 2.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013, relevant impurities, with consideration for possible adverse synergistic effects and/or interaction between them and with the proposal for classification and labelling. With this assessment, the applicant shall demonstrate whether or not sufficient information is available to classify the plant protection product in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 with regard to toxicity to humans and whether or not acute toxicity studies on animals as described in points 7.3.1 to 7.3.6 are needed. 7.3. Acute toxicity Unless information can be provided to allow an assessment to be conducted on the possible human toxicity of the plant protection product as set out in point 7.2, the applicant shall define which of the tests described in points 7.3.1 to 7.3.6 is relevant for the plant protection product and perform the test(s) identified in accordance with the instruction provided in each respective relevant point. The studies indicated in points 7.3.1 to 7.3.6, data and information to be provided and evaluated shall be sufficient to permit the identification of effects following a single exposure to the plant protection product and in particular to establish or indicate: The information generated shall also permit the plant protection product to be classified in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008. 7.3.1. Acute oral toxicity Unless information can be provided to allow an assessment to be conducted on the possible acute oral toxicity of the plant protection product as set out in point 7.2, a test for acute oral toxicity shall be carried out in accordance with the most appropriate guidelines. 7.3.2. Acute dermal toxicity Unless information can be provided to allow an assessment to be conducted on the possible dermal toxicity of the plant protection product as set out in point 7.2, a test for dermal toxicity shall be carried out in accordance with the most appropriate guidelines. 7.3.3. Acute inhalation toxicity Unless information can be provided to allow an assessment to be conducted on the possible inhalation toxicity of the plant protection product as set out in point 7.2, a test for acute inhalation toxicity shall be carried out if the plant protection product: 7.3.4. Skin irritation Unless information can be provided to allow an assessment to be conducted on the skin irritation potential of the plant protection product from the available information regarding its components, including the active substance, co-formulants, safeners, synergists, and relevant impurities as set out in point 7.2, a test for skin irritation shall be carried out in accordance with the most appropriate guidelines. The test shall provide the potential of skin irritancy of the plant protection product including the potential reversibility of the effects observed. 7.3.5. Eye irritation A test for eye irritation shall be carried out in accordance with the most appropriate guidelines, unless: The test shall provide the potential for eye irritation of the plant protection product, including the potential reversibility of the effects observed. 7.3.6. Skin sensitisation Unless information can be provided to allow an assessment to be conducted on the skin sensitisation properties of the plant protection product from the available information regarding its chemical components (i.e. co-formulants, metabolites of concern and relevant impurities) as set out in point 7.2, a test for skin sensitisation when available, shall be carried out in accordance with the most appropriate guidelines. 7.4. Additional toxicity information If, based on results of the studies required in point 7.3, one or more substances of concern is present in the plant protection product (e.g. metabolites of concern and/or co-formulants) for which the risk is for human and animal health is considered not acceptable based on those studies already performed, relevant additional information on toxicity may be necessary for the plant protection product. The need to perform supplementary studies on the plant protection product shall be based on expert judgement case-by-case, in the light of the particular parameters to be investigated and the objectives to be achieved, for example, if concern on the toxicity of the plant protection products has arisen from studies described in points 7.3.1 to 7.3.6 or a conclusion on toxicity could not be reached. 7.5. Data on exposure If, based on data provided in Section 5 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 and this Section, effects on human health cannot be excluded, sufficient information and data shall be generated and reported to permit an assessment of the extent of exposure to the plant protection product likely to occur under the proposed conditions of use. Study design shall take into account biological, physical, chemical and toxicological properties of the plant protection product as well as the type of the product (undiluted/diluted), preparation type, and the route, the degree and duration of exposure. In the case where there is a particular concern for a possibility of dermal absorption of a toxic component of the plant protection product based on information provided in this Section, dermal absorption data shall be provided as provided for under point 7.3 of Part A. Results from exposure monitoring during production and use of the plant protection product shall be submitted. The information and data referred to in this point shall provide the basis for the selection of appropriate protective measures including personal protective equipment (see point 4.2) to be used by operators and workers and other appropriate risk mitigation measures (e.g. for bystanders and residents) and to be specified on the label. 7.6. Available toxicological data relating to non-active substances Where relevant, the following information shall be submitted for each co-formulants, safeners and synergists: All other available information shall be submitted. 7.7. Supplementary studies for combinations of plant protection products Where the plant protection product label indicates the use of the plant protection product with other plant protection products and/or with adjuvants as a tank mix, the studies as referred to under points 7.3.1 to 7.3.6 shall be carried out for the relevant combination of plant protection products. Decisions as to the need for supplementary studies shall be made on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the results of the acute toxicity studies of the individual plant protection products, the possibility for exposure to the combination of the plant protection products concerned and available information or practical experience with the plant protection products concerned or similar plant protection products. The need to perform supplementary studies on the plant protection product shall be based on expert judgement case-by-case, in the light of the particular parameters to be investigated and the objectives to be achieved (for example, for plant protection products containing active substances or other components suspected to have synergistic or additive toxicological effects). 8. RESIDUES IN OR ON TREATED PRODUCTS, FOOD AND FEED Data and information on residues in or on treated products, food and feed in accordance with Section 6 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be submitted, unless the applicant shows that the data and information already submitted for the active substance are sufficient to permit a risk assessment to be performed on the plant protection product. 9. FATE AND BEHAVIOUR IN THE ENVIRONMENT Data and information in accordance with Section 7 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be submitted on the fate and behaviour of the plant protection product in the environment, unless the applicant shows that the data and information already submitted for the active substance are sufficient to permit a risk assessment to be performed on the plant protection product. 10. EFFECTS ON NON-TARGET ORGANISMS Introduction 10.1. Effects on terrestrial vertebrates The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use), as detailed in points 8.1, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed and they shall provide LD 50 values and include gross pathological findings. The studies may be conducted on the species used in the studies referred to in point 8.1 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013. 10.2. Effects on aquatic organisms 10.2.1. Effects on fish The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use) as detailed in points 8.2.1, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed and they shall provide LD 50 values, and shall include gross pathological findings. The studies may be conducted on the species used in the studies referred to in point 8.2.1 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013. 10.2.2. Effects on aquatic invertebrates The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use)as detailed in points 8.2.2, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed. 10.2.3. Effects on algae The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use) as detailed in points 8.2.3, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed. 10.2.4. Effects on aquatic macrophytes The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use) as detailed in points 8.2.4, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed. 10.3. Effects on bees The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use) as detailed in points 8.3, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed. 10.4. Effects on non-target arthropods other than bees The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use) as detailed in points 8.4, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed. Analyses might include further studies on additional species, or higher tier studies such as studies on selected non-target organisms using the formulated plant protection product. The choice of non-target arthropods test species playing an important role in integrated pest management may be based on several factors, such as biological properties of the micro-organism and the intended use (e.g. crop type). 10.5. Effects on non-target meso- and macroorganisms in soil The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use) as detailed in points 8.5, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed. 10.6. Effects on non-target terrestrial plants The same information submitted on the micro-organism (and/or on a plant protection product containing that active substance with respect to a representative use) as detailed in points 8.6, 8.7 and 8.8 of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 shall be provided for the plant protection product subject of the application, unless the applicant can: If generation of data is required based on the provisions laid down under this point, relevant studies shall be performed. 10.7. Additional toxicity studies Further data may be submitted or additional toxicity studies performed, if tests required in points 10.1 to 10.6 have shown adverse effects in one or more non-target organisms and the risk is considered not acceptable. The type of study to be performed shall be chosen based on the effects and the affected non-target organism(s) observed in the studies required in points 10.1 to 10.6 and during efficacy testing, and may have to include also further studies on additional non-target species.’ ( 1 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/1760 of 26 May 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing the criteria for the designation of antimicrobials to be reserved for the treatment of certain infections in humans ( OJ L 353, 6.10.2021, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on veterinary medicinal products and repealing Directive 2001/82/EC ( OJ L 4, 7.1.2019, p. 43 ). ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ).