COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/2087 of 28 September 2023 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Lysoform IPA Surface’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0030790-0000 is hereby granted to Lysoform Dr Hans Rosemann GmbH for the making available on the market and use of the same biocidal product family ‘Lysoform IPA Surface’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 19 October 2023 until 30 November 2030. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 28 September 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 414/2013 of 6 May 2013 specifying a procedure for the authorisation of same biocidal products in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 125, 7.5.2013, p. 4 ). ( 3 ) ECHA opinion for ‘Lysoform IPA Surface’, 31 March 2023, ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/2013 of 18 April 2013 on changes of biocidal products authorised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 109, 19.4.2013, p. 4 ). Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Lysoform IPA Surface Product type 2 – Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Product type 4 – Food and feed area (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0030790-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0030790-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL – META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 disinfection of surfaces – spraying 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Spray ready-to-use product onto the surfaces and allow to take effect for at least 1 minute at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C). 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The following personal risk mitigation measure can be applied for refilling procedure unless it can be replaced by technical and/or organisational measures: Wear eye protection during handling of the product. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Use # 2 – disinfection of surfaces – wiping 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Apply the ready-to-use product on wipes by pouring, spraying or soaking and wipe the surface thoroughly with the wet wipe (wet-wiping). Allow to take effect for at least 5 minutes at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C). 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The following personal risk mitigation measure can be applied for refilling procedure unless it can be replaced by technical and/or organisational measures: Wear eye protection during handling of the product. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Use # 3 – disinfection of surfaces with food and feed contact – spraying 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Spray ready-to-use product onto the surface and allow to take effect at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C) for at least 1 (bactericidal and yeasticidal activity) or 2 minutes (virucidal activity). 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The following personal risk mitigation measure can be applied for disinfection of food processing machinery and for refilling procedure unless it can be replaced by technical and/or organisational measures: Wear eye protection during handling of the product. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Use # 4 – disinfection of surfaces with food and feed contact – wiping 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Apply the ready-to-use product on wipes by pouring, spraying or soaking and wipe the surface thoroughly with the wet wipe (wet-wiping). Allow to take effect for at least 5 minutes at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C). 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The following personal risk mitigation measure can be applied for disinfection of food processing machinery and for refilling procedure unless it can be replaced by technical and/or organisational measures: Wear eye protection during handling of the product. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use Clean the surface carefully before use. Remove excess water from the surface before disinfection, if appropriate. Do not apply more than 25 ml/m 2 . Make sure to wet surfaces completely. Used wipes must be disposed in a closed container. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures The product must only be applied for disinfection of small surfaces. Ensure adequate ventilation to prevent the formation of explosive atmospheres. Avoid contact with eyes. Apply a funnel for refilling. Keep out of reach of children and pets. Keep children and pets away from rooms where disinfection is taking place. Provide adequate ventilation before children and pets enter treated rooms. This does not apply to hospital patient rooms. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid: In case of accident: Call a poison centre or a doctor. IF INHALED: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. If on skin: Wash with water. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. If eye irritation persists: Get medical advice/attention. IF SWALLOWED: Call a POISON CENTER or doctor/physician if you feel unwell. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf-life: 36 months Keep container tightly closed. Store in a well-ventilated place. Protect from sunlight. Store at room temperature in the original container. 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No: 67-63-0), for which a European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 5 Use # 1 – disinfection of surfaces – wiping 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Thoroughly wipe the surface with the wipe and allow to take effect for at least 5 minutes at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C). 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 6 Use # 2 – disinfection of surfaces with food and feed contact – wiping 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Thoroughly wipe the surface with the wipe and allow to take effect for at least 5 minutes at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C). 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use Clean the surface carefully before use. Remove excess water from the surface before disinfection, if appropriate. Make sure to wet surfaces completely. Used wipes must be disposed in a closed container. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures The product must only be applied for disinfection of small surfaces. Ensure adequate ventilation to prevent the formation of explosive atmospheres. Avoid contact with eyes. Keep out of reach of children and pets. Keep children and pets away from rooms where disinfection is taking place. Provide adequate ventilation before children and pets enter treated rooms. This does not apply to hospital patient rooms. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid: In case of accident: Call a poison centre or a doctor. IF INHALED: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. If on skin: Wash with water. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. If eye irritation persists: Get medical advice/attention. IF SWALLOWED: Call a POISON CENTER or doctor/physician if you feel unwell. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf-life: 24 months Keep container tightly closed. Store in a well-ventilated place. Protect from sunlight. Store at room temperature in the original container. 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No: 67-63-0), for which a European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2.