COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2024/3170 of 18 December 2024 laying down detailed provisions concerning the voluntary environmental labelling scheme for the estimation of the environmental performance of flights, established pursuant to Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2023/2405 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Flight Emissions Label) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2023/2405 of the European Parliament and the Council of 18 October 2023 on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air transport (ReFuelEU Aviation) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 14(11) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation lays down detailed provisions to ensure the uniform implementation of and compliance with the rules on the environmental labelling scheme set out in Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2023/2405, namely: Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Application for the issuance of labels by the Agency 1. An aircraft operator seeking the issuance of labels for its flights shall submit an application to the Agency, by 1 February of each year, through the dedicated module of the digital reporting tool. The aircraft operator shall, for that purpose, indicate the scope of the flights to be covered, in accordance with Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) 2023/2405. On the basis of the application, the Agency shall engage with the aircraft operator. 2. By 1 May of each year, the aircraft operators mentioned in paragraph 1 shall report, through the dedicated module of the digital reporting tool, the information listed in paragraphs 3 and 4 on their scheduled flights and on the operations carried out during the previous calendar year. 3. The aircraft operator shall report the following information on its scheduled flights for the two upcoming scheduling periods: 4. The aircraft operator shall report the following information on the operations carried out during the previous calendar year: 5. The Agency shall use the information referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4, with the necessary confidentiality considerations, for the purpose of processing the application and issuing the labels. 6. The Agency shall also take into account the information reported by aircraft operators and by aviation fuel suppliers under Articles 8 and 10 of Regulation (EU) 2023/2405. 7. The Agency may require the aircraft operator to provide any additional information necessary for the estimation of flight emissions and for the issuance of labels. 8. Before an aircraft operator provides the Agency with the information referred to in paragraphs 4 and 6, the information shall be verified by an independent verifier identified in the report of the aircraft operator. The verification shall be performed in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 8(3) of Regulation (EU) 2023/2405. The aircraft operator shall provide the verifier with all the relevant supporting documents to facilitate the process of verifying the information referred to in paragraphs 4 and 6. In addition, the information provided under paragraph 4, point (c) related to the aviation fuels life cycle emissions shall be verified by one of the certification bodies identified in the framework of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 or of the Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA). Article 4 Attribution of labels to flights of aircraft operators 1. Where the Agency finds the information provided by the aircraft operator in accordance with Article 3 complete and precise it shall, by 30 June of each year: 2. The validity period of the labels issued by the Agency shall correspond to the following: 3. Where the Agency determines that an aircraft operator did not submit all the information necessary for the issuance of labels in accordance with Article 3, or where it has duly justified reasons to consider that the information provided is not complete or precise, the Agency shall request the aircraft operator to correct the information provided or to provide additional information. 4. Where the Agency determines, after making the request referred to in the previous paragraph, that the information provided by the aircraft operator does not comply with the minimum requirements laid down in Article 3, or that the veracity or accuracy of such information cannot be verified, the Agency shall, after giving the aircraft operator the right to be heard, reject the issuance of the labels. The Agency shall inform the concerned aircraft operator thereof. 5. When the information provided by an aircraft operator in accordance with Article 3 needs to be corrected after its submission or after its verification by the Agency or is no longer valid, the aircraft operator shall inform the Agency thereof without any undue delay through the digital reporting tool and shall provide the corrected information with the necessary justification. The Agency, based on the information and justification provided by the aircraft operator, may retroactively update the flight emissions and issue new labels for the flights or set of flights concerned. Article 5 Estimation of the flight emissions 1. The Agency shall estimate the flight emissions for each flight or set of flights operated by an aircraft operator under the same conditions using the methodology laid down in Annex II to this Regulation by: 2. When applying the methodology laid down in Annex II, the Agency shall estimate the flight emissions for each flight or set of flights operated by an aircraft operator under the same conditions in accordance with the best estimate of the: 3. Where the information necessary to estimate the consumption of aviation fuel in accordance with paragraph 2, point (a), of this Article does not exist, is insufficient, cannot be verified or exists only for significantly different operating conditions, the Agency shall estimate the consumption of aviation fuels needed to operate the flight in accordance with point (1)(3)(b), of Annex II. 4. Where the information necessary to estimate the expected aviation fuels life cycle emissions in accordance with paragraph 2, point (b), does not exist, is insufficient, cannot be verified or exists for significantly different operating conditions, the Agency shall consider these aviation fuels to be conventional aviation fuels. 5. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, point (b), for the purpose of estimating the average aviation fuels life cycle emissions in accordance with that point, the Agency may assign specific batches of aviation fuels to a specific flight or set of flights operated by the aircraft operator departing from a given departure airport, provided that the following conditions are met: 6. Where subsequent flights are carried out by an aircraft operator without refuelling aviation fuels between them, the Agency shall split the expected aviation fuels life cycle emissions at the initial departure airport proportionally between all flights operated under such circumstances. 7. Where an aircraft operator fails to provide sufficient information to the Agency regarding aviation fuels life cycle emissions uplifted at a departure airport or where aviation fuels cannot physically be attributed to a specific departure airport, the Agency shall consider those batches of aviation fuels to be conventional aviation fuels. 8. The default values used in the estimation of the expected aviation fuels life cycle emissions referred to in paragraph 2, point (b) shall be disclosed and updated on the website created under Article 8. Article 6 Display of labels by aircraft operators 1. Aircraft operators holding the labels shall be responsible for the manner in which the label and the label logotype are used, especially in the context of advertising, and for compliance with the requirements of this Regulation. The issuance of the labels, including the label logotype, shall only confer the aircraft operator or the point of sale the right to use the label logotype in compliance with the requirements set out in this Regulation. 2. Aircraft operators shall display the labels issued to them at all points of sale owned by them without any undue delay and in accordance with the specifications of Annex III and with the following requirements: 3. Aircraft operators may display the labels on the boarding passes of those flights for which labels were issued. 4. Aircraft operators shall display the labels issued to them without interruption during their respective validity periods provided for in Article 4(2). 5. To ensure clear and correct display of labels, aircraft operators shall: 6. Aircraft operators shall ensure that, where their flights are offered or made available at points of sale with which the aircraft operator has a contractual relation: 7. Aircraft operators shall deploy reasonable efforts to ensure that points of sale with which they do not cooperate, but which display their flights, also comply with the requirements laid down in the previous paragraph without any undue delay. Article 7 Monitoring of compliance 1. The Agency shall review, at least on a semi-annual basis, for each aircraft operator for which labels were issued, whether the factors on the basis of which a label was issued for each flight or set of flights operated under the same conditions have changed. 2. The review referred to in paragraph 1 shall comprise the review of: 3. For the purposes of carrying out the review, the Agency shall request the necessary information from the aircraft operator, including, where relevant, reports from independent verifiers. 4. If the Agency concludes, after carrying out the review, that a label is no longer appropriate or is not being correctly displayed by an aircraft operator, it shall decide, after giving the aircraft operator an opportunity to be heard, to revoke the existing label, or to issue a new label. Such decision shall be notified to the aircraft operator through the digital reporting tool. 5. The Agency shall consider the justifications of the aircraft operator for any delays in the display of labels, as provided for in Article 6(2), (6) and (7). In view of the justification, the Agency shall take one of the following decisions, after giving the aircraft operator an opportunity to be heard, and notify it to the aircraft operator through the digital reporting tool: 6. Upon receipt of a notification issued in accordance with paragraph 4 or point (a) of paragraph 5, the aircraft operator shall adjust the display of the labels or remove the revoked labels, and, if applicable, replace them by valid labels distributed by the Agency, without any undue delay. The aircraft operator shall confirm the status of compliance with the notifications received from the Agency through the digital reporting tool. 7. The Agency shall take all necessary action to ensure that an aircraft operator adheres to its decisions issued in accordance with paragraph 4 and paragraph 5, point (a). 8. Aircraft operators shall remove revoked, or expired labels without any undue delay without the need for a notification from the Agency to that effect. Aircraft operators shall keep the Agency informed at all times about the removal or rectification of labels through the digital reporting tool. 9. Aircraft operators shall cooperate with the Agency when carrying out a review and shall continuously follow its instructions in relation to the correct display of labels. 10. Aircraft operators may, under exceptional circumstances, request the Agency to terminate individual labels issued for flights or a set of flights whose operations have been discontinued or where a change in operational conditions during the scheduling period render the valid labels incorrect. They shall notify the Agency of their request through the digital reporting tool. 11. The Agency shall inform the aircraft operators of any dedicated rules and procedures contained in other legal acts of the Union that ensure the effective monitoring of compliance with this Regulation, including to verify the accuracy and veracity of the information reported by aircraft operators and the correct display of labels. 12. The Agency shall inform the aircraft operators of any applicable rules and procedures for lodging complaints against other aircraft operators. Article 8 Flight emissions website 1. The Agency shall create and maintain a flight emissions website (the ‘website’) consisting of a public part with online access for the general public and a compliance part only to be accessed by aircraft operators. The compliance part of the website shall be linked to the digital reporting tool set up by the Agency. 2. The public part of the website shall meet the following minimum requirements: 3. The compliance part of the website shall comply with the following technical specifications: Article 9 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . However, it shall apply to freight aircraft operators within the scope of Regulation (EU) 2023/2405 as from 1 January 2028. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 18 December 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L, 2023/2405, 31.10.2023, ELI: . ( 2 ) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82 , ELI: ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2017 setting a framework for energy labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU ( OJ L 198, 28.7.2017, p. 1 , ELI: ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2018 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Union Aviation Safety Agency, and amending Regulations (EC) No 2111/2005, (EC) No 1008/2008, (EU) No 996/2010, (EU) No 376/2014 and Directives 2014/30/EU and 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 552/2004 and (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91 ( OJ L 212, 22.8.2018, p. 1 , ELI: ). ( 5 ) Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community ( OJ L 293, 31.10.2008, p. 1 , ELI: ). ( 6 ) Directive 2009/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2009 on airport charges ( OJ L 70, 14.3.2009, p. 11 , ELI: ). ( 7 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 95/93 of 18 January 1993 on common rules for the allocation of slots at Community airports ( OJ L 14, 22.1.1993, p. 1 , ELI: ). ( 8 ) Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC ( OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 , ELI: ). ANNEX I TIMELINE FOR SUBMITTING APPLICATIONS AND FOR GENERATING LABELS The timeline for aircraft operators to submit applications and for the Agency to generate and distribute labels shall be the following. Table 1 ANNEX II METHODOLOGY FOR ESTIMATING FLIGHT EMISSIONS This Annex lays down the methodology and the necessary steps that the Agency shall follow for the estimation of flight emissions. 1. CALCULATION OF FLIGHT EMISSIONS 2. ALLOCATION OF FLIGHT EMISSIONS TO CABIN AND FREIGHT 3. GENERATION OF EMISSIONS FOOTPRINT AND EFFICIENCY 4. ALLOCATION OF CABIN EMISSIONS TO EACH CABIN CLASS ANNEX III TEMPLATES FOR DISPLAYING LABELS ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)