COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2025/221 of 6 February 2025 granting a Union authorisation for the single biocidal product ‘Neporex 2SG’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0032480-0000 is hereby granted to Elanco Animal Health Inc. for the making available on the market and use of the single biocidal product ‘Neporex 2SG’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 27 February 2025 until 31 January 2035. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 6 February 2025. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 , ELI: . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 29 February 2024 on the Union authorisation of ‘Neporex 2SG’ (ECHA/BPC/418/2024), . SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS FOR A BIOCIDAL PRODUCT Neporex 2SG Product type(s) PT18: Insecticides, acaricides and products to control other arthropods Authorisation number: EU-0032480-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0032480-0000 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Trade name(s) of the product 1.2. Authorisation holder 1.3. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the product 2.2. Type(s) of formulation SG Water soluble granule 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) 4.1. Use description Table 1 Pouring with watering can 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) 5.1. Instructions for use General Not authorised for use in veal calve housings. Dilute the granules in water (25 g biocidal product in 1 litre water to treat 1 m 2 ). Only watering can application is allowed. Fly population reduction can be observed starting from 2 weeks after product application. The following general resistance management measures shall be applied: Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. Cattle and small ruminant (e.g. sheep and goats) facilities Deep litter: Conduct the treatment within the first few days (up to 3 days) of starting a rearing cycle or within the first 3 days after dung removal and the build-up of new breeding material has started. Use treatment along walls, edges and spillage areas around feeders, drinkers and where manure accumulates. Fly breeding sites are likely to be where manure is not compacted, particularly along walls or fences, because in well-trodden litter limited fly larvae develop. Slatted floor: Treat the entire floor area within the first few days (up to 3 days) after cleaning out the dung pit but only after the new manure starts to pile up again. In case of small ruminants (e.g. sheep and goats) kept on soft bedding: larvae can be found on the whole surface of the cubicle / pen; therefore, application of the product to the entire surface is required. Apply in corners or around drinking and feeding troughs if necessary. Pigs facilities All-in, all-out system: Conduct the treatment within the first few days (up to 3 days) after cleaning out the dung pit but only after the new manure starts to build up. Slatted floors: Treat the entire floor area within the first few days (up to 3 days) after cleaning out the dung pit but only after the new manure starts to build up. Deep litter: Conduct the treatment within the first few days (up to 3 days) after dung removal but only after the manure starts to build up. Use treatment along walls, edges and spillage areas around feeders, drinkers and where manure accumulates. Fly breeding sites are likely to be where manure is not compacted, particularly along walls or fences, because in well-trodden litter limited fly larvae develop. Chicken poultry facilities (layers, broilers, breeders) Deep pits, slatted floor, floor-manure-piling operations: Conduct the treatment to the entire dung area within the first few days (up to 3 days) after manure removal but only after the manure starts to build up. Bedding operations: Apply onto the humid points where larvae develop, such as in areas around drinkers and feeders or in points where a leakage of water occurs (fall of steam condensation, leakage from water pipes etc.). Operations with manure removal belts: Remove manure outside the operations at intervals sufficient enough to avoid the development of larvae. Spillage of manure on the floor or accumulation of manure in corners may occur and facilitate the development of larvae. Conduct the treatment by pouring the application solution onto these points. Other poultry (turkeys, ducks, geese) Bedding operations: Apply the application solution onto the humid points where larvae develop, such as in areas around drinkers and feeders or in points where a leakage of water occurs (fall of steam condensation, leakage from water pipes etc.). Slatted areas: Apply the application solution to the entire dung area within the first few days (up to 3 days) after manure removal but only after the manure starts to build up. Re-apply whenever the level of manure increases by 10 cm. Rabbit facilities Deep pits, floor-manure-piling operations: Apply the application solution to the entire dung area within the first few days (up to 3 days) after manure removal but only after the first manure starts to build up. Re-apply whenever the level of manure increases by 10 cm. Operations with mechanical removal systems: Remove Manure outside the operations at intervals sufficient enough to avoid the development of larvae. Spillage of manure on the floor or accumulation of manure on corners may occur and facilitate the development of larvae. Conduct the treatment by pouring the application solution onto these points. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION With respect to the ‘Category(ies) of users’ note: Professionals (including industrial users) means trained professionals if this is required by national legislation. Full titles of EN standards and legislation referred to in section 5.2 EN 374 – Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms. EN 13832 – Footwear protecting against chemicals EN 13034 – Protective clothing against liquid chemicals. Performance requirements for chemical protective clothing offering limited protective performance against liquid chemicals (Type 6 and Type PB [6] equipment). Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) ( OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, p. 11 ). ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)