DIRECTIVE (EU) 2016/2284 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 14 December 2016 on the reduction of national emissions of certain atmospheric pollutants, amending Directive 2003/35/EC and repealing Directive 2001/81/EC (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 2 ) , Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 3 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Objectives and subject matter 1. In order to move towards achieving levels of air quality that do not give rise to significant negative impacts on and risks to human health and the environment, this Directive establishes the emission reduction commitments for the Member States' anthropogenic atmospheric emissions of sulphur dioxide (SO 2 ), nitrogen oxides (NO x ), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC), ammonia (NH 3 ) and fine particulate matter (PM 2,5 ) and requires that national air pollution control programmes be drawn up, adopted and implemented and that emissions of those pollutants and the other pollutants referred to in Annex I, as well as their impacts, be monitored and reported. 2. This Directive also contributes to achieving: Article 2 1. This Directive shall apply to emissions of the pollutants referred to in Annex I from all sources occurring in the territory of the Member States, their exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones. 2. This Directive does not cover emissions in the Canary Islands, the French overseas departments, Madeira, and the Azores. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions apply: Article 4 National emission reduction commitments 1. Member States shall, as a minimum, limit their annual anthropogenic emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, non-methane volatile organic compounds, ammonia and fine particulate matter in accordance with the national emission reduction commitments applicable from 2020 to 2029 and from 2030 onwards, as laid down in Annex II. 2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, Member States shall take the necessary measures aimed at limiting their 2025 anthropogenic emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, non-methane volatile organic compounds, ammonia and fine particulate matter. The indicative levels of those emissions shall be determined by a linear reduction trajectory established between their emission levels defined by the emission reduction commitments for 2020 and the emission levels defined by the emission reduction commitments for 2030. Member States may follow a non-linear reduction trajectory if this is economically or technically more efficient, and provided that as from 2025 it converges progressively on the linear reduction trajectory and that it does not affect any emission reduction commitment for 2030. Member States shall set out that non-linear reduction trajectory and the reasons for following it in the national air pollution control programmes to be submitted to the Commission in accordance with Article 10(1). Where the emissions for 2025 cannot be limited in accordance with the determined reduction trajectory, Member States shall explain the reasons for that deviation as well as the measures that would bring the Member States back on their trajectory in the subsequent informative inventory reports to be provided to the Commission in accordance with Article 10(2). 3. The following emissions are not accounted for the purpose of complying with paragraphs 1 and 2: Article 5 Flexibilities 1. Member States may establish, in accordance with Part 4 of Annex IV, adjusted annual national emission inventories for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, non-methane volatile organic compounds, ammonia and fine particulate matter where non-compliance with their national emission reduction commitments would result from applying improved emission inventory methods updated in accordance with scientific knowledge. For the purpose of determining whether the relevant conditions set out in Part 4 of Annex IV are fulfilled, the emission reduction commitments for the years 2020 to 2029 shall be considered as having been set on 4 May 2012. As from 2025 the following additional conditions shall apply to adjustments in case of there being significantly different emission factors or methodologies used for determining emissions from specific source categories in comparison with those which were expected as a result of the implementation of a given norm or standard under Union source-based air pollution control legislation, pursuant to points 1(d)(ii) and (iii) of Part 4 of Annex IV: 2. If in a given year a Member State, due to an exceptionally cold winter or an exceptionally dry summer, cannot comply with its emission reduction commitments, it may comply with those commitments by averaging its national annual emissions for the year in question, the year preceding that year and the year following it, provided that this average does not exceed the national annual emission level determined by the Member State's reduction commitment. 3. If in a given year a Member State, for which one or more reduction commitments laid down in Annex II are set at a more stringent level than the cost-effective reduction identified in TSAP 16, cannot comply with the relevant emission reduction commitment after having implemented all cost-effective measures, it shall be deemed to comply with that relevant emission reduction commitment for a maximum of five years, provided that for each of those years it compensates for that non-compliance by an equivalent emission reduction of another pollutant referred to in Annex II. 4. A Member State shall be deemed to comply with its obligations under Article 4 for a maximum of three years, where non-compliance with its emission reduction commitments for the relevant pollutants results from a sudden and exceptional interruption or loss of capacity in the power and/or heat supply or production system, which could not reasonably have been foreseen, and provided that the following conditions are met: 5. Members States that intend to apply paragraph 1, 2, 3 or 4 shall inform the Commission thereof by 15 February of the reporting year concerned. That information shall include the pollutants and sectors concerned and, where available, the magnitude of the impacts upon national emission inventories. 6. The Commission, assisted by the European Environment Agency, shall review and assess whether the use of any of the flexibilities for a particular year fulfils the relevant conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article and in Part 4 of Annex IV or in paragraphs 2, 3 or 4 of this Article, where applicable. Where the Commission considers that the use of a given flexibility is not in accordance with the relevant conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article and in Part 4 of Annex IV, or in paragraphs 2, 3 or 4 of this Article, it shall adopt a decision within nine months from the date of receipt of the relevant report referred to in Article 8(4), informing the Member State concerned that the use of that flexibility cannot be accepted and stating the reasons for that refusal. Where the Commission has raised no objections within nine months from the date of receipt of the relevant report referred to in Article 8(4), the Member State concerned shall consider the use of that flexibility to be valid and accepted for that year. 7. The Commission may adopt implementing acts specifying the detailed rules for the use of the flexibilities referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17. 8. The Commission, when exercising its powers under paragraphs 6 and 7, shall take into account the relevant guidance documents developed under the LRTAP Convention. Article 6 National air pollution control programmes 1. Member States shall draw up, adopt and implement their respective national air pollution control programmes in accordance with Part 1 of Annex III in order to limit their annual anthropogenic emissions in accordance with Article 4, and to contribute to achieving the objectives of this Directive pursuant to Article 1(1). 2. When drawing up, adopting and implementing the programme referred to in paragraph 1, Member States shall: With a view to complying with the relevant national emission reduction commitments, Member States shall include in their national air pollution control programmes the emission reduction measures laid down as obligatory in Part 2 of Annex III and may include in those programmes the emission reduction measures laid down as optional in Part 2 of Annex III or measures having equivalent mitigation effect. 3. Member States shall update their national air pollution control programmes at least every four years. 4. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, the emission reduction policies and measures contained in the national air pollution control programmes shall be updated within 18 months of the submission of the latest national emission inventory or national emission projections if, according to the submitted data, the obligations set out in Article 4 are not complied with or if there is a risk of non-compliance. 5. Member States shall consult the public, in accordance with Directive 2003/35/EC, and the competent authorities, which, by reason of their specific environmental responsibilities in the field of air pollution, quality and management at all levels, are likely to be concerned by the implementation of the national air pollution control programmes, on their draft national air pollution control programmes and any significant updates prior to the finalisation of those programmes. 6. Where appropriate, transboundary consultations shall be conducted. 7. The Commission shall facilitate the elaboration and implementation of the national air pollution control programmes, where appropriate, through an exchange of good practices. 8. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 16 to amend this Directive with regard to the adaptation of Part 2 of Annex III to developments, including technical progress, within the framework of the LRTAP Convention. 9. The Commission may establish guidance on the elaboration and implementation of national air pollution control programmes. 10. The Commission shall also specify by means of implementing acts, the format of the national air pollution control programmes. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17. Article 7 Financial support The Commission shall endeavour to facilitate access to existing Union funds, in accordance with the legal provisions governing those funds, in order to support the measures to be taken with a view to complying with the objectives of this Directive. Those Union funds include present and future available funding under, inter alia: The Commission shall evaluate the possibility of creating a one-stop shop, where any interested party can easily check the availability of Union funds, and the related access procedures, for projects which address air pollution concerns. Article 8 National emission inventories and projections, and informative inventory reports 1. Member States shall prepare and annually update national emission inventories for the pollutants set out in Table A of Annex I, in accordance with the requirements set out therein. Member States may prepare and annually update national emission inventories for the pollutants set out in Table B of Annex I, in accordance with the requirements set out therein. 2. Member States shall prepare and update every four years spatially disaggregated national emission inventories and large point source inventories and, every two years, national emission projections for the pollutants set out in Table C of Annex I, in accordance with the requirements set out therein. 3. Member States shall draw up an informative inventory report which shall accompany the national emission inventories and projections referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, in accordance with the requirements set out in Table D of Annex I. 4. Member States that opt for a flexibility under Article 5 shall include the information demonstrating that the use of that flexibility fulfils the relevant conditions set out in Article 5(1) and Part 4 of Annex IV or in Article 5(2), (3) or (4), where applicable, in the informative inventory report of the year concerned. 5. Member States shall prepare and update the national emission inventories (including if appropriate adjusted national emission inventories), national emission projections, spatially disaggregated national emission inventories, large point source inventories and the accompanying informative inventory reports in accordance with Annex IV. 6. The Commission, assisted by the European Environment Agency, shall annually prepare and update Union-wide emission inventories and an informative inventory report as well as, every two years, Union-wide emission projections and, every four years, spatially disaggregated Union-wide emission inventories and Union-wide large point source inventories, for the pollutants referred to in Annex I, on the basis of the information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article. 7. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 16 to amend this Directive with regard to the adaptation of Annex I and Annex IV to developments, including technical and scientific progress, within the framework of the LRTAP Convention. Article 9 Monitoring air pollution impacts 1. Member States shall ensure the monitoring of negative impacts of air pollution upon ecosystems based on a network of monitoring sites that is representative of their freshwater, natural and semi-natural habitats and forest ecosystem types, taking a cost-effective and risk-based approach. To that end, Member States shall coordinate with other monitoring programmes established pursuant to Union legislation including Directive 2008/50/EC, Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 13 ) and Council Directive 92/43/EEC ( 14 ) and, if appropriate, the LRTAP Convention and, where appropriate, make use of data collected under those programmes. In order to comply with the requirements of this Article, Member States may use the optional monitoring indicators listed in Annex V. 2. The methodologies laid down in the LRTAP Convention and its Manuals for the International Cooperative Programmes may be used when collecting and reporting the information listed in Annex V. 3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 16 to amend this Directive with regard to the adaptation of Annex V to technical and scientific progress and to developments within the framework of the LRTAP Convention. Article 10 Reporting by Member States 1. Member States shall provide their first national air pollution control programmes to the Commission by 1 April 2019. Where a national air pollution control programme is updated under Article 6(4), the Member State concerned shall provide the updated programme to the Commission within two months. The Commission shall examine the national air pollution control programmes and their updates in the light of the requirements set out in Article 4(2) and Article 6. 2. Member States shall provide their national emission inventories and projections, spatially disaggregated national emission inventories, large point source inventories and the informative inventory reports referred to in Article 8(1), (2) and (3) and, where relevant, in Article 8(4), to the Commission and to the European Environment Agency in accordance with the reporting dates set out in Annex I. This reporting shall be consistent with the reporting to the Secretariat of the LRTAP Convention. 3. The Commission, assisted by the European Environment Agency and in consultation with the Member States concerned, shall review the national emission inventory data in the first year of reporting and regularly thereafter. That review shall involve the following: Where the Member State concerned and the Commission are unable to reach an agreement on the necessity or on the content of the technical corrections pursuant to point (c), the Commission shall adopt a decision laying down the technical corrections to be applied by the Member State concerned. 4. Member States shall report the following information referred to in Article 9 to the Commission and the European Environment Agency: Article 11 Reports by the Commission 1. The Commission shall, by 1 April 2020 and every four years thereafter, report to the European Parliament and the Council on the progress made in the implementation of this Directive, including an assessment of its contribution to the achievement of the objectives referred to in Article 1, including: 2. Where the report indicates that the non-achievement of the indicative emission levels and emission reduction commitments referred to in Article 4 could be the result of ineffective Union source-based air pollution control legislation, including its implementation at Member State level, the Commission shall, where appropriate, investigate the need for further action also considering the sectoral impacts of implementation. Where appropriate, the Commission shall present legislative proposals, including new source-based air control pollution legislation, in order to ensure compliance with the commitments of this Directive. Article 12 European Clean Air Forum The Commission shall set up a European Clean Air Forum to provide input for guidance and facilitate the coordinated implementation of Union legislation and policies related to improving air quality, bringing together all stakeholders including competent authorities of the Member States at all relevant levels, the Commission, industry, civil society, and the scientific community at regular intervals. The European Clean Air Forum shall exchange experience and good practices, including on emission reductions from domestic heating and road transport, that can inform and enhance the national air pollution control programmes and their implementation. Article 13 Review 1. On the basis of the reports referred to in Article 11(1), the Commission shall review this Directive no later than 31 December 2025 with a view to safeguarding progress towards achieving the objectives referred to in Article 1(2), in particular by taking into account scientific and technical progress and the implementation of Union climate and energy policies. If appropriate, the Commission shall present legislative proposals for emission reduction commitments for the period after 2030. 2. As regards ammonia, the Commission, in its review, shall assess in particular: 3. On the basis of the reported national emissions of mercury the Commission shall assess their impact on achieving the objectives set out in Article 1(2) and shall consider measures for reducing those emissions and, if appropriate, submit a legislative proposal. Article 14 Access to information 1. Member States shall, in compliance with Directive 2003/4/EC, ensure the active and systematic dissemination to the public of the following information by publishing it on a publicly accessible website: 2. The Commission shall, in compliance with Regulation (EC) No 1367/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 18 ) , ensure the active and systematic dissemination to the public of Union-wide emission inventories, and projections as well as informative inventory reports on a publicly accessible website. 3. The Commission shall publish on its website: Article 15 Cooperation with third countries and coordination within international organisations The Union and the Member States, as appropriate, shall pursue, without prejudice to Article 218 TFEU, bilateral and multilateral cooperation with third countries and coordination within relevant international organisations such as the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UNECE, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), including through the exchange of information, concerning technical and scientific research and development, with the aim of improving the basis for the facilitation of emission reductions. Article 16 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Articles 6(8), 8(7) and 9(3) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 31 December 2016. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Articles 6(8), 8(7) and 9(3) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making ( 19 ) . 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Articles 6(8), 8(7) and 9(3) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 17 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the Ambient Air Quality Committee established by Article 29 of Directive 2008/50/EC. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Where the Committee delivers no opinion, the Commission shall not adopt the draft implementing act and the third subparagraph of Article 5(4) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Article 18 Penalties Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties applicable to infringements of national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Article 19 Amendment to Directive 2003/35/EC In Annex I of Directive 2003/35/EC, the following point is added: Article 20 Transposition 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 1 July 2018. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Article 10(2) by 15 February 2017. Member States shall immediately inform the Commission thereof. When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main measures of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 21 Repeal and transitional provisions 1. Directive 2001/81/EC is repealed with effect from 1 July 2018. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph: 2. Until 31 December 2019, Member States may apply Article 5(1) of this Directive in relation to the ceilings under Article 4 of and Annex I to Directive 2001/81/EC. Article 22 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on 31 December 2016. Article 23 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 14 December 2016. For the European Parliament The President M. SCHULZ For the Council The President I. KORČOK ( 1 ) OJ C 451, 16.12.2014, p. 134 . ( 2 ) OJ C 415, 20.11.2014, p. 23 . ( 3 ) Position of the European Parliament of 23 November 2016 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 8 December 2016. ( 4 ) Directive 2001/81/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2001 on national emission ceilings for certain atmospheric pollutants ( OJ L 309, 27.11.2001, p. 22 ). ( 5 ) Decision No 1386/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on a General Union Environment Action Programme to 2020 ‘Living well, within the limits of our planet’ ( OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 171 ). ( 6 ) Directive 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe ( OJ L 152, 11.6.2008, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to environmental information and repealing Council Directive 90/313/EEC ( OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26 ). ( 8 ) Directive 2003/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May 2003 providing for public participation in respect of the drawing up of certain plans and programmes relating to the environment and amending with regard to public participation and access to justice Council Directives 85/337/EEC and 96/61/EC ( OJ L 156, 25.6.2003, p. 17 ). ( 9 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ( 10 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ( 11 ) OJ C 369, 17.12.2011, p. 14 . ( 12 ) Directive 2004/107/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 relating to arsenic, cadmium, mercury, nickel and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in ambient air ( OJ L 23, 26.1.2005, p. 3 ). ( 13 ) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy ( OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and wild fauna and flora ( OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 ). ( 15 ) Decision 2012/11/EC, ECE/EB/AIR/113/Add. 1. ( 16 ) Decision ECE/EB.AIR/127, paragraph 36e. ( 17 ) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 ). ( 18 ) Regulation (EC) No 1367/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on the application of the provisions of the Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters to Community institutions and bodies ( OJ L 264, 25.9.2006, p. 13 ). ( 19 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ANNEX I MONITORING AND REPORTING OF ATMOSPHERIC EMISSIONS Table A Annual emission reporting requirements as referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 8(1) Table B Annual emission reporting requirements as referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 8(1) Table C Reporting requirements on emissions and projections as referred to in Article 8(2) Table D Annual reporting requirements on informative inventory report referred to in Article 8(3) ( 1 ) Nomenclature for reporting (NFR) as provided by the LRTAP Convention. ( 2 ) natural emissions shall be reported in accordance with the methodologies laid down in the LRTAP Convention and the EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook. They shall not be included in national totals and shall be reported separately. ( 3 ) Cd (cadmium), Hg (mercury), Pb (lead). ( 4 ) POPs (persistent organic pollutants). ( 5 ) PAHs (Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons). ( 6 ) PCBs (Polychlorinated biphenyls). ( 7 ) HCB (hexachlorobenzene). ( 8 ) ‘PM 10 ’ means particles with an aerodynamic diameter equal to or less than 10 micrometres (μm). ( 9 ) re-submissions due to errors shall be provided within four weeks at the latest and include a clear explanation of the changes made. ( 10 ) natural emissions shall be reported in accordance with the methodologies laid down in the LRTAP convention and the EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook. They shall not be included in national totals and shall be reported separately. ( 11 ) As (arsenic), Cr (chromium), Cu (copper), Ni (nickel), Se (selenium), Zn (zinc). ( 12 ) TSP (total suspended particles). ( 13 ) re-submissions due to errors shall be provided within four weeks and include a clear explanation of the changes made. ANNEX II NATIONAL EMISSION REDUCTION COMMITMENTS Table A Emission reduction commitments for sulphur dioxide (SO 2 ), nitrogen oxides (NO x ) and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC). The reduction commitments have the year 2005 as base year, and for road transport, apply to emissions calculated on the basis of fuels sold ( *1 ) . Table B Emission reduction commitments for ammonia (NH 3 ) and fine particulate matter (PM 2,5 ). The reduction commitments have the year 2005 as base year, and for road transport, apply to emissions calculated on the basis of fuels sold ( *2 ) . ( *1 ) Member States having the choice to use the national emission total calculated on the basis of fuels used as a basis for compliance under the LRTAP Convention may keep that option in order to ensure coherence between international and Union law. ( *2 ) Member States having the choice to use the national emission total calculated on the basis of fuels used as a basis for compliance under the LRTAP Convention may keep that option in order to ensure coherence between international and Union law. ANNEX III CONTENT OF NATIONAL AIR POLLUTION CONTROL PROGRAMMES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 6 AND 10 PART 1 Minimum content of national air pollution control programmes PART 2 Emission reduction measures referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 6(2) Member States shall take into account the relevant Ammonia Guidance Document, and shall make use of best available techniques in accordance with Directive 2010/75/EU. A. Measures to control ammonia emissions B. Emission reduction measures to control emissions of fine particulate matter and black carbon C. Preventing impacts on small farms In taking the measures outlined in Sections A and B, Member States shall ensure that impacts on small and micro farms are fully taken into account. Member States may, for instance, exempt small and micro farms from those measures where possible and appropriate in view of the applicable reduction commitments. ( 1 ) Decision 2012/10/EC, ECE/EB.AIR/113/Add 1. ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 on the financing, management and monitoring of the common agricultural policy and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No 352/78, (EC) No 165/94, (EC) No 2799/98, (EC) No 814/2000, (EC) No 1290/2005 and (EC) No 485/2008 ( OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 549 ). ANNEX IV METHODOLOGIES FOR THE PREPARATION AND UPDATING OF NATIONAL EMISSION INVENTORIES AND PROJECTIONS, INFORMATIVE INVENTORY REPORTS AND ADJUSTED NATIONAL EMISSION INVENTORIES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 5 AND 8 For the pollutants referred to in Annex I, Member States shall prepare national emission inventories, adjusted national emission inventories where relevant, national emission projections, spatially disaggregated national emission inventories, large point source inventories and informative inventory reports, using the methodologies adopted by Parties to the LRTAP Convention (EMEP Reporting Guidelines), and are requested to use the EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory Guidebook (EMEP/EEA Guidebook) referred to therein. In addition, supplementary information, in particular the activity data, needed for the assessment of the national emission inventories and projections shall be prepared in accordance with the same guidelines. Reliance upon the EMEP Reporting Guidelines is without prejudice to the additional arrangements specified in this Annex and to the requirements on reporting nomenclature, time series and reporting dates specified in Annex I. PART 1 National annual emission inventories PART 2 National emission projections PART 3 Informative inventory report The informative inventory reports shall be prepared in accordance with the EMEP Reporting Guidelines and reported using the template for inventory reports as specified therein. The inventory report shall include, as a minimum, the following information: PART 4 Adjustment of national emission inventories ( 1 ) Member States having the choice to use the national emission total calculated on the basis of fuels used as a basis for compliance under the LRTAP Convention may keep this option in order to ensure coherence between international and Union law. ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union level relevant to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC ( OJ L 165, 18.6.2013, p. 13 ). ANNEX V OPTIONAL INDICATORS FOR MONITORING AIR POLLUTION IMPACTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 9 ANNEX VI CORRELATION TABLE Declaration by the Commission on the Review of Methane Emissions The Commission considers that there is a strong air quality case for keeping the development of methane emissions in the Member States under review in order to reduce ozone concentrations in the EU and to promote methane reductions internationally. The Commission confirms that on the basis of the reported national emissions, it intends to further assess the impact of methane emissions on achieving the objectives set out in Art. 1 paragraph 2 of the NEC Directive and will consider measures for reducing those emissions, and where appropriate, submit a legislative proposal to that purpose. In its assessment, the Commission will take into account a number of ongoing studies in this field, due to be finalised in 2017, as well as further international developments in this area.