COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/1192 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens and Globodera rostochiensis (Wollenweber) Behrens THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 28(1), points (a) to (h) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation sets out measures for the purpose of eradicating Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens and Globodera rostochiensis (Wollenweber) Behrens, and preventing their spread within the Union territory. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: CHAPTER II OFFICIAL DETECTION SURVEYS Article 3 Official detection surveys 1. Competent authorities shall carry out an official detection survey for the presence of the specified pest on the production sites, in which the plants listed in Annex I, intended for replanting, or potatoes intended for the production of potato tubers for planting, are to be planted or stored under conditions, where the roots or other parts of the plant are in direct contact with the soil of the production site. 2. The official detection surveys shall be carried out in the period between the harvesting of the latest crop and the planting of the plants or potato tubers for planting referred to in paragraph 1. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the official detection survey may be carried out: 3. An official detection survey shall not be required for: 4. Member States shall officially record the results of the official detection surveys and make them accessible to the Commission, on request, in accordance with the template set out in Annex IV. Article 4 Sampling and testing for official detection surveys 1. In the case of production sites in which potato tubers intended for planting, or plants listed in point 1 of Annex I intended for the production of plants for planting, are to be planted or stored, the official detection survey shall involve sampling and testing for the presence of the specified pest, carried out in accordance with Annex III. 2. In the case of production sites in which plants listed in points 2 and 3 of Annex I, intended for the production of plants for planting, are to be planted or stored, the official detection survey shall involve sampling and testing for the specified pest, carried out in accordance with Annex III. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, no sampling and testing for the specified pest shall be required if a production site has: Article 5 Designation of infested production sites and infested specified plants 1. When the specified pests have been found present in a production site during an official detection survey or an official monitoring survey, as referred to in Article 6, and that presence has been officially confirmed by the tests referred to in Article 4 and Article 7(2), the competent authorities shall designate the site as infested. 2. Specified plants originating from a production site designated as infested pursuant to paragraph 1, or those, which have been in contact with soil, in which the specified pests have been found, shall be designated as infested. CHAPTER III OFFICIAL MONITORING SURVEYS Article 6 Official monitoring surveys 1. Annual risk-based official monitoring surveys shall be carried out on production sites used for the production of potatoes, other than those intended for the production of potato tubers intended for planting, in order to determine the distribution of the specified pests on those sites. 2. Member States shall report to the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, the results of the monitoring surveys referred to in paragraph 1 which were carried out in the preceding year in accordance with the template set out in Annex IV. Article 7 Sampling and testing for official monitoring surveys 1. The official monitoring surveys shall be carried out on at least 0,5 % of the acreage used in the relevant year for the production of potatoes, other than potatoes intended for the production of potato tubers for planting. 2. Those official monitoring surveys shall involve sampling and testing for the presence of specified pests, in accordance with point 2 of Annex III. 3. Where Member States use the sample size referred to in point 6 of Annex III, they shall notify the details of the areas, where that sample size has been used, to the Commission and the other Member States. CHAPTER IV MEASURES Article 8 Eradication measures 1. In a production site which has been officially designated as infested pursuant to Article 5(1), the competent authorities, or the professional operators under the official supervision of the competent authorities, shall apply, for the purpose of eradicating the specified pests, all of the following measures: 2. If production sites to be used for production of potatoes other than those intended for the production of potato tubers for planting are officially designated as infested pursuant to Article 5(1), those production sites shall be subject to an official control programme aiming to ensure that the specified pests are not spread out of those production sites. The official control programme referred to in the first subparagraph shall take into account, as applicable, all of the following elements: Member States shall notify the official control programme to the Commission and the other Member States. 3. The degree of resistance of potato varieties shall be quantified in accordance with the standard scoring notation table set out in point 1 of Annex V. Testing for resistance shall be carried out in accordance with the protocol set out in point 2 of Annex V. Article 9 Measures on infested plants 1. The competent authorities, or the professional operators under the official supervision of the competent authorities, shall apply, for the purpose of eradicating the specified pests, all of the following measures on specified plants, which have been designated as infested pursuant to Article 5: 2. The measures taken under paragraph 1, point (b), shall take into consideration the particular production and marketing systems for host plants of the specified pest in the Member State concerned and the characteristics of the population of the specified pest. CHAPTER V NOTIFICATIONS OF SPECIFIED PESTS AND VARIETIES AND REVOCATION OF MEASURES Article 10 Notification of the confirmed presence of the specified pest on a resistant potato variety 1. Professional operators, and any other person, that become aware of any symptoms of the specified pest, resulting from a breakdown or a change in the effectiveness of a resistant potato variety which relates to an exceptional change in the composition of nematode species, pathotype or virulence group, shall notify the competent authorities thereof. 2. In all cases reported pursuant to paragraph 1, as well as when they become aware of such cases, the competent authorities shall investigate the potato cyst nematode species and, where applicable, the pathotype or virulence group involved, and confirm their presence by appropriate methods. 3. By 31 January of each year, Member States shall notify to the Commission and to the other Member States the details of the confirmations made pursuant to paragraph 2 as regards the preceding year. Article 11 Notification of resistant varieties to the specified pests Member States shall notify to the Commission and the other Member States, by 31 January of each year, a list of all new varieties of potatoes which they have authorised for marketing during the preceding year, and which they have found, by official tests as referred to in Annex V, to be resistant to the specified pests. They shall indicate the varieties together with the species, pathotypes, virulence groups or populations of the specified pests to which they are resistant, as well as the relative susceptibility. Article 12 Official re-sampling and testing with a view to revoke the measures in an infested production site 1. The competent authorities may carry out re-sampling of an infested production site designated pursuant to Article 5(1), and testing, in accordance with one of the following methods: The period provided for in paragraph 1, point (a), may be reduced to a minimum of three years, if effective and officially approved control measures have been implemented. 2. If the presence of the specified pests is not confirmed, following the official re-sampling and testing referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authorities shall update the official record referred to in Article 3(4) and in Article 5(1) and immediately revoke any restrictions imposed on the respective production site. CHAPTER VI FINAL PROVISIONS Article 13 Transitional measures on testing methods By way of derogation from Article 4(1) and (2) and Article 7(2) and until 15 July 2024, testing may be carried out using the method of isolation of nematode cysts from the debris, followed by species detection and identification with real-time PCR based on Beniers et al . 2014, instead of the methods with regard to detection and identification of the specified pests listed in point 1(b) of Annex III. Article 14 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 July 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4 . ( 2 ) Council Directive 2007/33/EC of 11 June 2007 on the control of potato cyst nematodes and repealing Directive 69/465/EEC ( OJ L 156, 16.6.2007, p. 12 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2009/128/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for Community action to achieve the sustainable use of pesticides ( OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 71 ). ( 4 ) Beniers JE, Been TH, Mendes O, van Gent-Pelzer MPE & van der Lee TAJ (2014) Quantification of viable eggs of the potato cyst nematodes (Globodera spp.) using either trehalose or RNA-specific Real-Time PCR. Nematology, 16, pp. 1219–1232. ANNEX I List of specified plants referred to in Article 2, point (3)(b) ANNEX II Official measures as referred to in Article 3(3), point (c), Article 9, first paragraph, points (b) and (c), and point 3 of Annex I The officially approved measures referred to in Article 9, first paragraph, point (b) are delivery to a processing or grading plant with appropriate and officially approved waste disposal procedures, including for waste soil, for which it has been established that there is no risk of spreading the specified pest. ANNEX III Sampling and testing as referred to in Articles 4 and 7 Sampling involving a soil sample with a standard rate of at least 1 500 ml soil/ha collected from at least 100 cores/ha, preferably in a rectangular grid of not less than 5 m in width and not more than 20 m in length between sampling points covering the entire production site. The whole sample is used for further examination, i.e. extraction of cysts, species identification and, if applicable, pathotype/virulence group determination. Testing applying the following methods for the extraction of the specified pest, which are described in the relevant validated and internationally recognised diagnostic protocols: Testing for the official monitoring survey, as referred to in Article 7, is carried out in accordance with point 1. The use of the reduced sample size, as referred to in points 3 and 4, may be continued in the subsequent official detection survey referred to in Article 3(1), as long as the specified pests have not been found in the production site concerned. The standard size of the soil sample may be reduced to a minimum of 200 ml of soil/ha, provided that the production site is situated in an area declared free from the specified pest, and designated, maintained and surveyed in accordance with the relevant International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM No 4) ( 4 ) . The minimum size of the soil sample in all cases is 200 ml of soil per production site. ( 1 ) Bulman, S.R. & Marshall, J.W. (1997). Differentiation of Australasian potato cyst nematode (PCN) populations using the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). New Zealand Journal of Crop and Horticultural Science 25, pp. 123–129. ( 2 ) Skantar, A.M., Handoo, Z.A., Carta, L.K., Chitwood, D.J. (2007). Morphological and molecular identification of Globodera pallida associated with Potato in Idaho. Journal of Nematology 39(2), pp. 133–144. ( 3 ) Gamel, S., Letort A., Fouville D., Folcher L., Grenier E. (2017). Development and validation of real-time PCR assays based on novel molecular markers for the simultaneous detection and identification of Globodera pallida , G. rostochiensis and Heterodera schachtii . Nematology 19 (7):789-804. ( 4 ) ISPM 4. 1995.Requirements for the establishment of pest free areas. Rome, IPPC, FAO. ANNEX IV Survey template referred to in Articles 3 and 6 Template for presenting potato cyst nematode survey results from the potato harvest of the preceding year. Please use this table only for potatoes harvested in your country ( 1 ) Only relevant in case of monitoring surveys. ( 2 ) G. p. = Globodera pallida . ( 3 ) G. r. = Globodera rostochiensis . ANNEX V Quantification of the degree of resistance of potato varieties and protocol for resistant testing, as referred to in Article 8(3) Standard scoring notation in relation to relative susceptibility of potato varieties for the specified pests