Corrigendum to Council Decision (CFSP) 2016/2314 of 19 December 2016 amending Decision (CFSP) 2015/778 on a European Union military operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA) ( Official Journal of the European Union L 345 of 20 December 2016 ) On page 62, recital 3: on page 62, recital 6: on page 63, Article 1, point (2) (concerning Article 2a(5) of Decision (CFSP) 2015/778), first sentence: ‘5. … EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA may collect, store and exchange with Member States, competent Union bodies, UNSMIL, EUROPOL, INTERPOL, Frontex, the International Criminal Court and the United States of America …’, ‘5. … EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA may collect, store and exchange with the relevant authorities of Member States, competent Union bodies, UNSMIL, INTERPOL, the International Criminal Court and the United States of America …’; on page 63, Article 1, point (3) (concerning Article 2b(1) of Decision (CFSP) 2015/778), first sentence: ‘1. As part of its supporting task to contribute to the implementation of the UN arms embargo on the high seas off the coast of Libya, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA shall gather and exchange information ….’, ‘1. Insofar as required by its supporting task to implement the UN arms embargo on the high seas off the coast of Libya, EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA shall gather and exchange information …’; on page 63, Article 1, point (5) (concerning Article 12(1) and (2) of Decision (CFSP) 2015/778): ‘1. The HR shall be authorised to release to designated third States, international organisations and international agencies, as appropriate and in accordance with the needs of EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA, any EU non-classified documents connected with the deliberations of the Council relating to the operation and covered by the obligation of professional secrecy …. The PSC shall designate on a case-by-case basis the third States, international organisations and international agencies concerned. 2. The HR shall be authorised to release to designated third States, international organisations and international agencies, as appropriate and in accordance with the needs of EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA …. The PSC shall designate on a case-by-case basis the third States, international organisations and international agencies concerned.’, ‘1. The HR shall be authorised to release to designated third States and the International Criminal Court, as appropriate and in accordance with the operational needs of EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA and in full respect of the principles of reciprocity and inclusiveness, any EU non-classified documents connected with the deliberations of the Council relating to the operation and covered by the obligation of professional secrecy … The PSC, provided that these conditions are met, shall designate on a case-by-case basis the third States concerned. 2. The HR shall be authorised to release to designated third States and the International Criminal Court, as appropriate and in accordance with the operational needs of EUNAVFOR MED operation SOPHIA …. The PSC, provided that these conditions are met, shall designate on a case-by-case basis the third States concerned.’.