COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2020/686 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the approval of germinal product establishments and the traceability and animal health requirements for movements within the Union of germinal products of certain kept terrestrial animals (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health (‘Animal Health Law’) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 94(3), Article 97(2), Article 101(3), Article 106(1), Article 122(1) and (2), Article 131(1), Article 160(1) and (2), Article 161(6), Article 162(3) and (4), Article 163(5), Article 164(2), Article 165(3) and Article 279(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: PART I SUBJECT MATTER, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation supplements the rules laid down in Regulation (EU) 2016/429 as regards registered and approved germinal product establishments and the traceability and animal health requirements for movements within the Union of germinal products of certain kept terrestrial animals. 2. Chapter 1 of Part II lays down the requirements for the approval of germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals from which germinal products of those animals are moved to another Member State in relation to: 3. Chapter 2 of Part II lays down the requirements on: 4. Chapter 3 of Part II lays down: 5. Chapter 1 of Part III lays down the animal health requirements, including derogations, for movements between Member States of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals, specifying: 6. Chapter 2 of Part III, for movements between Member States of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals, lays down: 7. Chapter 3 of Part III lays down the animal health, certification and notification requirements for movements between Member States of germinal products of: 8. Chapter 4 of Part III lays down rules for the granting of derogations by competent authorities for movements between Member States of germinal products for scientific purposes and germinal products stored at gene banks. 9. Part IV lays down certain transitional measures regarding Directives 88/407/EEC, 89/556/EEC, 90/429/EEC and 92/65/EEC in relation to: 10. This Regulation shall not apply to germinal products of wild animals. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, in addition to the definitions laid down in Article 1 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882, the following definitions shall apply: PART II APPROVAL OF GERMINAL PRODUCT ESTABLISHMENTS, REGISTERS, RECORD-KEEPING AND TRACEABILITY CHAPTER 1 Approval of germinal product establishments Article 3 Requirements for the approval of germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Operators of the following germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall apply in accordance with Article 94(1)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 to the competent authority for approval for the purpose of moving consignments of germinal products of those animals to other Member States: Article 4 Approval by the competent authority of germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. The competent authority shall only grant approval of a germinal product establishment for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine or equine animals as referred to in Article 97 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 after it has ensured that it complies with the following requirements: 2. When granting approval of a germinal product establishment for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals, as referred to in Articles 97 and 99 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, the competent authority shall assign it with a unique approval number, which shall include the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code of the country in which the approval is granted. Article 5 Special rules for the cessation of activities of approved germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. Where the operator of an approved germinal product establishment for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals ceases its activity, that operator shall ensure that prior to the withdrawal date of the approval all consignments of semen, oocytes or embryos collected or produced and stored in that germinal product establishment have been moved: 2. Where consignments of semen, oocytes or embryos are not moved from the approved germinal product establishment prior the withdrawal date of the approval as referred to in paragraph 1, such consignments shall not be moved to another Member State. CHAPTER 2 Registers to be kept by the competent authority of registered and approved germinal product establishments Article 6 Register to be kept by the competent authority of registered germinal product establishments 1. The competent authority shall draw up and keep up-to-date a register of registered germinal product establishments. 2. The competent authority shall include at least the following information in the register referred to in paragraph 1, for each registered germinal product establishment: Article 7 Register to be kept by the competent authority of approved germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. The competent authority shall draw up and keep up to date a register of approved germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals. 2. The competent authority shall include at least the following information in the register referred to in paragraph 1 for each approved germinal product establishment: 3. Where, based on requirements provided for in Article 4, a germinal product processing establishment or a germinal product storage centre is approved by the competent authority for the storage and, in respect of the germinal product processing establishment, the processing, of germinal products of more than one type or of more than one animal species, the competent authority shall include information on the type of the germinal products and on the animal species thereof stored and, if applicable, processed at the approved germinal product establishment in its register of approved germinal product establishments. 4. Where the competent authority has suspended or withdrawn the approval of an approved germinal product establishment in accordance with Article 100(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, it shall, without undue delay: 5. Where an approved germinal product establishment has ceased its activity as referred to in Article 5, the competent authority shall, without undue delay, indicate the date of cessation of those activities in its register of approved germinal product establishments. 6. The competent authority shall make the register referred to in paragraph 1 available to the public on its website, where germinal products are to be moved between Member States and notify the URL of that website to the Commission. Where the URL of the website of a competent authority has been changed it shall notify, without undue delay, the new URL of that website to the Commission. CHAPTER 3 Record-keeping and traceability Section 1 Record keeping Article 8 Record-keeping obligations of operators of approved germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. Operators of approved germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall keep and maintain records containing at least the following information: 2. Where a germinal product establishment, referred to in paragraph 1(c), is approved by the competent authority for either processing and storage or storage of germinal products of more than one type or of more than one animal species, the operator shall keep and maintain records separately for each type of germinal product and germinal products of each animal species either processed and stored or stored. Article 9 Record-keeping obligations of operators of approved germinal product establishments for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals that cease their activity 1. Where an approved germinal product establishment for bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals ceases its activity as referred to in Article 5, the operator of that establishment shall only move consignments of stored germinal products to a germinal product storage centre if such consignments are accompanied by originals or copies of the records required in accordance with Article 8(1). 2. The operator of the germinal product storage centre receiving the consignment of germinal products from the establishment that has ceased its activity as referred to in paragraph 1 shall record the entry and details of the germinal products based on the accompanying records required in accordance with Article 8(1)(c). Section 2 Traceability Article 10 Traceability requirements for germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. Operators collecting, producing, processing or storing germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine or equine animals shall mark each straw or other package in which semen, oocytes or embryos, whether or not separated into individual doses, are placed, stored and transported, in such a way that the following information can be readily established: 2. In case of sex-sorting of semen at a germinal product processing establishment, the operator of the semen collection centre shall supplement the information referred to in paragraph 1 with information which permits the identification of the unique approval number of the germinal product processing establishment where that semen was sex-sorted. 3. Where a single straw or another package contains semen of bovine, porcine, ovine or caprine animals collected from more than one donor animal, the operator shall ensure that the information referred to in paragraph 1 permits the identification of all donor animals that have contributed to the dose of semen used for insemination. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, where the semen of ovine or caprine animals is 5. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(c), the operator shall ensure that the marking of each straw or other package in which semen, oocytes or embryos are placed, stored and transported, is carried out in such a way that it permits the identification of: Article 11 Traceability requirements for germinal products of dogs and cats, terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals kept at confined establishments, and animals of the families Camelidae and Cervidae 1. Operators collecting, producing, processing or storing germinal products of dogs or cats, of terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine or equine animals kept at confined establishments or of animals of the family Camelidae or Cervidae shall mark each straw or other package in which semen, oocytes or embryos, whether or not separated into individual doses, are placed, stored and transported in such a way that the following information can be readily established: 2. In case of sex-sorting of semen at an establishment other than the establishment of its collection or production, the operator of the establishment of collection or production of that semen shall supplement the information referred to in paragraph 1 with information which permits the identification of the establishment where that semen was sex-sorted. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, where the semen of the animals referred to in paragraph 1 is frozen in pellets, the operator may mark the goblet containing semen pellets of a single donor instead of marking each individual pellet in that goblet. 4. Where a single straw or another package contains semen collected from more than one donor animal, the operator shall ensure that the information, referred to in paragraph 1, includes the identification of all donor animals. PART III MOVEMENTS OF GERMINAL PRODUCTS BETWEEN MEMBER STATES CHAPTER 1 Animal health requirements for movements of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Section 1 Rules for the collection, production, processing and storage of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals in approved germinal product establishments Article 12 Rules for movements to other Member States of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals from approved germinal product establishments Operators shall only move to another Member State semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals, which were collected, produced, processed and stored in approved germinal product establishments. Article 13 Derogation for the movements to other Member States of semen of ovine and caprine animals from the establishments where those animals are kept By way of derogation from Article 12, operators may move to other Member States consignments of semen of ovine and caprine animals which were collected, processed and stored at the establishment where those donor animals are kept, provided that those operators: Article 14 Derogation for movements to other Member States of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals kept at confined establishments By way of derogation from Article 12, operators of confined establishments may move to other Member States consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos collected at those establishments from bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals, provided that those operators: Section 2 Animal health requirements for donor animals from which germinal products were collected, and isolation and quarantine requirements for those animals Sub-Section I General animal health requirements for donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Article 15 Responsibilities of operators for compliance with the animal health requirements for donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals from which germinal products were collected Operators shall only move to another Member State consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals which comply with the following requirements: Article 16 Responsibilities of centre veterinarians and team veterinarians for compliance with the animal health requirements for donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals from which germinal products were collected Centre veterinarians, as regards donor animals of semen, or team veterinarians, as regards donor animals of oocytes and embryos, shall ensure that the donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals comply with the following requirements: Article 17 Responsibilities of centre veterinarians and team veterinarians for compliance with the animal health requirements for donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals from which germinal products were collected from establishments subject to movement restrictions on animal health grounds Centre veterinarians, as regards donor animals of semen, or team veterinarians, as regards donor animals of oocytes and embryos, shall ensure that semen, oocytes and embryos, collected at either a semen collection centre or an establishment which is subjected to movement restrictions on animal health grounds concerning the diseases referred to in Article 16(b), 20, 21, 22 or 23, comply with the following requirements: Article 18 Additional responsibilities of centre veterinarians for compliance with the animal health requirements for donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals from which semen was collected Centre veterinarians shall ensure that donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals comply with the following requirements: Article 19 Derogation from the animal health requirements for donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals moved between semen collection centres 1. By way of derogation from point (b) of Article 18, operators may move donor bovine, porcine, ovine and caprine animals, and donor equine animals subjected to the testing programme for certain diseases as referred to in point 1(b)(i) of Chapter I of Part 4 of Annex II, directly from one semen collection centre to another semen collection centre: 2. Operators shall only move donor animals, as referred to in the introductory phrase of paragraph 1, where the movement is authorised by the competent authority of the semen collection centre of origin and with the prior consent of the centre veterinarian of the semen collection centre of destination. 3. Operators shall ensure that donor animals referred to in the introductory phrase of paragraph 1 do not come into direct or indirect contact with animals of a lower health status during the movement and the means of transport used have been cleansed and disinfected before use. 4. Operators of semen collection centres of destination shall subject donor animals referred to in the introductory phrase of paragraph 1 to all compulsory routine tests referred to in paragraph 1(a) not later than 12 months following the date the last compulsory routine tests were carried out on those animals. Sub-Section II Additional animal health requirements for certain species of ungulates Article 20 Additional animal health requirements for donor bovine animals from which semen, oocytes and embryos were collected 1. The centre veterinarian, as regards donor animals of semen, or the team veterinarian, as regards donor animals of oocytes and embryos, shall ensure that donor bovine animals comply with the following requirements: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a)(iii), the centre veterinarian may accept that a donor animal of semen came from an establishment which was not free from enzootic bovine leukosis provided that the animal either: 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a)(iii), the team veterinarian may accept a donor animal of oocytes and embryos that was less than 2 years of age which came from an establishment which was not free from enzootic bovine leukosis provided that the official veterinarian responsible for the establishment of origin has certified that there has been no clinical case of enzootic bovine leukosis during a period of at least the preceding 3 years. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a)(iv), Article 21 Additional animal health requirements for donor porcine animals from which semen, oocytes and embryos were collected 1. The centre veterinarian, as regards donor animals of semen, or the team veterinarian, as regards donor animals of oocytes and embryos, shall ensure that donor porcine animals comply with the following requirements: 2. The centre veterinarian shall ensure that donor porcine animals of semen comply with the following requirements: Article 22 Additional animal health requirements for donor ovine and caprine animals from which semen, oocytes and embryos were collected The centre veterinarian, as regards donor animals of semen, or the team veterinarian, as regards donor animals of oocytes and embryos, shall ensure that donor ovine and caprine animals comply with the following requirements: Article 23 Additional animal health requirements for donor equine animals from which semen, oocytes and embryos were collected 1. The centre veterinarian shall ensure that equine animals admitted to a semen collection centre and the team veterinarian shall ensure that equine animals used for the collection of oocytes and embryos or the production of embryos comply with the following requirements prior to the collection of the germinal products: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a), the movement restrictions referred to in paragraph 1(a)(i) to (iii) must remain in place for a period of at least 30 days, beginning on the day on which all the animals on the establishment of species listed for the respective disease referred to in paragraph 1(a)(i) to (iii) were either killed and destroyed or slaughtered, where allowed in accordance with paragraph 1(b), and the establishment was cleaned and disinfected. Section 3 Laboratory and other tests to be carried out on kept donor animals of the bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine species and germinal products thereof Article 24 Laboratory and other tests to be carried out on donor bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals and germinal products thereof Operators shall ensure that: Article 25 Authorisation for laboratory tests to be carried out on donor animals of the bovine, porcine, ovine and caprine species in quarantine accommodation 1. The competent authority may authorise the following tests referred to in Annex II to be carried out on samples taken in the quarantine accommodation: 2. Where the competent authority has granted the authorisations referred to in paragraph 1, the following conditions shall be met: Section 4 Animal health requirements for the collection, production, processing, storage and other procedures of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Article 26 Obligations on operators as regards the animal health requirements for the collection, production, processing and storage of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Operators shall ensure that consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals are only moved to other Member States if those consignments fulfil the animal health requirements for the collection, production, processing and storage of germinal products set out in Annex III. Section 5 Animal health requirements for the transport of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Article 27 Responsibilities of centre veterinarians and team veterinarians for compliance with the animal health requirements for the transport of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. Where germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals are moved to another Member State or to a germinal product processing establishment or a germinal product storage centre within the same Member State, the centre veterinarian or the team veterinarian shall ensure that: 2. The seal referred to in paragraph 1(a) applied under the responsibility of the centre veterinarian or the team veterinarian may be replaced by the official veterinarian. Article 28 Responsibilities of operators for compliance with the animal health requirements for the transport of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. Operators shall only move semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals to other Member States subject to compliance with the following conditions: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, operators may place in one transport container semen, oocytes and embryos of the same species provided that: 3. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2, operators may place in one transport container semen, oocytes and embryos of ovine and caprine animals. Article 29 Additional responsibilities on operators for the transport of semen of bovine, porcine, ovine and caprine animals Where operators move to another Member State consignments of semen of bovine, porcine, ovine or caprine animals which has been collected from more than one donor animal and placed in a single straw or another package, the operators shall: CHAPTER 2 Animal health certification, self-declaration and movement notification for germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Article 30 Rules on animal health certification 1. Before issuing an animal health certificate for movements between Member States of consignments of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals, the official veterinarian shall carry out: 2. The official veterinarian shall carry out the checks and examinations as provided for in paragraph 1 and issue the animal health certificate within the period of 72 hours preceding the time of dispatch of the consignment of germinal products. 3. The animal health certificate shall be valid for a period of 10 days from the date of issuing. Article 31 Information to be contained in the animal health certificate for germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine moved between Member States The animal health certificates for movements between Member States of consignments of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals, shall contain at least the information set out in point 1 of Annex IV. Article 32 Requirements concerning the self-declaration document for movements to and from germinal product processing establishments of consignments of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals 1. Where an operator of an approved germinal product establishment of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals arranges for germinal products to be processed by a germinal product processing establishment, that operator shall ensure that a self-declaration document accompanies the consignment of the germinal products during the transport to and from that germinal product processing establishment. 2. An operator of an approved germinal product establishment shall ensure that the self-declaration document referred to in paragraph 1 includes at least the following information: Article 33 Requirement for advance notification by operators of movements of consignments of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals between Member States Where consignments of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals are moved to another Member State, operators of approved germinal product establishments, establishments where ovine and caprine animals are kept as referred to in Article 13 or confined establishments as referred to in Article 14 shall notify the competent authority in their Member State of origin in advance of the intended movement of those consignments of germinal products. Article 34 Information necessary to notify movements of consignments of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals between Member States Operators notifying the competent authority in their Member State of origin in accordance with Article 33, shall provide that competent authority with the information concerning each consignment of germinal products to be moved to another Member State provided for in: Article 35 Emergency procedures for the notification of movements of consignments of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals between Member States in the event of power cuts and other disturbances of IMSOC 1. In the event of power cuts and other disturbances of IMSOC, the competent authority of the place of origin of the consignment of germinal products of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals to be moved to another Member State shall notify the Commission and the competent authority of the place of destination of the movement of that consignment by fax or email. 2. The notification, referred to in paragraph 1, shall be done by the competent authority of the place of origin of the consignment of germinal products in accordance with the contingency arrangements to be applied in the event of unavailability of any of the functionalities IMSOC. CHAPTER 3 Animal health requirements, animal health certification and notification for germinal products of animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Article 36 Animal health requirements for movements to other Member States of germinal products of dogs and cats Operators shall only move to other Member States semen, oocytes and embryos collected from dogs ( Canis lupus familiaris ) and cats ( Felis silvestris catus ) which: Article 37 Animal health requirements for movements to other Member States between confined establishments of germinal products of kept terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals Operators of confined establishments shall only move germinal products of terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals kept at those establishments to confined establishments in other Member States when the donor animals: Article 38 Animal health requirements for movements to other Member States of germinal products of animals of the families Camelidae and Cervidae Operators shall only move to another Member State germinal products collected from animals of the family Camelidae or Cervidae which: Article 39 Rules concerning animal health certification 1. Before signing an animal health certificate for movements between Member States of consignments of germinal products of dogs or cats, the official veterinarian shall carry out: 2. Before signing an animal health certificate for movements between Member States of consignments of germinal products of terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine or equine animals kept at confined establishments, the official veterinarian shall carry out: 3. Before signing an animal health certificate for movements between Member States of consignments of germinal products of animals of the family Camelidae or Cervidae , the official veterinarian shall carry out: 4. The official veterinarian shall carry out the checks and examinations as provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 and issue the animal health certificate within the period of 72 hours preceding the time of dispatch of the consignment of germinal products. 5. The animal health certificate provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be valid for 10 days from the date of issuing. Article 40 Animal health certification requirements for movements of consignments of germinal products of kept terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals between Member States The animal health certificates for movements between Member States of consignments of germinal products of dogs and cats, and of terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine or equine animals kept at confined establishments or of animals of the family Camelidae or Cervidae , shall contain at least the information set out in point 2 of Annex IV. Article 41 Requirement for advance notification by operators of movements of consignments of germinal products of kept terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals between Member States Where consignments of germinal products of dogs or cats, of terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine or equine animals kept at confined establishments or of animals of the family Camelidae or Cervidae are moved to another Member State, the operator shall notify the competent authority in the Member State of origin of the consignments in advance of the intended movement of those consignments of germinal products. Article 42 Information necessary to notify movements of consignments of germinal products of kept terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals between Member States Operators required to notify the competent authority in the Member State of origin of the consignments in accordance with Article 41, shall provide that competent authority with the information concerning each consignment of germinal products to be moved to another Member State provided for in point 2(a) to (f) of Annex IV. Article 43 Emergency procedures for the notification of movements of consignments of germinal products of kept terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals between Member States in the event of power cuts and other disturbances of IMSOC 1. In the event of power cuts and other disturbances of IMSOC, the competent authority of the place of origin of the consignment of germinal products of dogs or cats, of terrestrial animals other than bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine or equine animals kept at confined establishments or of animals of the family Camelidae or Cervidae , to be moved to another Member State, shall notify the Commission and the competent authority of the place of destination of the movement of that consignment by fax or email. 2. The notification, referred to in paragraph 1, shall be carried out by the competent authority of the place of origin of the consignment of the germinal products in accordance with the contingency arrangements to be applied in the event of unavailability of any of the functionalities of IMSOC. CHAPTER 4 Additional rules for the granting of derogations by competent authorities for germinal products Article 44 Additional rules for the granting of derogations by competent authorities for germinal products intended for scientific purposes 1. The competent authorities of the Member States of origin may grant derogation for the movement to another Member State of germinal products intended for scientific purposes which do not fulfil the animal health requirements provided for in Chapter 1 or 3, provided the operator of the establishment of dispatch has obtained the prior written consent of the competent authority of the Member State of destination to accept the consignment of germinal products. 2. The competent authority of the Member State of destination shall only consent to accept the consignment of germinal products referred to in paragraph 1, where the operator of the establishment of destination intended to receive those germinal products ensures that the germinal products are only used for scientific purposes under conditions that prevent the spread of category D diseases. Article 45 Additional rules for the granting of derogations by competent authorities for germinal products moved to gene banks in another Member State 1. The competent authorities of the Member States of origin may grant derogations for movements to gene banks in another Member State of germinal products, provided that the operator of the establishment of dispatch has obtained the prior written consent of the competent authority of the Member State of destination to accept the consignment of germinal products, of: 2. The competent authority of the Member State of destination shall only consent to accept the consignment of germinal products referred to in paragraph 1, provided that: Article 46 Rules on and information to be contained in the self-declaration document for germinal products intended for scientific purposes or to be moved to gene banks in another Member State 1. Where germinal products intended for scientific purposes or for storage at gene banks are to be moved to another Member State, the operator of the establishment of dispatch shall ensure that a self-declaration document accompanies the germinal products during the transport to the place of destination. 2. The operator of the establishment of dispatch shall ensure that the self-declaration document provided for in paragraph 1 includes at least the following information: Article 47 Advance notification by operators of movements of germinal products intended for scientific purposes or to gene banks between Member States Where germinal products intended for scientific purposes or for storage at gene banks are moved to another Member State, the operator of the establishment of dispatch shall notify the competent authority in the Member State of origin of the consignment in advance of the intended movement of those germinal products and provide the information listed in Article 46(2)(a) to (g). Article 48 Emergency procedures for the notification of movements between Member States of germinal products intended for scientific purposes or to gene banks in the event of power cuts and other disturbances of IMSOC 1. In the event of power cuts and other disturbances of IMSOC, the competent authority of the place of origin of the consignment of germinal products intended for scientific purposes or for storage at gene banks, to be moved to another Member State, shall notify the Commission and the competent authority of the place of destination of the movement of that consignment by fax or email. 2. The notification, referred to in paragraph 1, shall be done by the competent authority of the place of origin of the consignment of the germinal products in accordance with the contingency arrangements to be applied in the event of unavailability of any of the functionalities of IMSOC. PART IV FINAL PROVISIONS Article 49 Transitional measures 1. Semen collection centres, semen storage centres, embryo collection teams and embryo production teams which have been approved before 21 April 2021 in accordance with Directives 88/407/EEC, 89/556/EEC, 90/429/EEC and 92/65/EEC referred to in the 6th, 7th, 8th and 12th indents of Article 270(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 shall be considered to have been approved in accordance with this Regulation. In all other respects, they shall be subject to the rules provided for in this Regulation, and in Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 2. Straws and other packages in which semen, oocytes or embryos, whether or not separated into individual doses, are placed, stored and transported, marked before 21 April 2021 in accordance with Directives 88/407/EEC, 89/556/EEC, 90/429/EEC and 92/65/EEC shall be considered to have been marked in accordance with this Regulation. 3. Animal health certificates issued before 21 April 2021 in accordance with Directives 88/407/EEC, 89/556/EEC, 90/429/EEC and 92/65/EEC shall be considered to have been issued in accordance with this Regulation. Article 50 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 21 April 2021. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 17 December 2019. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 84, 31.3.2016, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Council Directive 88/407/EEC of 14 June 1988 laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra-Community trade in and imports of semen of domestic animals of the bovine species ( OJ L 194, 22.7.1988, p. 10 ). ( 3 ) Council Directive 89/556/EEC of 25 September 1989 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in and importation from third countries of embryos of domestic animals of the bovine species ( OJ L 302, 19.10.1989, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Council Directive 90/429/EEC of 26 June 1990 laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra-Community trade in and imports of semen of domestic animals of the porcine species ( OJ L 224, 18.8.1990, p. 62 ). ( 5 ) Council Directive 92/65/EEC of 13 July 1992 laying down animal health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of animals, semen, ova and embryos not subject to animal health requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 90/425/EEC ( OJ L 268, 14.9.1992, p. 54 ). ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (Animal by-products Regulation) ( OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Commission Decision 2003/24/EC of 30 December 2002 concerning the development of an integrated computerised veterinary system ( OJ L 8, 14.1.2003, p. 44 ). ( 10 ) Commission Decision 2004/292/EC of 30 March 2004 on the introduction of the Traces system and amending Decision 92/486/EEC ( OJ L 94, 31.3.2004, p. 63 ). ( 11 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on official controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products, amending Regulations (EC) No 999/2001, (EC) No 396/2005, (EC) No 1069/2009, (EC) No 1107/2009, (EU) No 1151/2012, (EU) No 652/2014, (EU) 2016/429 and (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Regulations (EC) No 1/2005 and (EC) No 1099/2009 and Council Directives 98/58/EC, 1999/74/EC, 2007/43/EC, 2008/119/EC and 2008/120/EC, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 854/2004 and (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 89/608/EEC, 89/662/EEC, 90/425/EEC, 91/496/EEC, 96/23/EC, 96/93/EC and 97/78/EC and Council Decision 92/438/EEC (Official Controls Regulation) ( OJ L 95, 7.4.2017, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions for the breeding, trade in and entry into the Union of purebred breeding animals, hybrid breeding pigs and the germinal products thereof and amending Regulation (EU) No 652/2014, Council Directives 89/608/EEC and 90/425/EEC and repealing certain acts in the area of animal breeding (‘Animal Breeding Regulation’) ( OJ L 171, 29.6.2016, p. 66 ). ( 13 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 of 3 December 2018 on the application of certain disease prevention and control rules to categories of listed diseases and establishing a list of species and groups of species posing a considerable risk for the spread of those listed diseases ( OJ L 308, 4.12.2018, p. 21 ). ( 14 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/2035 of 28 June 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for establishments keeping terrestrial animals and hatcheries, and the traceability of certain kept terrestrial animals and hatching eggs ( OJ L 314, 5.12.2019, p. 115 ). ( 15 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for surveillance, eradication programmes, and disease-free status for certain listed and emerging diseases (See page 211 of this Official Journal). ( 16 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/688 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and the Council, as regards animal health requirements for movements within the Union of terrestrial animals and hatching eggs (See page 140 of this Official Journal). ( 17 ) Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals and repealing Regulation (EC) No 998/2003 ( OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1 ). ANNEX I RULES FOR THE COLLECTION, PRODUCTION, PROCESSING AND STORAGE OF GERMINAL PRODUCTS OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS AS REFERRED TO IN CHAPTER 1 OF PART II PART 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR SEMEN COLLECTION CENTRES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 PART 2 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE APPROVAL OF AN EMBRYO COLLECTION TEAM REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 PART 3 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE APPROVAL OF AN EMBRYO PRODUCTION TEAM REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 PART 4 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE APPROVAL OF A GERMINAL PRODUCT PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 PART 5 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE APPROVAL OF A GERMINAL PRODUCT STORAGE CENTRE REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 ANNEX II ADDITIONAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR BOVINE, OVINE, CAPRINE, PORCINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS FROM WHICH GERMINAL PRODUCTS ARE COLLECTED, AND CONCERNING QUARANTINE AND LABORATORY OR OTHER TESTS OF THOSE ANIMALS AS REFERRED TO IN SECTION 2 OF CHAPTER 1 OF PART III PART 1 ADDITIONAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR BOVINE ANIMALS FROM WHICH GERMINAL PRODUCTS ARE COLLECTED, AND CONCERNING QUARANTINE AND LABORATORY OR OTHER TESTS OF THOSE ANIMALS, AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 20 Chapter I Additional animal health requirements for bovine animals from which semen is collected, and concerning quarantine and laboratory or other tests for those animals Chapter II Additional animal health requirements for bovine animals which are in vivo derived embryos donors, and concerning the quarantine of those animals Chapter III Additional animal health requirements for bovine animals from which oocytes for in vitro production of embryos are collected, and concerning quarantine of those animals PART 2 ADDITIONAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR PORCINE ANIMALS FROM WHICH GERMINAL PRODUCTS ARE COLLECTED, AND CONCERNING QUARANTINE AND LABORATORY OR OTHER TESTS OF THOSE ANIMALS, AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 21 Chapter I Additional animal health requirements for porcine animals from which semen is collected, and concerning quarantine and laboratory or other tests of those animals Chapter II Additional animal health requirements for porcine animals from which oocytes and embryos are collected, and concerning the quarantine of those animals PART 3 ADDITIONAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR OVINE AND CAPRINE ANIMALS FROM WHICH GERMINAL PRODUCTS ARE COLLECTED, AND CONCERNING THE QUARANTINE AND LABORATORY OR OTHER TESTS OF THOSE ANIMALS, AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 22 Chapter I Additional animal health requirements for ovine and caprine animals from which semen is collected, and concerning the quarantine and laboratory or other tests of those animals Chapter II Additional animal health requirements for ovine and caprine animals from which oocytes and embryos are collected, and concerning the quarantine of those animals PART 4 ADDITIONAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUINE ANIMALS FROM WHICH GERMINAL PRODUCTS ARE COLLECTED, AND CONCERNING THE QUARANTINE AND LABORATORY OR OTHER TESTS OF THOSE ANIMALS, AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 23 Chapter I Additional animal health requirements for equine animals from which semen is collected, and concerning the quarantine and laboratory or other tests of those animals Chapter II Additional animal health requirements for equine animals from which oocytes and embryos are collected, and concerning the quarantine and laboratory or other tests of those animals PART 5 OTHER ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE AND CAPRINE ANIMALS AND ANIMALS OF THE FAMILIES CAMELIDAE AND CERVIDAE FROM WHICH GERMINAL PRODUCTS ARE COLLECTED, AND CONCERNING THE QUARANTINE AND LABORATORY OR OTHER TESTS OF THOSE ANIMALS, AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 20, 21, 22 AND 38 Chapter I Requirements for bovine, porcine, ovine and caprine animals as regards foot-and-mouth disease Chapter II Requirements for bovine, ovine and caprine animals and for animals of the families Camelidae and Cervidae as regards infection with bluetongue virus (serotypes 1-24) Chapter III Requirements for bovine, ovine and caprine animals as regards infection with the epizootic haemorrhagic disease virus (serotypes 1-7) Chapter IV Requirements for an establishment to be considered free from infection with Brucella abortus, Brucella melitensis and Brucella suis in porcine animals To qualify as free from infection with Brucella abortus, Brucella melitensis and Brucella suis , an establishment of porcine animals must satisfy the following requirements: ( 1 ) Manual of the International Embryo Transfer Society – A procedural guide and general information for the use of embryo transfer technology emphasising sanitary procedures, published by the International Embryo Transfer Society 1 111 North Dunlap Avenue, Savoy, Illinois 61 874 USA ( ANNEX III ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COLLECTION, PRODUCTION, PROCESSING AND STORAGE OF GERMINAL PRODUCTS OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 26 PART 1 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COLLECTION, PROCESSING AND STORAGE OF FRESH, CHILLED OR FROZEN SEMEN OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS, AND FOR THE TRANSPORT OF THAT SEMEN PART 2 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF IN VIVO DERIVED EMBRYOS OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS In vivo derived embryos shall be collected, processed and preserved in accordance with the following requirements: PART 3 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF OOCYTES, OVARIES AND OTHER TISSUES FOR IN VITRO PRODUCTION OF EMBRYOS OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS In addition to the requirements set out in Part 2, the following additional requirements shall apply to the collection, processing and transport of oocytes, ovaries and other tissues for use in in vitro fertilisation and in vitro culture: Separate equipment shall be used to handle oocytes and embryos from different individual donor animals and from different batches of donor animals. PART 4 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROCESSING OF IN VITRO PRODUCED EMBRYOS OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS In addition to the requirements set out in Part 2, the following additional requirements shall apply to the processing of in vitro produced embryos: PART 5 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROCESSING OF MICROMANIPULATED EMBRYOS OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS Prior to any micromanipulation which compromises the integrity of the zona pellucida or, in the case of equine embryos, the embryonic capsule, all embryos or oocytes shall be collected and processed in accordance with the animal health requirements set out in Parts 2, 3 and 4. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: PART 6 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE STORAGE OF IN VIVO DERIVED AND IN VITRO PRODUCED EMBRYOS, AND OF OOCYTES OF BOVINE, PORCINE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND EQUINE ANIMALS ANNEX IV INFORMATION TO BE CONTAINED IN THE ANIMAL HEALTH CERTIFICATE FOR GERMINAL PRODUCTS MOVED BETWEEN MEMBER STATES AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 31 AND 40