DIRECTIVE (EU) 2024/1760 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 13 June 2024 on corporate sustainability due diligence and amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937 and Regulation (EU) 2023/2859 (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 50(1), Article 50(2), point (g), and Article 114 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Subject matter 1. This Directive lays down rules on: 2. This Directive shall not constitute grounds for reducing the level of protection of human, employment and social rights, or of protection of the environment or of protection of the climate provided for by the national law of the Member States or by the collective agreements applicable at the time of the adoption of this Directive. 3. This Directive shall be without prejudice to obligations in the areas of human, employment and social rights, and of protection of the environment and climate change under other Union legislative acts. If a provision of this Directive conflicts with a provision of another Union legislative act pursuing the same objectives and providing for more extensive or more specific obligations, the provision of that other Union legislative act shall prevail to the extent of the conflict and shall apply as regards those specific obligations. Article 2 1. This Directive shall apply to companies which are formed in accordance with the legislation of a Member State and which fulfil one of the following conditions: 2. This Directive shall also apply to companies which are formed in accordance with the legislation of a third country and fulfil one of the following conditions: 3. Where the ultimate parent company has as its main activity the holding of shares in operational subsidiaries and does not engage in taking management, operational or financial decisions affecting the group or one or more of its subsidiaries, it may be exempted from carrying out the obligations under this Directive. That exemption is subject to the condition that one of the ultimate parent company’s subsidiaries established in the Union is designated to fulfil the obligations set out in Articles 6 to 16 and Article 22 on behalf of the ultimate parent company, including the obligations of the ultimate parent company with respect to the activities of its subsidiaries. In such a case, the designated subsidiary is given all the necessary means and legal authority to fulfil those obligations in an effective manner, in particular to ensure that the designated subsidiary obtains from the companies of the group the relevant information and documents to fulfil the obligations of the ultimate parent company under this Directive. The ultimate parent company shall apply for the exemption referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph to the competent supervisory authority, in accordance with Article 24, to assess whether the conditions referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph are met. Where the conditions are met, the competent supervisory authority shall grant the exemption. Where applicable, such authority shall duly inform the competent supervisory authority of the Member State where the designated subsidiary is established of the application and then of its decision. The ultimate parent company shall remain jointly liable with the designated subsidiary for a failure of the latter to comply with its obligations in accordance with the first subparagraph of this paragraph. 4. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the number of part-time employees shall be calculated on a full-time equivalent basis. Temporary agency workers and other workers in non-standard forms of employment, provided that they fulfil the criteria for determining the status of worker as established by the Court of Justice of the European Union, shall be included in the calculation of the number of employees in the same way as if they were workers employed directly for the same period of time by the company. 5. Where a company meets the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 or 2, this Directive shall only apply if those conditions are met in two consecutive financial years. This Directive shall no longer apply to a company referred to in paragraph 1 or 2 where the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 or 2 cease to be met for each of the last two relevant financial years. 6. As regards the companies referred to in paragraph 1, the Member State competent to regulate matters covered by this Directive shall be the Member State in which the company has its registered office. 7. As regards a company as referred to in paragraph 2, the Member State competent to regulate matters covered by this Directive shall be the Member State in which that company has a branch. If a company does not have a branch in any Member State, or has branches located in different Member States, the Member State competent to regulate matters covered by this Directive shall be that in which that company generated the highest net turnover in the Union in the financial year preceding the last financial year. 8. This Directive shall not apply to AIFs, as defined in Article 4(1), point (a), of Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 31 ) or to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) within the meaning of Article 1(2) of Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 32 ) . Article 3 Definitions 1. For the purpose of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply: 2. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 34 in order to amend the Annex to this Directive by: Article 4 Level of harmonisation 1. Without prejudice to Article 1(2) and (3), Member States shall not introduce, in their national law, provisions within the field covered by this Directive laying down human rights and environmental due diligence obligations diverging from those laid down in Article 8(1) and (2), Article 10(1) and Article 11(1). 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, this Directive shall not preclude Member States from introducing, in their national law, more stringent provisions diverging from those laid down in provisions other than Article 8(1) and (2), Article 10(1) and Article 11(1), or provisions that are more specific in terms of the objective or the field covered, in order to achieve a different level of protection of human, employment and social rights, the environment or the climate. Article 5 Due diligence 1. Member States shall ensure that companies conduct risk-based human rights and environmental due diligence as laid down in Articles 7 to 16 (‘due diligence’) by carrying out the following actions: 2. Member States shall ensure that, for the purposes of due diligence, companies are entitled to share resources and information within their respective groups of companies and with other legal entities. 3. Member States shall ensure that a business partner is not obliged to disclose to a company that is complying with the obligations resulting from this Directive information that is a trade secret, as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Directive (EU) 2016/943, without prejudice to the disclosure of the identity of direct and indirect business partners, or essential information needed to identify actual or potential adverse impacts, where necessary and duly justified for the company’s compliance with due diligence obligations. This shall be without prejudice to the possibility for the business partners to protect their trade secrets through the mechanisms established in Directive (EU) 2016/943. Business partners shall never be obliged to disclose classified information or other information the disclosure of which would cause a risk to the essential interests of a state’s security. 4. Member States shall require companies to retain documentation regarding the actions carried out to fulfil their due diligence obligations for the purpose of demonstrating compliance, including supporting evidence, for at least 5 years from the moment when such documentation was produced or obtained. Where, upon expiry of the retention period provided for in the first subparagraph, there are ongoing judicial or administrative proceedings under this Directive, the retention period shall be extended until the conclusion of the matter. Article 6 Due diligence support at a group level 1. Member States shall ensure that parent companies falling under the scope of this Directive are allowed to fulfil the obligations set out in Articles 7 to 11 and Article 22 on behalf of companies which are subsidiaries of those parent companies and fall under the scope of this Directive, if this ensures effective compliance. This is without prejudice to such subsidiaries being subject to the exercise of the supervisory authority’s powers in accordance with Article 25 and to their civil liability in accordance with Article 29. 2. The fulfilment of the due diligence obligations set out in Articles 7 to 16 by a parent company in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article shall be subject to all of the following conditions: 3. Where the parent company fulfils the obligation set out in Article 22 on behalf of the subsidiary in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, the subsidiary shall comply with the obligations laid down in Article 22 in accordance with the parent company’s transition plan for climate change mitigation accordingly adapted to its business model and strategy. Article 7 Integrating due diligence into company policies and risk management systems 1. Member States shall ensure that companies integrate due diligence into all their relevant policies and risk management systems and have in place a due diligence policy that ensures risk-based due diligence. 2. The due diligence policy referred to in paragraph 1 shall be developed in prior consultation with the company’s employees and their representatives, and contain all of the following: 3. Member States shall ensure that companies update their due diligence policies without undue delay after a significant change occurs, and review and, where necessary, update such policies at least every 24 months. For the purposes referred to in the first subparagraph, companies shall take into account the adverse impacts already identified in accordance with Article 8, as well as the appropriate measures taken to address such adverse impacts in accordance with Articles 10 and 11 and the outcome of the assessments carried out in accordance with Article 15. Article 8 Identifying and assessing actual and potential adverse impacts 1. Member States shall ensure that companies take appropriate measures to identify and assess actual and potential adverse impacts arising from their own operations or those of their subsidiaries and, where related to their chains of activities, those of their business partners, in accordance with this Article. 2. As part of the obligation set out in paragraph 1, taking into account relevant risk factors, companies shall take appropriate measures to: 3. Member States shall ensure that, for the purposes of identifying and assessing the adverse impacts referred to in paragraph 1 based on, where appropriate, quantitative and qualitative information, companies are entitled to make use of appropriate resources, including independent reports and information gathered through the notification mechanism and the complaints procedure provided for in Article 14. 4. Where information necessary for the in-depth assessment provided for in paragraph 2, point (b), can be obtained from business partners at different levels of the chain of activities, the company shall prioritise requesting such information, where reasonable, directly from business partners where the adverse impacts are most likely to occur. Article 9 Prioritisation of identified actual and potential adverse impacts 1. Member States shall ensure that, where it is not feasible to prevent, mitigate, bring to an end or minimise all identified adverse impacts at the same time and to their full extent, companies prioritise adverse impacts identified pursuant to Article 8 in order to fulfil the obligations laid down in Article 10 or 11. 2. The prioritisation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be based on the severity and likelihood of the adverse impacts. 3. Once the most severe and most likely adverse impacts are addressed in accordance with Article 10 or 11 within a reasonable time, the company shall address less severe and less likely adverse impacts. Article 10 Preventing potential adverse impacts 1. Member States shall ensure that companies take appropriate measures to prevent, or where prevention is not possible or not immediately possible, adequately mitigate, potential adverse impacts that have been, or should have been, identified pursuant to Article 8, in accordance with Article 9 and with this Article. To determine the appropriate measures referred to in the first subparagraph, due account shall be taken of: 2. Companies shall be required to take the following appropriate measures, where relevant: 3. Companies may take, where relevant, appropriate measures in addition to the measures listed in paragraph 2, such as engaging with a business partner about the company’s expectations with regard to preventing and mitigating potential adverse impacts, or providing or enabling access to capacity-building, guidance, administrative and financial support such as loans or financing, while taking into consideration the resources, knowledge and constraints of the business partner. 4. As regards potential adverse impacts that could not be prevented or adequately mitigated by the appropriate measures listed in paragraph 2, the company may seek contractual assurances from an indirect business partner, with a view to achieving compliance with the company’s code of conduct or a prevention action plan. When such contractual assurances are obtained, paragraph 5 shall apply. 5. The contractual assurances referred to in paragraph 2, point (b), and in paragraph 4, shall be accompanied by appropriate measures to verify compliance. For the purposes of verifying compliance, the company may refer to independent third-party verification, including through industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives. When contractual assurances are obtained from, or a contract is entered into with, an SME, the terms used shall be fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory. The company shall also assess whether the contractual assurances of an SME should be accompanied by any of the appropriate measures for SMEs referred to in paragraph 2, point (e). Where measures to verify compliance are carried out in relation to SMEs, the company shall bear the cost of the independent third-party verification. Where the SME requests to pay at least a part of the cost of the independent third-party verification, or in agreement with the company, that SME may share the results of such verification with other companies. 6. As regards potential adverse impacts as referred to in paragraph 1 that could not be prevented or adequately mitigated by the measures set out in paragraphs 2, 4 and 5, the company shall, as a last resort, be required to refrain from entering into new or extending existing relations with a business partner in connection with which, or in the chain of activities of which, the impact has arisen and shall, where the law governing their relations so entitles them, take the following actions, as a last resort: Prior to temporarily suspending or terminating a business relationship, the company shall assess whether the adverse impacts from doing so can be reasonably expected to be manifestly more severe than the adverse impact that could not be prevented or adequately mitigated. Should that be the case, the company shall not be required to suspend or to terminate the business relationship, and shall be in a position to report to the competent supervisory authority about the duly justified reasons for such decision. Member States shall provide for an option to temporarily suspend or terminate the business relationship in contracts governed by their laws in accordance with the first subparagraph, except for contracts where the parties are obliged by law to enter into them. Where the company decides to temporarily suspend or to terminate the business relationship, it shall take steps to prevent, mitigate or bring to an end the impacts of the suspension or termination, shall provide reasonable notice to the business partner concerned and shall keep that decision under review. Where the company decides not to temporarily suspend or terminate the business relationship pursuant to this Article, it shall monitor the potential adverse impact and periodically assess its decision and whether further appropriate measures are available. Article 11 Bringing actual adverse impacts to an end 1. Member States shall ensure that companies take appropriate measures to bring actual adverse impacts that have been, or should have been, identified pursuant to Article 8 to an end, in accordance with Article 9 and with this Article. To determine the appropriate measures referred to in the first subparagraph, due account shall be taken of: 2. Where the adverse impact cannot immediately be brought to an end, Member States shall ensure that companies minimise the extent of that impact. 3. Companies shall be required to take the following appropriate measures, where relevant: 4. Companies may take, where relevant, appropriate measures in addition to the measures listed in paragraph 3, such as engaging with a business partner about the company’s expectations with regard to bringing actual adverse impacts to an end or minimising the extent of such impacts, or providing or enabling access to capacity-building, guidance, administrative and financial support such as loans or financing, while taking into consideration the resources, knowledge and constraints of the business partner. 5. As regards actual adverse impacts that could not be brought to an end or the extent of which could not be adequately minimised by the appropriate measures listed in paragraph 3, the company may seek contractual assurances from an indirect business partner, with a view to achieving compliance with the company’s code of conduct or a corrective action plan. When such contractual assurances are obtained, paragraph 6 shall apply. 6. The contractual assurances referred to in paragraph 3, point (c), and in paragraph 5, shall be accompanied by appropriate measures to verify compliance. For the purposes of verifying compliance, the company may refer to independent third-party verification, including through industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives. When contractual assurances are obtained from, or a contract is entered into with, an SME, the terms used shall be fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory. The company shall also assess whether the contractual assurances of an SME should be accompanied by any of the appropriate measures for SMEs referred to in paragraph 3, point (f). Where measures to verify compliance are carried out in relation to SMEs, the company shall bear the cost of the independent third-party verification. Where the SME requests to pay at least a part of the cost of the independent third-party verification, or in agreement with the company, the SME may share the results of such verification with other companies. 7. As regards actual adverse impacts as referred to in paragraph 1 that could not be brought to an end or the extent of which could not be minimised by the measures set out in paragraphs 3, 5 and 6, the company shall, as a last resort, be required to refrain from entering into new or extending existing relations with a business partner in connection with which, or in the chain of activities of which, the impact has arisen and shall, where the law governing their relations so entitles them, take the following actions, as a last resort: Prior to temporarily suspending or terminating a business relationship, the company shall assess whether the adverse impacts of doing so can be reasonably expected to be manifestly more severe than the adverse impact that could not be brought to an end or the extent of which could not be adequately minimised. Should that be the case, the company shall not be required to suspend or to terminate the business relationship, and shall be in a position to report to the competent supervisory authority about the duly justified reasons for such decision. Member States shall provide for an option to temporarily suspend or terminate the business relationship in contracts governed by their laws in accordance with the first subparagraph, except for contracts where the parties are obliged by law to enter into them. Where the company decides to temporarily suspend or to terminate the business relationship, the company shall take steps to prevent, mitigate or bring to an end the impacts of the suspension or termination, provide reasonable notice to the business partner and keep that decision under review. Where the company decides not to temporarily suspend or terminate the business relationship pursuant to this Article, the company shall monitor the actual adverse impact and periodically assess its decision and whether further appropriate measures are available. Article 12 Remediation of actual adverse impacts 1. Member States shall ensure that, where a company has caused or jointly caused an actual adverse impact, the company provides remediation. 2. Where the actual adverse impact is caused only by the company’s business partner, voluntary remediation may be provided by the company. The company may also use its ability to influence the business partner that is causing the adverse impact to provide remediation. Article 13 Meaningful engagement with stakeholders 1. Member States shall ensure that companies take appropriate measures to carry out effective engagement with stakeholders, in accordance with this Article. 2. Without prejudice to Directive (EU) 2016/943, when consulting with stakeholders, companies shall, as appropriate, provide them with relevant and comprehensive information, in order to carry out effective and transparent consultations. Without prejudice to Directive (EU) 2016/943, consulted stakeholders shall be allowed to make a reasoned request for relevant additional information, which shall be provided by the company within a reasonable period of time and in an appropriate and comprehensible format. If the company refuses a request for additional information, the consulted stakeholders shall be entitled to a written justification for that refusal. 3. Consultation of stakeholders shall take place at the following stages of the due diligence process: 4. Where it is not reasonably possible to carry out effective engagement with stakeholders to the extent necessary to comply with the requirements of this Directive, companies shall consult additionally with experts who can provide credible insights into actual or potential adverse impacts. 5. In consulting stakeholders, companies shall identify and address barriers to engagement and shall ensure that participants are not the subject of retaliation or retribution, including by maintaining confidentiality or anonymity. 6. Member States shall ensure that companies are allowed to fulfil the obligations laid down in this Article through industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives, as appropriate, provided that the consultation procedures meet the requirements set out in this Article. The use of industry and multi-stakeholder initiatives shall not be sufficient to fulfil the obligation to consult the company’s own employees and their representatives. 7. Engagement with employees and their representatives shall be without prejudice to relevant Union and national law in the field of employment and social rights as well as to the applicable collective agreements. Article 14 Notification mechanism and complaints procedure 1. Member States shall ensure that companies enable persons and entities listed in paragraph 2 to submit complaints to them where those persons or entities have legitimate concerns regarding actual or potential adverse impacts with respect to the companies’ own operations, the operations of their subsidiaries or the operations of their business partners in the chains of activities of the companies. 2. Member States shall ensure that complaints may be submitted by: 3. Member States shall ensure that companies establish a fair, publicly available, accessible, predictable and transparent procedure for dealing with the complaints referred to in paragraph 1, including a procedure where a company considers a complaint to be unfounded, and inform the relevant workers representatives and trade unions of that procedure. Companies shall take reasonably available measures to prevent any form of retaliation by ensuring the confidentiality of the identity of the person or organisation submitting the complaint, in accordance with national law. Where information needs to be shared, it shall be in a manner that does not endanger the complainant’s safety, including by not disclosing that complainant’s identity. Member States shall ensure that, where the complaint is well-founded, the adverse impact that is the subject matter of the complaint is deemed to be identified within the meaning of Article 8 and the company shall take appropriate measures in accordance with Articles 10, 11 and 12. 4. Member States shall ensure that complainants are entitled to: 5. Member States shall ensure that companies establish an accessible mechanism for the submission of notifications by persons and entities where they have information or concerns regarding actual or potential adverse impacts with respect to their own operations, the operations of their subsidiaries and the operations of their business partners in the chains of activities of the companies. The mechanism shall ensure that notifications can be made either anonymously or confidentially in accordance with national law. Companies shall take reasonably available measures to prevent any form of retaliation by ensuring that the identity of persons or entities that submit notifications remains confidential, in accordance with national law. The company may inform persons or entities that submit notifications about steps and actions taken or to be taken, where relevant. 6. Member States shall ensure that companies are allowed to fulfil the obligations laid down in paragraph 1, the first subparagraph of paragraph 3, and paragraph 5, through participation in collaborative complaints procedures and notification mechanisms, including those established jointly by companies, through industry associations, multi-stakeholder initiatives or global framework agreements, provided that such collaborative procedures and mechanisms meet the requirements set out in this Article. 7. The submission of a notification or complaint under this Article shall not be a prerequisite for, or preclude the persons submitting them from, having access to the procedures under Article 26 and 29 or to other, non-judicial, mechanisms. Article 15 Monitoring Member States shall ensure that companies carry out periodic assessments of their own operations and measures, those of their subsidiaries and, where related to the chain of activities of the company, those of their business partners, to assess the implementation and to monitor the adequacy and effectiveness of the identification, prevention, mitigation, bringing to an end and minimisation of the extent of adverse impacts. Such assessments shall be based, where appropriate, on qualitative and quantitative indicators and be carried out without undue delay after a significant change occurs, but at least every 12 months and whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that new risks of the occurrence of those adverse impacts may arise. Where appropriate, the due diligence policy, the adverse impacts identified and the appropriate measures that derived shall be updated in accordance with the outcome of such assessments and with due consideration of relevant information from stakeholders. Article 16 Communicating 1. Without prejudice to the exemption provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article, Member States shall ensure that companies report on the matters covered by this Directive by publishing on their website an annual statement. That annual statement shall be published: In the case of a company formed in accordance with the law of a third country, the statement shall also include the information required pursuant to Article 23(2) regarding the company’s authorised representative. 2. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to companies that are subject to sustainability reporting requirements in accordance with Article 19a, 29a or 40a of Directive 2013/34/EU, including those that are exempted in accordance with Article 19a(9) or Article 29a(8) of that Directive. 3. By 31 March 2027, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 34 in order to supplement this Directive by laying down the content and criteria for the reporting under paragraph 1, specifying, in particular, sufficiently detailed information on the description of due diligence, actual and potential adverse impacts identified, and appropriate measures taken with respect to those impacts. In preparing those delegated acts, the Commission shall take due account of, and align them as appropriate with, the sustainability reporting standards adopted pursuant to Articles 29b and 40b of Directive 2013/34/EU. When adopting the delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall ensure that there is no duplication in reporting requirements for companies referred to in Article 3(1)point (a)(iii), that are subject to reporting requirements under Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2019/2088, while maintaining in full the minimum obligations stipulated in this Directive. Article 17 Accessibility of information on the European single access point 1. From 1 January 2029, Member States shall ensure that, when making public the annual statement referred to in Article 16(1) of this Directive, companies submit that statement at the same time to the collection body referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article for the purpose of making it accessible on the European single access point (ESAP), as established by Regulation (EU) 2023/2859. Member States shall ensure that the information contained in the annual statement referred to in the first subparagraph complies with the following requirements: 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, point (b)(ii), Member States shall ensure that companies obtain a legal entity identifier. 3. By 31 December 2028, for the purposes of making the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article accessible on ESAP, Member States shall designate at least one collection body, as defined in Article 2, point (2), of Regulation (EU) 2023/2859, and notify the European Securities and Markets Authority thereof. 4. For the purposes of ensuring the efficient collection and management of information submitted in accordance with paragraph 1, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt implementing measures to specify: Article 18 Model contractual clauses In order to provide support to companies to facilitate their compliance with Article 10(2), point (b), and Article 11(3), point (c), the Commission, in consultation with Member States and stakeholders, shall adopt guidance about voluntary model contractual clauses, by 26 January 2027. Article 19 Guidelines 1. In order to provide support to companies or to Member State authorities on how companies should fulfil their due diligence obligations in a practical manner, and to provide support to stakeholders, the Commission, in consultation with Member States and stakeholders, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, the European Environment Agency, the European Labour Authority, and where appropriate with international organisations and other bodies having expertise in due diligence, shall issue guidelines, including general guidelines and sector-specific guidelines or guidelines for specific adverse impacts. 2. The guidelines to be issued pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include: 3. The guidelines referred to in paragraph 2, points (a), (d), and (e), shall be made available by 26 January 2027. The guidelines in paragraph 2, points (b), (f) and (g), shall be made available by 26 July 2027. 4. The guidelines referred to in this Article shall be made available in all the official languages of the Union. The Commission shall periodically review the guidelines and adapt them where appropriate. Article 20 Accompanying measures 1. Member States shall, in order to provide information and support to companies and their business partners and to stakeholders, set up and operate individually or jointly dedicated websites, platforms or portals. Specific consideration shall be given, in that respect, to the SMEs that are present in the chains of activities of companies. Those websites, platforms or portals shall, in particular, give access to: 2. Without prejudice to State aid rules, Member States may financially support SMEs. Member States may also provide support to stakeholders for the purpose of facilitating the exercise of rights laid down in this Directive. 3. The Commission may complement Member State support measures, building on existing Union action to support due diligence in the Union and in third countries, and may devise new measures, including facilitation of industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives to help companies fulfil their obligations. 4. Without prejudice to Articles 25, 26 and 29, companies may participate in industry and multi-stakeholder initiatives to support the implementation of the obligations referred to in Articles 7 to 16 to the extent that such initiatives are appropriate to support the fulfilment of those obligations. In particular, companies may, after having assessed their appropriateness, make use of or join relevant risk analysis carried out by industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives or by members of those initiatives and may take or join effective appropriate measures through such initiatives. When doing so, companies shall monitor the effectiveness of such measures and, continue to take appropriate measures where necessary to ensure the fulfilment of their obligations. The Commission and the Member States may facilitate the dissemination of information on such initiatives and their outcome. The Commission, in collaboration with Member States, shall issue guidance setting out fitness criteria and a methodology for companies to assess the fitness of industry and multi-stakeholder initiatives. 5. Without prejudice to Articles 25, 26 and 29, companies may use independent third-party verification on and from companies in their chains of activities to support the implementation of due diligence obligations to the extent that such verification is appropriate to support the fulfilment of the relevant obligations. Independent third-party verification may be carried out by other companies or by an industry or multi-stakeholder initiative. Independent third-party verifiers shall act with objectivity and complete independence from the company, be free from any conflicts of interest, remain free from external influence, whether direct or indirect, and shall refrain from any action incompatible with their independence. Depending on the nature of the adverse impact, they shall have experience and competence in environmental or human rights matters and shall be accountable for the quality and reliability of the verification they carry out. The Commission, in collaboration with Member States, shall issue guidance setting out fitness criteria and a methodology for companies to assess the fitness of third-party verifiers, and guidance for monitoring the accuracy, effectiveness and integrity of third-party verification. Article 21 Single helpdesk 1. The Commission shall establish a single helpdesk through which companies may seek information, guidance and support with regard to fulfilling their obligations provided for in this Directive. 2. Relevant national authorities in each Member State shall collaborate with the single helpdesk in order to assist in tailoring the information and guidance to national contexts and in disseminating that information and guidance. Article 22 Combating climate change 1. Member States shall ensure that companies referred to in Article 2(1), points (a), (b) and (c), and Article 2(2), points (a), (b) and (c), adopt and put into effect a transition plan for climate change mitigation which aims to ensure, through best efforts, that the business model and strategy of the company are compatible with the transition to a sustainable economy and with the limiting of global warming to 1,5 o C in line with the Paris Agreement and the objective of achieving climate neutrality as established in Regulation (EU) 2021/1119, including its intermediate and 2050 climate neutrality targets, and where relevant, the exposure of the company to coal-, oil- and gas-related activities. The design of the transition plan for climate change mitigation referred to in the first subparagraph shall contain: 2. Companies that report a transition plan for climate change mitigation in accordance with Article 19a, 29a or 40a, as the case may be, of Directive 2013/34/EU shall be deemed to have complied with the obligation to adopt a transition plan for climate change mitigation referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Companies that are included in the transition plan for climate change mitigation of their parent undertaking reported in accordance with Article 29a or 40a, as the case may be, of Directive 2013/34/EU, shall be deemed to have complied with the obligation to adopt a transition plan for climate change mitigation referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. 3. Member States shall ensure that the transition plan for climate change mitigation referred to in paragraph 1 is updated every 12 months and contains a description of the progress the company has made towards achieving the targets referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, point (a). Article 23 Authorised representative 1. Member States shall require that a company referred to in Article 2(2) operating in a Member State designates as its authorised representative a natural or legal person that is established or domiciled in one of the Member States where it operates. The designation shall be valid when confirmed as accepted by the authorised representative. 2. Member States shall require that the authorised representative or the company notifies the name, address, email address and telephone number of the authorised representative to a supervisory authority in the Member State where the authorised representative is domiciled or established and, where it is different, the competent supervisory authority, as specified in Article 24(3). Member States shall ensure that the authorised representative is obliged to provide, upon request, a copy of the designation in an official language of a Member State to any of the supervisory authorities. 3. Member States shall require that the authorised representative or the company informs a supervisory authority in the Member State where the authorised representative is domiciled or established and, where it is different, the competent supervisory authority, as specified in Article 24(3), that the company is a company referred to in Article 2(2). 4. Member States shall require that each company empowers its authorised representative to receive communications from supervisory authorities on all matters necessary for compliance with and enforcement of provisions of national law transposing this Directive. Companies shall be required to provide their authorised representative with the necessary powers and resources to cooperate with supervisory authorities. 5. When a company referred to in Article 2(2) fails to comply with the obligations laid down in this Article, all Member States in which that company operates shall be competent to enforce the fulfilment of such obligations in accordance with their national law. A Member State that intends to enforce the obligations laid down in this Article shall notify the supervisory authorities through the European Network of Supervisory Authorities set up under Article 28 so that other Member States do not enforce them. Article 24 Supervisory authorities 1. Each Member State shall designate one or more supervisory authorities to supervise compliance with the obligations laid down in the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to Articles 7 to 16 and Article 22. 2. As regards a company referred to in Article 2(1), the competent supervisory authority shall be that of the Member State in which the company has its registered office. 3. As regards a company referred to in Article 2(2), the competent supervisory authority shall be that of the Member State in which the company has a branch. If the company does not have a branch in any Member State, or has branches located in different Member States, the competent supervisory authority shall be the supervisory authority of the Member State in which the company generated most of its net turnover in the Union in the financial year preceding the last financial year before the date indicated in Article 37 or the date on which the company first fulfils the criteria laid down in Article 2(2), whichever comes last. A company referred to in Article 2(2) may, on the basis of a change in circumstances leading to it generating most of its turnover in the Union in a different Member State, make a duly reasoned request to change the supervisory authority that is competent to regulate matters covered by this Directive in respect of that company. 4. Where a parent company fulfils the obligations resulting from this Directive on behalf of its subsidiaries in accordance with Article 6, the competent supervisory authority of the parent company shall cooperate with the competent supervisory authority of the subsidiary, which will remain competent to ensure that the subsidiary is subject to the exercise of powers in accordance with Article 25. In this regard, the European Network of Supervisory Authorities set up under Article 28 shall facilitate the necessary cooperation, coordination and provision of mutual assistance in accordance with Article 28. 5. Where a Member State designates more than one supervisory authority, it shall ensure that the respective competences of those supervisory authorities are clearly defined and that they cooperate closely and effectively with each other. 6. Member States may designate the authorities for the supervision of regulated financial undertakings also as supervisory authorities for the purposes of this Directive. 7. By 26 July 2026, Member States shall inform the Commission of the names and contact details of the supervisory authorities designated pursuant to this Article, as well as of their respective competences where there are several designated supervisory authorities. They shall inform the Commission of any changes thereto. 8. The Commission shall make publicly available, including on its website, a list of the supervisory authorities, and, where a Member State has several supervisory authorities, the respective competences of those authorities in relation to this Directive. The Commission shall regularly update the list on the basis of the information received from the Member States. 9. Member States shall guarantee the independence of the supervisory authorities and ensure that they, and all persons working for or who have worked for them, and auditors, experts and any other persons acting on their behalf, exercise their powers impartially, transparently and with due respect for obligations of professional secrecy. In particular, Member States shall ensure that the supervisory authorities are legally and functionally independent, free from external influence, whether direct or indirect, including from the companies falling within the scope of this Directive or other market interests, that their staff and the persons responsible for the management are free from conflicts of interest, subject to confidentiality requirements, and refrain from any action incompatible with their duties. 10. Member States shall ensure that supervisory authorities publish and make accessible online an annual report on their activities under this Directive. Article 25 Powers of supervisory authorities 1. Member States shall ensure that the supervisory authorities have adequate powers and resources to carry out the tasks assigned to them under this Directive, including the power to require companies to provide information and carry out investigations related to compliance with the obligations set out in Articles 7 to 16. Member States shall require the supervisory authorities to supervise the adoption and design of the transition plan for climate change mitigation in accordance with the requirements provided for in Article 22(1). 2. A supervisory authority may initiate an investigation on its own initiative or as a result of substantiated concerns communicated to it pursuant to Article 26, where it considers that it has sufficient information indicating a possible breach by a company of the obligations provided for in the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive. 3. Inspections shall be conducted in compliance with the national law of the Member State in which the inspection is carried out and after prior warning has been given to the company, except where prior warning would hinder the effectiveness of the inspection. Where, as part of its investigation, a supervisory authority wishes to carry out an inspection on the territory of a Member State other than its own, it shall seek assistance from the supervisory authority in that Member State pursuant to Article 28(3). 4. If, as a result of the actions taken pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2, a supervisory authority identifies a failure to comply with the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive, it shall grant the company concerned an appropriate period of time to take remedial action, if such action is possible. Taking remedial action shall not preclude the imposition of penalties or the triggering of civil liability, in accordance with Articles 27 and 29, respectively. 5. When carrying out their tasks, supervisory authorities shall have at least the power to: 6. Supervisory authorities shall exercise the powers referred to in this Article in accordance with national law: 7. Member States shall ensure that each natural or legal person has the right to an effective judicial remedy against a legally binding decision by a supervisory authority concerning them, in accordance with national law. 8. Member States shall ensure that the supervisory authorities keep records of the investigations referred to in paragraph 1, indicating, in particular, their nature and result, as well as records of any enforcement action taken under paragraph 5. 9. Decisions of supervisory authorities regarding a company’s compliance with the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive shall be without prejudice to the company’s civil liability under Article 29. Article 26 Substantiated concerns 1. Member States shall ensure that natural and legal persons are entitled to submit substantiated concerns, through easily accessible channels, to any supervisory authority when they have reasons to believe, on the basis of objective circumstances, that a company is failing to comply with the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive. 2. Member States shall ensure that, where persons submitting substantiated concerns so request, the supervisory authority takes the necessary measures for the appropriate protection of the identity of that person and their personal information, which, if disclosed, would be harmful to that person. 3. Where a substantiated concern falls under the competence of another supervisory authority, the authority receiving the substantiated concern shall transmit it to that authority. 4. Member States shall ensure that supervisory authorities assess the substantiated concerns in an appropriate period of time and, where appropriate, exercise their powers as referred to in Article 25. 5. The supervisory authority shall, as soon as possible and in accordance with the relevant provisions of national law and in compliance with Union law, inform persons referred to in paragraph 1 of the result of the assessment of their substantiated concerns and shall provide the reasoning for that result. The supervisory authority shall also inform persons submitting such substantiated concerns who have, in accordance with national law, a legitimate interest in the matter, of its decision to accept or refuse any request for action, as well as of a description of the further steps and measures, and practical information on access to administrative and judicial review procedures. 6. Member States shall ensure that persons submitting substantiated concerns in accordance with this Article and having, in accordance with national law, a legitimate interest in the matter, have access to a court or other independent and impartial public body competent to review the procedural and substantive legality of the decisions, acts or failure to act of the supervisory authority. Article 27 Penalties 1. Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties, including pecuniary penalties, applicable to infringements of the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive, and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 2. In deciding whether to impose penalties and, if such penalties are imposed, in determining their nature and appropriate level, due account shall be taken of: 3. Member States shall provide for at least the following penalties: 4. When pecuniary penalties are imposed, they shall be based on the company’s net worldwide turnover. The maximum limit of pecuniary penalties shall be not less than 5 % of the net worldwide turnover of the company in the financial year preceding that of the decision to impose the fine. Member States shall ensure that, with regard to companies referred to in Article 2(1), point (b), and Article 2(2), point (b), pecuniary penalties are calculated taking into account the consolidated turnover reported by the ultimate parent company. 5. Member States shall ensure that any decision of the supervisory authorities concerning penalties related to the infringements of the provisions of national law adopted pursuant to this Directive is published, remains publicly available for at least five years and is sent to the European Network of Supervisory Authorities set up under Article 28. The published decision shall not contain any personal data within the meaning of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Article 28 European Network of Supervisory Authorities 1. The Commission shall set up a European Network of Supervisory Authorities, composed of representatives of the supervisory authorities. The European Network of Supervisory Authorities shall facilitate the cooperation of the supervisory authorities and the coordination and alignment of regulatory, investigative, sanctioning and supervisory practices of the supervisory authorities and, as appropriate, the sharing of information among them. The Commission may invite Union agencies with relevant expertise in the areas covered by this Directive to join the European Network of Supervisory Authorities. 2. Member States shall cooperate with the European Network of Supervisory Authorities in order to identify the companies within their jurisdiction, in particular by providing all necessary information in order to assess whether a third-country company fulfils the criteria laid down in Article 2. The Commission shall set up a secured system for the exchange of information regarding the net turnover generated in the Union by a company referred to in Article 2(2) that does not have a branch in any Member State or has branches located in different Member States, through which Member States shall regularly communicate information they have regarding the net turnover generated by such companies. The Commission shall analyse that information within a reasonable period of time and notify the Member State where the company generated most of its net turnover in the Union in the financial year preceding the last financial year, that the company is a company referred to in Article 2(2) and the supervisory authority of the Member State is competent in accordance with Article 24(3). 3. Supervisory authorities shall provide each other with relevant information and mutual assistance in carrying out their duties and shall put in place measures for effective cooperation with each other. Mutual assistance shall include collaboration with a view to exercising the powers referred to in Article 25, including in relation to inspections and information requests. 4. Supervisory authorities shall take all appropriate steps needed to reply to a request for assistance by another supervisory authority without undue delay and no later than 1 month after receiving the request. Where necessary due to the circumstances of the case, the period may be extended by a maximum of two months based on a proper justification. Such steps may include, in particular, the transmission of relevant information on the conduct of an investigation. 5. Requests for assistance shall contain all the necessary information, including the purpose of and reasons for the request. Supervisory authorities shall only use the information received through a request for assistance for the purpose for which it was requested. 6. The requested supervisory authority shall inform the requesting supervisory authority of the results or, as the case may be, of the progress regarding the measures to be taken in order to respond to the request for assistance. 7. Supervisory authorities shall not charge each other fees for actions and measures taken pursuant to a request for assistance. However, supervisory authorities may agree on rules to indemnify each other for specific expenditure arising from the provision of assistance in exceptional cases. 8. The supervisory authority that is competent pursuant to Article 24(3) shall inform the European Network of Supervisory Authorities of that fact and of any request to change the competent supervisory authority. 9. When doubts exist as to the attribution of competence, the information on which that attribution is based will be shared with the European Network of Supervisory Authorities, which may coordinate efforts to find a solution. 10. The European Network of Supervisory Authorities shall publish: Article 29 Civil liability of companies and the right to full compensation 1. Member States shall ensure that a company can be held liable for damage caused to a natural or legal person, provided that: A company cannot be held liable if the damage was caused only by its business partners in its chain of activities. 2. Where a company is held liable in accordance with paragraph 1, a natural or legal person shall have the right to full compensation for the damage, in accordance with national law. Full compensation under this Directive shall not lead to overcompensation, whether by means of punitive, multiple or other types of damages. 3. Member States shall ensure that: 4. Companies that have participated in industry or multi-stakeholder initiatives, or used independent third-party verification or contractual clauses to support the implementation of due diligence obligations may nevertheless be held liable in accordance with this Article. 5. The civil liability of a company for damages arising under this provision shall be without prejudice to the civil liability of its subsidiaries or of any direct and indirect business partners in the chain of activities of the company. When the damage was caused jointly by the company and its subsidiary, direct or indirect business partner, they shall be liable jointly and severally, without prejudice to the provisions of national law concerning the conditions of joint and several liability and the rights of recourse. 6. The civil liability rules under this Directive shall not limit companies’ liability under Union or national legal systems and shall be without prejudice to Union or national rules on civil liability related to adverse human rights impacts or to adverse environmental impacts that provide for liability in situations not covered by or providing for stricter liability than this Directive. 7. Member States shall ensure that the provisions of national law transposing this Article are of overriding mandatory application in cases where the law applicable to claims to that effect is not the national law of a Member State. Article 30 Reporting of breaches and protection of reporting persons Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that Directive (EU) 2019/1937 applies to the reporting of breaches of the provisions of national law transposing this Directive and the protection of persons reporting such breaches. Article 31 Public support, public procurement and public concessions Member States shall ensure that compliance with the obligations resulting from the provisions of national law transposing this Directive, or their voluntary implementation, qualifies as an environmental or social aspect that contracting authorities may, in accordance with Directives 2014/23/EU, 2014/24/EU and 2014/25/EU, take into account as part of the award criteria for public and concession contracts, and as an environmental or social condition that contracting authorities may, in accordance with those Directives, lay down in relation to the performance of public and concession contracts. Article 32 Amendment to Directive (EU) 2019/1937 In Directive (EU) 2019/1937, point E.2 of Part I of the Annex, the following point is added: Article 33 Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2023/2859 In Regulation (EU) 2023/2859, part B of the Annex, the following point is added: Article 34 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 3(2) and Article 16 shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from 25 July 2024. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 3(2) and Article 16 may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making. 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 3(2) or Article 16 shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 35 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 48 ) . 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Article 36 Review and reporting 1. The Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the necessity of laying down additional sustainability due diligence requirements tailored to regulated financial undertakings with respect to the provision of financial services and investment activities, and the options for such due diligence requirements as well as their impacts, in line with the objectives of this Directive. The report shall take into account other Union legislative acts that apply to regulated financial undertakings. It shall be published at the earliest possible opportunity after 25 July 2024, but no later than 26 July 2026. It shall be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal. 2. By 26 July 2030, and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the implementation of this Directive and its effectiveness in reaching its objectives, in particular in addressing adverse impacts. The report shall be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal. The first report shall, inter alia, assess the following issues: Article 37 Transposition 1. Member States shall adopt and publish, by 26 July 2026, the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive. They shall forthwith communicate the text of those measures to the Commission. They shall apply those measures: When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. Member States shall determine how such reference is to be made. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main measures of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 38 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 39 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 13 June 2024. For the European Parliament The President R. METSOLA For the Council The President M. MICHEL ( 1 ) OJ C 443, 22.11.2022, p. 81 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 24 April 2024 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 24 May 2024. ( 3 ) OJ L 282, 19.10.2016, p. 4 . ( 4 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) No 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) ( OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Decision (EU) 2022/591 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 April 2022 on a General Union Environment Action Programme to 2030 ( OJ L 114, 12.4.2022, p. 22 ). ( 6 ) Directive (EU) 2024/1619 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2024 amending Directive 2013/36/EU as regards supervisory powers, sanctions, third-country branches, and environmental, social and governance risks (Capital Requirements Directive) ( OJ L, 2024/1619, 19.6.2024, ELI: ). ( 7 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/821 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017 laying down supply chain due diligence obligations for Union importers of tin, tantalum and tungsten, their ores, and gold originating from conflict-affected and high-risk areas ( OJ L 130, 19.5.2017, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2023 concerning batteries and waste batteries, amending Directive 2008/98/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and repealing Directive 2006/66/EC ( OJ L 191, 28.7.2023, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/1115 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2023 on the making available on the Union market and the export from the Union of certain commodities and products associated with deforestation and forest degradation and repealing Regulation (EU) No 995/2010 ( OJ L 150, 9.6.2023, p. 206 ). ( 10 ) Directive (EU) 2016/2341 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2016 on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision (IORPs) ( OJ L 354, 23.12.2016, p. 37 ). ( 11 ) Directive (EU) 2016/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on the protection of undisclosed know-how and business information (trade secrets) against their unlawful acquisition, use and disclosure ( OJ L 157, 15.6.2016, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/821 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2021 setting up a Union regime for the control of exports, brokering, technical assistance, transit and transfer of dual-use items ( OJ L 206, 11.6.2021, p. 1 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/125 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 January 2019 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment ( OJ L 30, 31.1.2019, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Directive 96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1996 concerning the posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services ( OJ L 18, 21.1.1997, p. 1 ). ( 15 ) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC ( OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19 ). ( 16 ) Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2019 on the protection of persons who report breaches of Union law ( OJ L 305, 26.11.2019, p. 17 ). ( 17 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-related disclosures in the financial services sector ( OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1 ). ( 18 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/2859 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2023 establishing a European single access point providing centralised access to publicly available information of relevance to financial services, capital markets and sustainability ( OJ L, 2023/2859, 20.12.2023, ELI: ). ( 19 ) Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on market abuse (market abuse regulation) and repealing Directive 2003/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Directives 2003/124/EC, 2003/125/EC and 2004/72/EC ( OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 1 ). ( 20 ) Council Directive 2001/86/EC of 8 October 2001 supplementing the Statute for a European company with regard to the involvement of employees ( OJ L 294, 10.11.2001, p. 22 ). ( 21 ) Directive 2002/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2002 establishing a general framework for informing and consulting employees in the European Community — Joint declaration of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on employee representation ( OJ L 80, 23.3.2002, p. 29 ). ( 22 ) Directive 2009/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 on the establishment of a European Works Council or a procedure in Community-scale undertakings and Community-scale groups of undertakings for the purposes of informing and consulting employees ( OJ L 122, 16.5.2009, p. 28 ). ( 23 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) ( OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1 ). ( 24 ) Directive (EU) 2020/1828 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2020 on representative actions for the protection of the collective interests of consumers and repealing Directive 2009/22/EC ( OJ L 409, 4.12.2020, p. 1 ). ( 25 ) Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage ( OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 56 ). ( 26 ) Directive 2014/23/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the award of concession contracts ( OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 1 ). ( 27 ) Directive 2014/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on public procurement and repealing Directive 2004/18/EC ( OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 65 ). ( 28 ) Directive 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors and repealing Directive 2004/17/EC ( OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 243 ). ( 29 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ( 30 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC ( OJ L 295, 21.11.2018, p. 39 ). ( 31 ) Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative Investment Fund Managers and amending Directives 2003/41/EC and 2009/65/EC and Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No 1095/2010 ( OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 1 ). ( 32 ) Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) ( OJ L 302, 17.11.2009, p. 32 ). ( 33 ) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 ( OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1 ). ( 34 ) Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments and amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU ( OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 349 ). ( 35 ) Regulation (EU) No 345/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2013 on European venture capital funds ( OJ L 115, 25.4.2013, p. 1 ). ( 36 ) Regulation (EU) No 346/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2013 on European social entrepreneurship funds ( OJ L 115, 25.4.2013, p. 18 ). ( 37 ) Regulation (EU) 2015/760 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on European long-term investment funds ( OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 98 ). ( 38 ) Directive 2009/138/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance (Solvency II) ( OJ L 335, 17.12.2009, p. 1 ). ( 39 ) Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on OTC derivatives, central counterparties and trade repositories ( OJ L 201, 27.7.2012, p. 1 ). ( 40 ) Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on improving securities settlement in the European Union and on central securities depositories and amending Directives 98/26/EC and 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 ( OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 1 ). ( 41 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/2402 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2017 laying down a general framework for securitisation and creating a specific framework for simple, transparent and standardised securitisation, and amending Directives 2009/65/EC, 2009/138/EC and 2011/61/EU and Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No 648/2012 ( OJ L 347, 28.12.2017, p. 35 ). ( 42 ) Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on payment services in the internal market, amending Directives 2002/65/EC, 2009/110/EC and 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, and repealing Directive 2007/64/EC ( OJ L 337, 23.12.2015, p. 35 ). ( 43 ) Directive 2009/110/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on the taking up, pursuit and prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions amending Directives 2005/60/EC and 2006/48/EC and repealing Directive 2000/46/EC ( OJ L 267, 10.10.2009, p. 7 ). ( 44 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/1503 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 October 2020 on European crowdfunding service providers for business, and amending Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 and Directive (EU) 2019/1937 ( OJ L 347, 20.10.2020, p. 1 ). ( 45 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/1114 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2023 on markets in crypto-assets, and amending Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 1095/2010 and Directives 2013/36/EU and (EU) 2019/1937 ( OJ L 150, 9.6.2023, p. 40 ). ( 46 ) Directive 2004/109/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 on the harmonisation of transparency requirements in relation to information about issuers whose securities are admitted to trading on a regulated market and amending Directive 2001/34/EC ( OJ L 390, 31.12.2004, p. 38 ). ( 47 ) Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 July 2002 on the application of international accounting standards ( OJ L 243, 11.9.2002, p. 1 ). ( 48 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by the Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). Part I 1. RIGHTS AND PROHIBITIONS INCLUDED IN INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS 2. HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS INSTRUMENTS Part II PROHIBITIONS AND OBLIGATIONS INCLUDED IN ENVIRONMENTAL INSTRUMENTS ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017 on mercury, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1102/2008 ( OJ L 137, 24.5.2017, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1021 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on persistent organic pollutants ( OJ L 169, 25.6.2019, p. 45 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste ( OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 ). ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)