COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) No 134/2014 of 16 December 2013 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to environmental and propulsion unit performance requirements and amending Annex V thereof (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two- or three-wheel vehicles and quadricycles ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 18(3), Article 23(12), Article 24(3) and Article 74 thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes the detailed technical requirements and test procedures regarding environmental and propulsion unit performance for the approval of L-category vehicles and the systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and sets out a list of UNECE regulations and amendments thereto. Article 2 Definitions The definitions of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall apply. In addition, the following definitions shall apply: CHAPTER II OBLIGATIONS OF THE MANUFACTURER REGARDING THE ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE OF VEHICLES Article 3 Fitting and demonstration requirements related to the environmental performance of L-category vehicles 1. The manufacturer shall equip L-category vehicles with systems, components and separate technical units affecting the environmental performance of a vehicle that are designed, constructed and assembled so as to enable the vehicle in normal use and maintained according to the prescriptions of the manufacturer to comply with the detailed technical requirements and testing procedures of this Regulation. 2. The manufacturer shall demonstrate by means of physical demonstration testing to the approval authority that the L-category vehicles made available on the market, registered or entering into service in the Union comply with the detailed technical requirements and test procedures concerning the environmental performance of these vehicles laid down in Articles 5 to 15. 3. Where the manufacturer modifies the characteristics of the emission abatement system or performance of any of the emission-relevant components after the approved vehicle type with regard to environmental performance is placed on the market, the manufacturer shall report this to the approval authority without delay. The manufacturer shall provide evidence to the approval authority that the changed emission abatement system or component characteristics do not result in a worse environmental performance than that demonstrated at type-approval. 4. The manufacturer shall ensure that spare parts and equipment that are made available on the market or are entering into service in the Union comply with the detailed technical requirements and test procedures with respect to the environmental performance of the vehicles referred to in this Regulation. An approved L-category vehicle equipped with such a spare part or equipment shall meet the same test requirements and performance limit values as a vehicle equipped with an original part or equipment satisfying endurance requirements up to and including those set out in Article 22(2), Article 23 and Article 24 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 5. The manufacturer shall ensure that type-approval procedures for verifying conformity of production are followed as regards the detailed environmental and propulsion unit performance requirements laid down in Article 33 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and its Number C3 of Annex II. 6. The manufacturer shall submit to the approval authority a description of the measures taken to prevent tampering with the powertrain management system including the computers controlling the environmental and propulsion unit performance in accordance with Number C1 of Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 7. For hybrid applications or applications equipped with a stop-start system, the manufacturer shall install on the vehicle a ‘service mode’ that makes it possible, subject to environmental and propulsion unit performance testing or inspection, for the vehicle to continuously run the fuel-consuming engine. Where that inspection or test execution requires a special procedure, this shall be detailed in the service manual (or equivalent media). That special procedure shall not require the use of special equipment other than that provided with the vehicle. Article 4 Application of UNECE regulations 1. The UNECE regulations and amendments thereto set out in Annex I to this Regulation shall apply to environmental and propulsion unit performance type approval. 2. Vehicles with a maximum design vehicle speed ≤ 25 km/h shall meet all the relevant requirements of UNECE regulations applying to vehicles with a maximum vehicle design speed of > 25 km/h. 3. Article 5 Technical specifications, requirements and test procedures with respect to the environmental performance of L-category vehicles 1. The environmental and propulsion unit performance test procedures shall be performed in accordance with the test requirements laid down in this Regulation. 2. The test procedures shall be carried out or witnessed by the approval authority or, if authorised by the approval authority, by the technical service. The manufacturer shall select a representative parent vehicle to demonstrate compliance of the environmental performance of the L-category vehicles to the satisfaction of the approval authority complying with the requirements of Annex XI. 3. The measurement methods and test results shall be reported to the approval authority in the test report format pursuant to Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 4. The environmental performance type-approval regarding test types I, II, III, IV, V, VII and VIII shall extend to different vehicle variants, versions and propulsion types and families, provided that the vehicle version, propulsion or pollution-control system parameters specified in Annex XI are identical or remain within the prescribed and declared tolerances in that Annex. 5. Hybrid applications or applications equipped with a stop-start system shall be tested with the fuel-consuming engine running where specified in the test procedure. Article 6 Test type I requirements: tailpipe emissions after cold start The test procedures and requirements applying to test type I on tailpipe emissions after cold start referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex II to this Regulation. Article 7 Test type II requirements: tailpipe emissions at (increased) idle and at free acceleration The test procedures and requirements applying to test type II on tailpipe emissions at (increased) idle and at free acceleration referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex III to this Regulation. Article 8 Test type III requirements: emissions of crankcase gases The test procedures and requirements applying to test type III on emissions of crankcase gases referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex IV to this Regulation. Article 9 Test type IV requirements: evaporative emissions The test procedures and requirements applying to test type IV on evaporative emissions referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex V to this Regulation. Article 10 Test type V requirements: durability of pollution-control devices The type V durability of pollution-control devices test procedures and requirements referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex VI to this Regulation. Article 11 Test type VII requirements: CO 2 emissions, fuel consumption, electric energy consumption or electric range The test procedures and requirements applying to test type VII on energy efficiency with respect to CO 2 emissions, fuel consumption, electric energy consumption or electric range referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex VII to this Regulation. Article 12 Test type VIII requirements: OBD environmental tests The test procedures and requirements applying to test type VIII on the environmental part of on-board diagnostics (OBD) referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex VIII to this Regulation. Article 13 Test type IX requirements: sound level The type test procedures and requirements applying to test type IX on sound level referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex IX to this Regulation. CHAPTER III OBLIGATIONS OF MANUFACTURERS REGARDING THE PROPULSION PERFORMANCE OF VEHICLES Article 14 General obligations 1. Before making an L-category vehicle available on the market, the manufacturer shall demonstrate the propulsion unit performance of the L-category vehicle type to the approval authority in accordance with the requirements laid down in this Regulation. 2. When making an L-category vehicle available on the market or registering it or before its entry into service, the manufacturer shall ensure that the propulsion unit performance of the L-category vehicle type does not exceed that reported to the approval authority in the information folder provided for in Article 27 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3. The propulsion unit performance of a vehicle equipped with a replacement system, component or separate technical unit shall not exceed that of a vehicle equipped with the original systems, components or separate technical units. Article 15 Propulsion performance requirements The test procedures and requirements on propulsion unit performance referred to in Number A2 of Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, shall be conducted and verified in accordance with Annex X to this Regulation. CHAPTER IV OBLIGATIONS OF THE MEMBER STATES Article 16 Type-approval of L-category vehicles, their systems, components or separate technical units 1. Where a manufacturer so requests, the national authorities shall not, on grounds relating to the environmental performance of vehicle, refuse to grant an environmental and propulsion unit performance type-approval or national approval for a new type of vehicle, or prohibit the making available on the market, registration, or entry into service of a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, where the vehicle concerned complies with Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and the detailed test requirements laid down in this Regulation. 2. With effect from the dates laid down in Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles that do not comply with the Euro 4 environmental step set out in Parts A1, B1, C1 and D of Annex VI and Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 or the Euro 5 environmental step set out in Parts A2, B2, C2 and D of Annex VI and Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 consider certificates of conformity containing previous environmental limit values to be no longer valid for the purposes of Article 43(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and shall, on grounds relating to emissions, fuel or energy consumption, or the applicable functional safety or vehicle construction requirements, prohibit the making available on the market, registration or entry into service of such vehicles. 3. When applying Article 77(5) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, national authorities shall classify the approved vehicle type in accordance with Annex I to that Regulation. Article 17 Type-approval of replacement pollution-control devices 1. National authorities shall prohibit the making available on the market or installation on a vehicle of new replacement pollution-control devices intended to be fitted on vehicles approved under this Regulation where they are not of a type in respect of which an environmental and propulsion unit performance type-approval has been granted in compliance with Article 23(10) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and with this Regulation. 2. National authorities may continue to grant extensions to EU type-approvals referred to in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 for replacement pollution-control devices which are of a type in the scope of Directive 2002/24/EC under the terms which originally applied. National authorities shall prohibit the making available on the market or installation on a vehicle of such replacement pollution-control device type unless they are of a type in respect of which a relevant type-approval has been granted. 3. A replacement pollution-control device type intended to be fitted to a vehicle type-approved in compliance with this Regulation shall be tested in accordance with Appendix 10 to Annex II and with Annex VI. 4. Original equipment replacement pollution-control devices which are of a type covered by this Regulation and which are intended to be fitted to a vehicle which the relevant whole vehicle type-approval document refers to, do not need to comply with the test requirements of Appendix 10 to Annex II, provided they fulfil the requirements of point 4 of that Appendix. CHAPTER V FINAL PROVISIONS Article 18 Amendment of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 is amended in accordance with Annex XII. Article 19 Entry into force 1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . 2. It shall apply from 1 January 2016. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 16 December 2013. For the Commission The President José Manuel BARROSO ( 1 ) OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 52 . ( 2 ) Council Decision 97/836/EC of 27 November 1997 with a view to accession by the European Community to the Agreement of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe concerning the adoption of uniform technical prescriptions for wheeled vehicles, equipment and parts which can be fitted to or be used on wheeled vehicles and the conditions for reciprocal recognition of approvals granted on the basis of these prescriptions (‘Revised 1958 Agreement’) ( OJ L 346, 17.12.1997, p. 78 ). ( 3 ) OJ L 226, 18.8.1997, p. 1 . ( 4 ) ‘Measurement procedure for two-wheel motorcycles equipped with a positive or compression ignition engine with regard to the emissions of gaseous pollutants, CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption (UN document reference ECE/TRANS/180/Add2e of 30 August 2005)’ including amendment 1 (UNECE document reference ECE/TRANS/180a2a1e of 29 January 2008). ( 5 ) The WMTC stage 2 is equal to the WMTC stage 1 amended by corrigendum 2 of addendum 2 (ECE/TRANS/180a2c2e of 9 September 2009) and corrigendum 1 of amendment 1 (ECE/TRANS/180a2a1c1e of 9 September 2009). ( 6 ) In addition, the corrigenda and amendments identified in the environmental effect study referred to in Article 23 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 will be taken into account, as well as corrigenda and amendments proposed and adopted by UNECE WP29 as continuous improvement of the world-harmonised test cycle for L-category vehicles. LIST OF ANNEXES ANNEX I List of UNECE regulations which apply on a compulsory basis Explanatory note: The fact that a system or component is included in this list does not make its installation mandatory. For certain components, however, mandatory installation requirements are laid down in other annexes to this Regulation. ANNEX II Test type I requirements: tailpipe emissions after cold start 1. Introduction 2. General requirements 3. Performance requirements The applicable performance requirements for EU type-approval are referred to in Parts A, B and C of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 4. Test conditions 4.1. Test room and soak area 4.1.1. Test room The test room with the chassis dynamometer and the gas sample collection device shall have a temperature of 298,2 ± 5 K (25 ± 5 °C). The room temperature shall be measured in the vicinity of the vehicle cooling blower (fan) before and after the type I test. 4.1.2. Soak area The soak area shall have a temperature of 298,2 ± 5 K (25 ± 5 °C) and be such that the test vehicle to be preconditioned can be parked in accordance with point 5.2.4. of this Annex. 4.2. Test vehicle 4.2.1. General All components of the test vehicle shall conform to those of the production series or, if the vehicle is different from the production series, a full description shall be given in the test report. In selecting the test vehicle, the manufacturer and the technical service shall agree to the satisfaction of the approval authority which tested parent vehicle is representative of the related vehicle propulsion family as laid down in Annex XI. 4.2.2. Run-in The vehicle shall be presented in good mechanical condition, properly maintained and used. It shall have been run in and driven at least 1 000 km before the test. The engine, drive train and vehicle shall be properly run in, in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements. 4.2.3. Adjustments The test vehicle shall be adjusted in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements, e.g. as regards the viscosity of the oils, or, if it differs from the production series, a full description shall be given in the test report. In case of a four by four drive, the axle to which the lowest torque is delivered may be deactivated in order to allow testing on a standard chassis dynamometer. 4.2.4. Test mass and load distribution The test mass, including the masses of the rider and the instruments, shall be measured before the beginning of the tests. The load shall be distributed across the wheels in conformity with the manufacturer’s instructions. 4.2.5. Tyres The tyres shall be of a type specified as original equipment by the vehicle manufacturer. The tyre pressures shall be adjusted to the specifications of the manufacturer or to those where the speed of the vehicle during the road test and the vehicle speed obtained on the chassis dynamometer are equalised. The tyre pressure shall be indicated in the test report. 4.3. L-category vehicle sub-classification Figure 1-1 provides a graphical overview of the L-category vehicle sub-classification in terms of engine capacity and maximum vehicle speed if subject to environmental test types I, VII and VIII, indicated by the (sub-)class numbers in the graph areas. The numerical values of the engine capacity and maximum vehicle speed shall not be rounded up or down. Figure 1-1 L-category vehicle sub-classification for environmental testing, test types I, VII and VIII 4.3.1. Class 1 L-category vehicles that fulfil the following specifications belong to class 1: Table 1-1 sub-classification criteria for class 1 L-category vehicles 4.3.2. Class 2 L-category vehicles that fulfil the following specifications belong to class 2 and shall be sub-classified in: Table 1-2 sub-classification criteria for class 2 L-category vehicles 4.3.3. Class 3 L-category vehicles that fulfil the following specifications belong to class 3 and shall be sub-classified in: Table 1-3 sub-classification criteria for class 3 L-category vehicles 4.3.4. WMTC, test cycle parts The WMTC test cycle (vehicle speed patterns) for type I, VII and VIII environmental tests consist of up to three parts as set out in Appendix 6. Depending on the L-vehicle category subject to the WMTC laid down in point 4.5.4.1. and its classification in terms of engine displacement and maximum design vehicle speed in accordance with point 4.3, the following WMTC test cycle parts must be run: Table 1-4 WMTC test cycle parts for class 1.2 and 3 L-category vehicles 4.4. Specification of the reference fuel The appropriate reference fuels as specified in Appendix 2 shall be used for testing. For the purpose of the calculation referred to in point 1.4 of Appendix 1 of Annex VII, for liquid fuels, the density measured at 288,2 K (15 °C) shall be used. 4.5. Type I test 4.5.1. Driver The test driver shall have a mass of 75 kg ± 5 kg. 4.5.2. Test bench specifications and settings 4.5.2.1. The dynamometer shall have a single roller for two-wheel L-category vehicles with a diameter of at least 400 mm. A chassis dynamometer equipped with dual rollers is permitted when testing tricycles with two front wheels or quadricycles. 4.5.2.2. The dynamometer shall be equipped with a roller revolution counter for measuring actual distance travelled. 4.5.2.3. Dynamometer flywheels or other means shall be used to simulate the inertia specified in point 5.2.2. 4.5.2.4. The dynamometer rollers shall be clean, dry and free from anything which might cause the tyre to slip. 4.5.2.5. Cooling fan specifications as follows: 4.5.2.6. The detailed requirements regarding test bench specifications are listed in Appendix 3. 4.5.3. Exhaust gas measurement system 4.5.3.1. The gas-collection device shall be a closed-type device that can collect all exhaust gases at the vehicle exhaust outlets on condition that it satisfies the backpressure condition of ± 125 mm H 2 O. An open system may be used if it is confirmed that all the exhaust gases are collected. The gas collection shall be such that there is no condensation which could appreciably modify the nature of exhaust gases at the test temperature. An example of a gas-collection device is illustrated in Figure 1-2: Figure 1-2 Equipment for sampling the gases and measuring their volume 4.5.3.2. A connecting tube shall be placed between the device and the exhaust gas sampling system. This tube and the device shall be made of stainless steel, or of some other material which does not affect the composition of the gases collected and which withstands the temperature of these gases. 4.5.3.3. A heat exchanger capable of limiting the temperature variation of the diluted gases in the pump intake to ± 5 K shall be in operation throughout the test. This exchanger shall be equipped with a preheating system capable of bringing the exchanger to its operating temperature (with the tolerance of ± 5 K) before the test begins. 4.5.3.4. A positive displacement pump shall be used to draw in the diluted exhaust mixture. This pump shall be equipped with a motor with several strictly controlled uniform speeds. The pump capacity shall be large enough to ensure the intake of the exhaust gases. A device using a critical-flow venturi (CFV) may also be used. 4.5.3.5. A device (T) shall be used for the continuous recording of the temperature of the diluted exhaust mixture entering the pump. 4.5.3.6. Two gauges shall be used, the first to ensure the pressure depression of the dilute exhaust mixture entering the pump relative to atmospheric pressure, and the second to measure the dynamic pressure variation of the positive displacement pump. 4.5.3.7. A probe shall be located near to, but outside, the gas-collecting device, to collect samples of the dilution air stream through a pump, a filter and a flow meter at constant flow rates throughout the test. 4.5.3.8. A sample probe pointed upstream into the dilute exhaust mixture flow, upstream of the positive displacement pump, shall be used to collect samples of the dilute exhaust mixture through a pump, a filter and a flow meter at constant flow rates throughout the test. The minimum sample flow rate in the sampling devices shown in Figure 1-2 and in point 4.5.3.7. shall be at least 150 litre/hour. 4.5.3.9. Three-way valves shall be used on the sampling system described in points 4.5.3.7. and 4.5.3.8. to direct the samples either to their respective bags or to the outside throughout the test. 4.5.3.10. Gas-tight collection bags 4.5.3.10.1. For dilution air and dilute exhaust mixture the collection bags shall be of sufficient capacity not to impede normal sample flow and shall not change the nature of the pollutants concerned. 4.5.3.10.2. The bags shall have an automatic self-locking device and shall be easily and tightly fastened either to the sampling system or the analysing system at the end of the test. 4.5.3.11. A revolution counter shall be used to count the revolutions of the positive displacement pump throughout the test. Note 2 : Attention shall be paid to the connecting method and the material or configuration of the connecting parts, because each section (e.g. the adapter and the coupler) of the sampling system can become very hot. If the measurement cannot be performed normally due to heat damage to the sampling system, an auxiliary cooling device may be used as long as the exhaust gases are not affected. Note 3 : With open type devices, there is a risk of incomplete gas collection and gas leakage into the test cell. There shall be no leakage throughout the sampling period. Note 4 : If a constant volume sampler (CVS) flow rate is used throughout the test cycle that includes low and high speeds all in one (i.e. part 1, 2 and 3 cycles), special attention shall be paid to the higher risk of water condensation in the high speed range. 4.5.3.12. Particulate mass emissions measurement equipment 4.5.3.12.1 Specification 4.5.3.12.1.1. System overview 4.5.3.12.1.1.1. The particulate sampling unit shall consist of a sampling probe located in the dilution tunnel, a particle transfer tube, a filter holder, a partial-flow pump, and flow rate regulators and measuring units. 4.5.3.12.1.1.2. It is recommended that a particle size pre-classifier (e.g. cyclone or impactor) be employed upstream of the filter holder. However, a sampling probe, used as an appropriate size-classification device such as that shown in Figure 1-6, is acceptable. 4.5.3.12.1.2. General requirements 4.5.3.12.1.2.1. The sampling probe for the test gas flow for particulates shall be so arranged within the dilution tract that a representative sample gas flow can be taken from the homogeneous air/exhaust mixture. 4.5.3.12.1.2.2. The particulate sample flow rate shall be proportional to the total flow of diluted exhaust gas in the dilution tunnel to within a tolerance of ±5 percent of the particulate sample flow rate. 4.5.3.12.1.2.3. The sampled dilute exhaust gas shall be maintained at a temperature below 325,2 K (52 °C) within 20 cm upstream or downstream of the particulate filter face, except in the case of a regeneration test, where the temperature shall be below 465,2 K (192 °C). 4.5.3.12.1.2.4. The particulate sample shall be collected on a single filter mounted in a holder in the sampled diluted exhaust gas flow 4.5.3.12.1.2.5. All parts of the dilution system and the sampling system from the exhaust pipe up to the filter holder which are in contact with raw and diluted exhaust gas shall be designed to minimise deposition or alteration of the particulates. All parts shall be made of electrically conductive materials that do not react with exhaust gas components, and shall be electrically grounded to prevent electrostatic effects. 4.5.3.12.1.2.6. If it is not possible to compensate for variations in the flow rate, provision shall be made for a heat exchanger and a temperature control device as specified in Appendix 4 so as to ensure that the flow rate in the system is constant and the sampling rate accordingly proportional. 4.5.3.12.1.3. Specific requirements 4.5.3.12.1.3.1. Particulate matter (PM) sampling probe 4.5.3.12.1.3.1.1. The sample probe shall deliver the particle-size classification performance described in point 4.5.3.12.1.3.1.4. It is recommended that this performance be achieved by the use of a sharp-edged, open-ended probe facing directly in the direction of flow, plus a pre-classifier (cyclone impactor, etc.). An appropriate sampling probe, such as that indicated in Figure 1-1, may alternatively be used provided it achieves the pre-classification performance described in point 4.5.3.12.1.3.1.4. 4.5.3.12.1.3.1.2. The sample probe shall be installed near the tunnel centreline between ten and 20 tunnel diameters downstream of the exhaust gas inlet to the tunnel and have an internal diameter of at least 12 mm. If more than one simultaneous sample is drawn from a single sample probe, the flow drawn from that probe shall be split into identical sub-flows to avoid sampling artefacts. If multiple probes are used, each probe shall be sharp-edged, open-ended and facing directly into the direction of flow. Probes shall be equally spaced at least 5 cm apart around the central longitudinal axis of the dilution tunnel. 4.5.3.12.1.3.1.3. The distance from the sampling tip to the filter mount shall be at least five probe diameters, but shall not exceed 1 020 mm. 4.5.3.12.1.3.1.4. The pre-classifier (e.g. cyclone, impactor, etc.) shall be located upstream of the filter holder assembly. The pre-classifier 50 percent cut point particle diameter shall be between 2.5 μm and 10 μm at the volumetric flow rate selected for sampling particulate mass emissions. The pre-classifier shall allow at least 99 percent of the mass concentration of 1 μm particles entering the pre-classifier to pass through the exit of the pre-classifier at the volumetric flow rate selected for sampling particulate mass emissions. However, a sampling probe, used as an appropriate size-classification device, such as that shown in Figure 1-6, is acceptable as an alternative to a separate pre-classifier. 4.5.3.12.1.3.2. Sample pump and flow meter 4.5.3.12.1.3.2.1. The sample gas flow measurement unit shall consist of pumps, gas flow regulators and flow measuring units. 4.5.3.12.1.3.2.2. The temperature of the gas flow in the flow meter may not fluctuate by more than ±3 K, except during regeneration tests on vehicles equipped with periodically regenerating after-treatment devices. In addition, the sample mass flow rate shall remain proportional to the total flow of diluted exhaust gas to within a tolerance of ± 5 percent of the particulate sample mass flow rate. Should the volume of flow change unacceptably as a result of excessive filter loading, the test shall be stopped. When the test is repeated, the rate of flow shall be decreased. 4.5.3.12.1.3.3. Filter and filter holder 4.5.3.12.1.3.3.1. A valve shall be located downstream of the filter in the direction of flow. The valve shall be responsive enough to open and close within one second of the start and end of the test. 4.5.3.12.1.3.3.2. It is recommended that the mass collected on the 47 mm diameter filter (P e ) is ≥ 20 μg and that the filter loading is maximised in line with the requirements of points 4.5.3.12.1.2.3. and 4.5.3.12.1.3.3. 4.5.3.12.1.3.3.3. For a given test, the gas filter face velocity shall be set to a single value within the range 20 cm/s to 80 cm/s, unless the dilution system is being operated with sampling flow proportional to CVS flow rate. 4.5.3.12.1.3.3.4. Fluorocarbon coated glass fibre filters or fluorocarbon membrane filters are required. All filter types shall have a 0,3 μm DOP (di-octylphthalate) or PAO (poly-alpha-olefin) CS 68649-12-7 or CS 68037-01-4 collection efficiency of at least 99 percent at a gas filter face velocity of 5,33 cm/s. 4.5.3.12.1.3.3.5. The filter holder assembly shall be of a design that provides an even flow distribution across the filter stain area. The filter stain area shall be at least 1 075 mm 2 . 4.5.3.12.1.3.4. Filter weighing chamber and balance 4.5.3.12.1.3.4.1. The microgram balance used to determine the weight of a filter shall have a precision (standard deviation) of 2 μg and resolution of 1 μg or better. It is recommended that the microbalance be checked at the start of each weighing session by weighing one reference weight of 50 mg. This weight shall be weighed three times and the average result recorded. The weighing session and balance are considered valid if the average result of the weighing is within ± 5 μg of the result from the previous weighing session. The weighing chamber (or room) shall meet the following conditions during all filter conditioning and weighing operations: It is recommended that temperature and humidity conditions be recorded along with sample and reference filter weights. 4.5.3.12.1.3.4.2. Buoyancy correction All filter weights shall be corrected for filter buoyancy in air. The buoyancy correction depends on the density of the sample filter medium, the density of air, and the density of the calibration weight used to calibrate the balance. The density of the air is dependent on the pressure, temperature and humidity. It is recommended that the temperature and dew point of the weighing environment be controlled to 295,2 K ± 1 K (22 °C ± 1 °C) and 282,7 ± 1 K (9,5 ± 1 °C) respectively. However, the minimum requirements stated in point 4.5.3.12.1.3.4.1. will also result in an acceptable correction for buoyancy effects. The correction for buoyancy shall be applied as follows: Equation 2-1: where: ρ air can be calculated as follows: Equation 2-2: where: The chamber (or room) environment shall be free of any ambient contaminants (such as dust) that would settle on the particulate filters during their stabilisation. Limited deviations from weighing room temperature and humidity specifications shall be allowed provided their total duration does not exceed 30 minutes in any one filter conditioning period. The weighing room shall meet the required specifications prior to personal entrance into the weighing room. No deviations from the specified conditions are permitted during the weighing operation. 4.5.3.12.1.3.4.3. The effects of static electricity shall be nullified. This may be achieved by grounding the balance through placement on an antistatic mat and neutralisation of the particulate filters prior to weighing using a Polonium neutraliser or a device of similar effect. Alternatively, nullification of static effects may be achieved through equalisation of the static charge. 4.5.3.12.1.3.4.4. A test filter shall be removed from the chamber no earlier than an hour before the test begins. 4.5.3.12.1.4. Recommended system description Figure 1-3 is a schematic drawing of the recommended particulate sampling system. Since various configurations can produce equivalent results, exact conformity with this figure is not required. Additional components such as instruments, valves, solenoids, pumps and switches may be used to provide additional information and coordinate the functions of component systems. Further components that are not needed to maintain accuracy with other system configurations may be excluded if their exclusion is based on good engineering judgment. Figure 1-3 Particulate sampling system A sample of the diluted exhaust gas is taken from the full flow dilution tunnel (DT) through the particulate sampling probe (PSP) and the particulate transfer tube (PTT) by means of the pump (P). The sample is passed through the particle size pre-classifier (PCF) and the filter holders (FH) that contain the particulate sampling filters. The flow rate for sampling is set by the flow controller (FC). 4.5.4. Driving schedules 4.5.4.1. Test cycles Test cycles (vehicle speed patterns) for the type I test consist of up to three parts, as laid down in Appendix 6. Depending on the vehicle (sub-)category, the following test cycle parts must be run: Table 1-5 Applicable test type I cycle for Euro 4 compliant vehicles Table 1-6 Applicable test type I cycle for Euro 5 compliant vehicles 4.5.4.2. Vehicle speed tolerances 4.5.4.2.1. The vehicle speed tolerance at any given time on the test cycles prescribed in point 4.5.4.1. is defined by upper and lower limits. The upper limit is 3,2 km/h higher than the highest point on the trace within one second of the given time. The lower limit is 3,2 km/h lower than the lowest point on the trace within one second of the given time. Vehicle speed variations greater than the tolerances (such as may occur during gear changes) are acceptable provided they occur for less than two seconds on any occasion. Vehicle speeds lower than those prescribed are acceptable provided the vehicle is operated at maximum available power during such occurrences. Figure 1-4 shows the range of acceptable vehicle speed tolerances for typical points. Figure 1-4 Drivers trace, allowable range 4.5.4.2.2. If the acceleration capability of the vehicle is not sufficient to carry out the acceleration phases or if the maximum design speed of the vehicle is lower than the prescribed cruising speed within the prescribed limits of tolerances, the vehicle shall be driven with the throttle fully open until the set speed is reached or at the maximum design speed achievable with fully opened throttle during the time that the set speed exceeds the maximum design speed. In both cases, point 4.5.4.2.1. is not applicable. The test cycle shall be carried on normally when the set speed is again lower than the maximum design speed of the vehicle. 4.5.4.2.3. If the period of deceleration is shorter than that prescribed for the corresponding phase, the set speed shall be restored by a constant vehicle speed or idling period merging into succeeding constant speed or idling operation. In such cases, point 4.5.4.2.1. is not applicable. 4.5.4.2.4. Apart from these exceptions, the deviations of the roller speed from the set speed of the cycles shall meet the requirements described in point 4.5.4.2.1. If not, the test results shall not be used for further analysis and the run must be repeated. 4.5.5. Gearshift prescriptions for the WMTC prescribed in Appendix 6 4.5.5.1. Test vehicles with automatic transmission 4.5.5.1.1. Vehicles equipped with transfer cases, multiple sprockets, etc., shall be tested in the configuration recommended by the manufacturer for street or highway use. 4.5.5.1.2. All tests shall be conducted with automatic transmissions in ‘Drive’ (highest gear). Automatic clutch-torque converter transmissions may be shifted as manual transmissions at the request of the manufacturer. 4.5.5.1.3. Idle modes shall be run with automatic transmissions in ‘Drive’ and the wheels braked. 4.5.5.1.4. Automatic transmissions shall shift automatically through the normal sequence of gears. The torque converter clutch, if applicable, shall operate as under real-world conditions. 4.5.5.1.5. The deceleration modes shall be run in gear using brakes or throttle as necessary to maintain the desired speed. 4.5.5.2. Test vehicles with manual transmission 4.5.5.2.1 Mandatory requirements 4.5.5.2.1.1. Step 1 — Calculation of shift speeds Upshift speeds (v 1→2 and v i→i+1 ) in km/h during acceleration phases shall be calculated using the following formulae: Equation 2-3: Equation 2-4: where: 4.5.5.2.1.2. Downshift speeds (v i→i-1 ) in km/h during cruise or deceleration phases in gears 4 (4th gear) to ng shall be calculated using the following formula: Equation 2-5: where: The downshift speed from gear 3 to gear 2 (v 3→2 ) shall be calculated using the following equation: Equation 2-6: where: The downshift speed from gear 2 to gear 1 (v 2→1 ) shall be calculated using the following equation: Equation 2-7: where: ndv 2 is the ratio between engine speed in min –1 and vehicle speed in km/h in gear 2 Since the cruise phases are defined by the phase indicator, slight speed increases could occur and it may be appropriate to apply an upshift. The upshift speeds (v 1→2 , v 2→3 and v i→i+1 ) in km/h during cruise phases shall be calculated using the following equations: Equation 2-7: Equation 2-8: Equation 2-9: 4.5.5.2.1.3. Step 2 — Gear choice for each cycle sample In order to avoid different interpretations of acceleration, deceleration, cruise and stop phases, corresponding indicators are added to the vehicle speed pattern as integral parts of the cycles (see tables in Appendix 6). The appropriate gear for each sample shall then be calculated according to the vehicle speed ranges resulting from the shift speed equations of point 4.5.5.2.1.1. and the phase indicators for the cycle parts appropriate for the test vehicle, as follows: The clutch shall be disengaged, if: 4.5.5.2.3. Step 3 — Corrections according to additional requirements 4.5.5.2.3.1. The gear choice shall be modified according to the following requirements: 4.5.5.2.2. Optional provisions The gear choice may be modified according to the following provisions: The use of gears lower than those determined by the requirements described in point 4.5.5.2.1. is permitted in any cycle phase. Manufacturers’ recommendations for gear use shall be followed if they do not result in gears higher than determined by the requirements of point 4.5.5.2.1. 4.5.5.2.3. Optional provisions Note 5 : The calculation programme to be found on the UN website at the following URL may be used as an aid for the gear selection: Explanations of the approach and the gearshift strategy and a calculation example are given in Appendix 9. 4.5.6. Dynamometer settings A full description of the chassis dynamometer and instruments shall be provided in accordance with Appendix 6. Measurements shall be taken to the accuracies specified in point 4.5.7. The running resistance force for the chassis dynamometer settings can be derived either from on-road coast-down measurements or from a running resistance table, with reference to Appendix 5 or 7 for a vehicle equipped with one wheel on the powered axle and to Appendix 8 for a vehicle with two or more wheels on the powered axles. 4.5.6.1. Chassis dynamometer setting derived from on-road coast-down measurements To use this alternative, on-road coast-down measurements shall be carried out as specified in Appendix 7 for a vehicle equipped with one wheel on the powered axle and Appendix 8 for a vehicle equipped with two or more wheels on the powered axles. 4.5.6.1.1. Requirements for the equipment The instrumentation for the speed and time measurement shall have the accuracies specified in point 4.5.7. 4.5.6.1.2. Inertia mass setting 4.5.6.1.2.1. The equivalent inertia mass mi for the chassis dynamometer shall be the flywheel equivalent inertia mass, mfi, closest to the sum of the mass in running order of the vehicle and the mass of the driver (75 kg). Alternatively, the equivalent inertia mass mi can be derived from Appendix 5. 4.5.6.1.2.2. If the reference mass m ref cannot be equalised to the flywheel equivalent inertia mass mi, to make the target running resistance force F * equal to the running resistance force F E (which is to be set to the chassis dynamometer), the corrected coast-down time ΔT E may be adjusted in accordance with the total mass ratio of the target coast-down time ΔT road in the following sequence: Equation 2-10: Equation 2-11: Equation 2-12: Equation 2-13: where: m r1 may be measured or calculated, in kilograms, as appropriate. As an alternative, m r1 may be estimated as f percent of m. 4.5.6.2. Running resistance force derived from a running resistance table 4.5.6.2.1. The chassis dynamometer may be set by the use of the running resistance table instead of the running resistance force obtained by the coast-down method. In this table method, the chassis dynamometer shall be set by the mass in running order regardless of particular L-category vehicle characteristics. Note 6 : Care shall be taken when applying this method to L-category vehicles with extraordinary characteristics. 4.5.6.2.2. The flywheel equivalent inertia mass mfi shall be the equivalent inertia mass m i specified in Appendix 5, 7 or 8 where applicable. The chassis dynamometer shall be set by the rolling resistance of the non-driven wheels (a) and the aero drag coefficient (b) specified in Appendix 5 or determined in accordance with the procedures set out in Appendix 7 or 8 respectively. 4.5.6.2.3 The running resistance force on the chassis dynamometer F E shall be determined using the following equation: Equation 2-14: 4.5.6.2.4. The target running resistance force F * shall be equal to the running resistance force obtained from the running resistance table F T , because the correction for the standard ambient conditions is not necessary. 4.5.7. Measurement accuracies Measurements shall be taken using equipment that fulfils the accuracy requirements in Table 1-7: Table 1-7 Required accuracy of measurements 5. Test procedures 5.1. Description of the type I test The test vehicle shall be subjected, according to its category, to test type I requirements as specified in this point 5. 5.1.1. Type I test (verifying the average emission of gaseous pollutants, CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption in a characteristic driving cycle) 5.1.1.1. The test shall be carried out by the method described in point 5.2. The gases shall be collected and analysed by the prescribed methods. 5.1.1.2. Number of tests 5.1.1.2.1. The number of tests shall be determined as shown in figure 1-5. R i1 to R i3 describe the final measurement results for the first (No 1) test to the third (No 3) test and the gaseous pollutant, carbon dioxide emission, fuel / energy consumption or electric range as laid down in Annex VII. ‘L x ’ represents the limit values L 1 to L 5 as defined in Parts A, B and C of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 5.1.1.2.2. In each test, the masses of the carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides, carbon dioxide and the fuel consumed during the test shall be determined. The mass of particulate matter shall be determined only for those (sub-)categories referred to in Parts A and B of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 (see explanatory notes 8 and 9 at the end of Annex VIII to that Regulation). Figure 1-5 Flowchart for the number of type I tests First Test R i1 ≤ 0,7*L accepted R i1 > 1,1*L Second Test R i1 ≤ 0,85*L and R i2 < L and R i1 + R i2 < 1,7*L accepted R i2 > 1,1*L or R i1 ≥ L and R i2 ≥ L Third Test R i1 < L and R i2 < L and R i3 < L accepted R i1 > 1,1*L R i3 ≥ L and R i2 ≥ L or R i1 ≥ L (R i1 + R i2 + R i3 )/3 < L accepted rejected 5.2. Type I tests 5.2.1. Overview 5.2.1.1. The type I test consists of prescribed sequences of dynamometer preparation, fuelling, parking, and operating conditions. 5.2.1.2. The test is designed to determine hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, particulate matter mass emissions if applicable and fuel / energy consumption as well as electric range while simulating real-world operation. The test consists of engine start-ups and L-category vehicle operation on a chassis dynamometer, through a specified driving cycle. A proportional part of the diluted exhaust emissions is collected continuously for subsequent analysis, using a constant volume (variable dilution) sampler (CVS). 5.2.1.3. Except in cases of component malfunction or failure, all emission-control systems installed on or incorporated in a tested L-category vehicle shall be functioning during all procedures. 5.2.1.4. Background concentrations are measured for all emission constituents for which emissions measurements are taken. For exhaust testing, this requires sampling and analysis of the dilution air. 5.2.1.5. Background particulate mass measurement The particulate background level of the dilution air may be determined by passing filtered dilution air through the particulate filter. This shall be drawn from the same point as the particulate matter sample, if a particulate mass measurement is applicable according to Annex VI(A) to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. One measurement may be performed prior to or after the test. Particulate mass measurements may be corrected by subtracting the background contribution from the dilution system. The permissible background contribution shall be ≤ 1 mg/km (or equivalent mass on the filter). If the background contribution exceeds this level, the default figure of 1 mg/km (or equivalent mass on the filter) shall be used. Where subtraction of the background contribution gives a negative result, the particulate mass result shall be considered to be zero. 5.2.2. Dynamometer settings and verification 5.2.2.1. Test vehicle preparation 5.2.2.1.1. The manufacturer shall provide additional fittings and adapters, as required to accommodate a fuel drain at the lowest point possible in the tanks as installed on the vehicle, and to provide for exhaust sample collection. 5.2.2.1.2. The tyre pressures shall be adjusted to the manufacturer’s specifications to the satisfaction of the technical service or so that the speed of the vehicle during the road test and the vehicle speed obtained on the chassis dynamometer are equal. 5.2.2.1.3. The test vehicle shall be warmed up on the chassis dynamometer to the same condition as it was during the road test. 5.2.2.2. Dynamometer preparation, if settings are derived from on-road coast-down measurements Before the test, the chassis dynamometer shall be appropriately warmed up to the stabilised frictional force Ff. The load on the chassis dynamometer FE is, in view of its construction, composed of the total friction loss Ff, which is the sum of the chassis dynamometer rotating frictional resistance, the tyre rolling resistance, the frictional resistance of the rotating parts in the powertrain of the vehicle and the braking force of the power absorbing unit (pau) Fpau, as in the following equation: Equation 2-15: The target running resistance force F * derived from Appendix 5 or 7 for a vehicle equipped with one wheel on the powered axle and Appendix 8 for a vehicle with two or more wheels on the powered axles, shall be reproduced on the chassis dynamometer in accordance with the vehicle speed, i.e.: Equation 2-16: The total friction loss Ff on the chassis dynamometer shall be measured by the method in point 5.2.2.2.1. or 5.2.2.2.2. 5.2.2.2.1. Motoring by chassis dynamometer This method applies only to chassis dynamometers capable of driving an L-category vehicle. The test vehicle shall be driven steadily by the chassis dynamometer at the reference speed v 0 with the drive train engaged and the clutch disengaged. The total friction loss Ff (v 0 ) at the reference speed v 0 is given by the chassis dynamometer force. 5.2.2.2.2. Coast-down without absorption The method for measuring the coast-down time is the coast-down method for the measurement of the total friction loss F f . The vehicle coast-down shall be performed on the chassis dynamometer by the procedure described in Appendix 5 or 7 for a vehicle equipped with one wheel on the powered axle and Appendix 8 for a vehicle equipped with two or more wheels on the powered axles, with zero chassis dynamometer absorption. The coast-down time Δti corresponding to the reference speed v 0 shall be measured. The measurement shall be carried out at least three times, and the mean coast-down time Equation 2-17: 5.2.2.2.3. Total friction loss The total friction loss F f(v 0 ) at the reference speed v 0 is calculated using the following equation: Equation 2-18: 5.2.2.2.4. Calculation of power-absorption unit force The force F pau (v 0 ) to be absorbed by the chassis dynamometer at the reference speed v 0 is calculated by subtracting F f(v0) from the target running resistance force F * (v 0 ) as shown in the following equation: Equation 2-19: 5.2.2.2.5. Chassis dynamometer setting Depending on its type, the chassis dynamometer shall be set by one of the methods described in points 5.2.2.2.5.1. to 5.2.2.2.5.4. The chosen setting shall be applied to the pollutant and CO 2 emission measurements as well as for the energy efficiency measurements (fuel /energy consumption and electric range) laid down in Annex VII. 5.2.2.2.5.1. Chassis dynamometer with polygonal function In the case of a chassis dynamometer with polygonal function, in which the absorption characteristics are determined by load values at several speed points, at least three specified speeds, including the reference speed, shall be chosen as the setting points. At each setting point, the chassis dynamometer shall be set to the value Fpau (vj) obtained in point 5.2.2.2.4. 5.2.2.2.5.2. Chassis dynamometer with coefficient control In the case of a chassis dynamometer with coefficient control, in which the absorption characteristics are determined by given coefficients of a polynomial function, the value of Fpau (vj) at each specified speed shall be calculated by the procedure in point 5.2.2.2. Assuming the load characteristics to be: Equation 2-20: where: the coefficients a, b and c shall be determined by the polynomial regression method. The chassis dynamometer shall be set to the coefficients a, b and c obtained by the polynomial regression method. 5.2.2.2.5.3. Chassis dynamometer with F * polygonal digital setter In the case of a chassis dynamometer with a polygonal digital setter, where a central processor unit is incorporated in the system, F * is input directly, and Δt i , F f and F pau are automatically measured and calculated to set the chassis dynamometer to the target running resistance force: Equation 2-21: In this case, several points in succession are directly input digitally from the data set of F * j and v j , the coast-down is performed and the coast-down time Δt j is measured. After the coast-down test has been repeated several times, F pau is automatically calculated and set at L-category vehicle speed intervals of 0,1 km/h, in the following sequence: Equation 2-22: Equation 2-23: Equation 2-24: 5.2.2.2.5.4. Chassis dynamometer with f * 0 , f * 2 coefficient digital setter In the case of a chassis dynamometer with a coefficient digital setter, where a central processor unit is incorporated in the system, the target running resistance force In this case, the coefficients f * 0 and f * 2 are directly input digitally; the coast-down is performed and the coast-down time Δti is measured. Fpau is automatically calculated and set at vehicle speed intervals of 0,06 km/h, in the following sequence: Equation 2-25: Equation 2-26: Equation 2-27: 5.2.2.2.6. Dynamometer settings verification 5.2.2.2.6.1. Verification test Immediately after the initial setting, the coast-down time Δt E on the chassis dynamometer corresponding to the reference speed (v 0 ) shall be measured by the procedure set out in Appendix 5 or 7 for a vehicle equipped with one wheel on the powered axle and in Appendix 8 for a vehicle with two or more wheels on the powered axles. The measurement shall be carried out at least three times, and the mean coast-down time Δt E shall be calculated from the results. The set running resistance force at the reference speed, F E (v 0 ) on the chassis dynamometer is calculated by the following equation: Equation 2-28: 5.2.2.2.6.2. Calculation of setting error The setting error ε is calculated by the following equation: Equation 2-29: The chassis dynamometer shall be readjusted if the setting error does not satisfy the following criteria: The procedure in points 5.2.2.2.6.1. to 5.2.2.2.6.2. shall be repeated until the setting error satisfies the criteria. The chassis dynamometer setting and the observed errors shall be recorded. Specimen record forms are provided in the template of the test report laid down in accordance with Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 5.2.2.3. Dynamometer preparation, if settings are derived from a running resistance table 5.2.2.3.1. The specified vehicle speed for the chassis dynamometer The running resistance on the chassis dynamometer shall be verified at the specified vehicle speed v. At least four specified speeds shall be verified. The range of specified vehicle speed points (the interval between the maximum and minimum points) shall extend either side of the reference speed or the reference speed range, if there is more than one reference speed, by at least Δv, as defined in Appendix 5 or 7 for a vehicle equipped with one wheel on the powered axle and in Appendix 8 for a vehicle with two or more wheels on the powered axles. The specified speed points, including the reference speed points, shall be at regular intervals of no more than 20 km/h apart. 5.2.2.3.2. Verification of chassis dynamometer 5.2.2.3.2.1. Immediately after the initial setting, the coast-down time on the chassis dynamometer corresponding to the specified speed shall be measured. The vehicle shall not be set up on the chassis dynamometer during the coast-down time measurement. The coast-down time measurement shall start when the chassis dynamometer speed exceeds the maximum speed of the test cycle. 5.2.2.3.2.2. The measurement shall be carried out at least three times, and the mean coast-down time Δt E shall be calculated from the results. 5.2.2.3.2.3. The set running resistance force FE(vj) at the specified speed on the chassis dynamometer is calculated using the following equation: Equation 2-30: 5.2.2.3.2.4. The setting error ε at the specified speed is calculated using the following equation: Equation 2-31: 5.2.2.3.2.5. The chassis dynamometer shall be readjusted if the setting error does not satisfy the following criteria: 5.2.2.3.2.6. The procedure described in points 5.2.2.3.2.1. to 5.2.2.3.2.5. shall be repeated until the setting error satisfies the criteria. The chassis dynamometer setting and the observed errors shall be recorded. 5.2.2.4. The chassis dynamometer system shall comply with the calibration and verification methods laid down in Appendix 3. 5.2.3. Calibration of analysers 5.2.3.1. The quantity of gas at the indicated pressure compatible with the correct functioning of the equipment shall be injected into the analyser with the aid of the flow metre and the pressure-reducing valve mounted on each gas cylinder. The apparatus shall be adjusted to indicate as a stabilised value the value inserted on the standard gas cylinder. Starting from the setting obtained with the gas cylinder of greatest capacity, a curve shall be drawn of the deviations of the apparatus according to the content of the various standard cylinders used. The flame ionisation analyser shall be recalibrated periodically, at intervals of not more than one month, using air/propane or air/hexane mixtures with nominal hydrocarbon concentrations equal to 50 percent and 90 percent of full scale. 5.2.3.2. Non-dispersive infrared absorption analysers shall be checked at the same intervals using nitrogen/ CO and nitrogen/ CO 2 mixtures in nominal concentrations equal to 10, 40, 60, 85 and 90 percent of full scale. 5.2.3.3. To calibrate the NO X chemiluminescence analyser, nitrogen/nitrogen oxide (NO) mixtures with nominal concentrations equal to 50 percent and 90 percent of full scale shall be used. The calibration of all three types of analysers shall be checked before each series of tests, using mixtures of the gases, which are measured in a concentration equal to 80 percent of full scale. A dilution device can be applied for diluting a 100 percent calibration gas to required concentration. 5.2.3.4. Heated flame ionisation detector (FID) (analyser) hydrocarbon response check procedure 5.2.3.4.1. Detector response optimisation The FID shall be adjusted according to the manufacturer’s specifications. To optimise the response, propane in air shall be used on the most common operating range. 5.2.3.4.2. Calibration of the hydrocarbon analyser The analyser shall be calibrated using propane in air and purified synthetic air (see point 5.2.3.6.). A calibration curve shall be established as described in point 5.2.3.1 to 5.2.3.3. 5.2.3.4.3. Response factors of different hydrocarbons and recommended limits The response factor (R f ) for a particular hydrocarbon species is the ratio of the FID C 1 reading to the gas cylinder concentration, expressed as ppm C 1 . The concentration of the test gas shall be at a level to give a response of approximately 80 percent of full-scale deflection for the operating range. The concentration shall be known to an accuracy of 2 percent in reference to a gravimetric standard expressed in volume. In addition, the gas cylinder shall be pre-conditioned for 24 hours at a temperature of between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). Response factors shall be determined when introducing an analyser into service and thereafter at major service intervals. The test gases to be used and the recommended response factors are: These are relative to a response factor (Rf) of 1,00 for propane and purified air. 5.2.3.5. Calibration and verification procedures of the particulate mass emissions measurement equipment 5.2.3.5.1. Flow meter calibration The technical service shall check that a calibration certificate has been issued for the flow meter demonstrating compliance with a traceable standard within a 12-month period prior to the test, or since any repair or change which could influence calibration. 5.2.3.5.2. Microbalance calibration The technical service shall check that a calibration certificate has been issued for the microbalance demonstrating compliance with a traceable standard within a 12-month period prior to the test. 5.2.3.5.3. Reference filter weighing To determine the specific reference filter weights, at least two unused reference filters shall be weighed within eight hours of, but preferably at the same time as, the sample filter weighing. Reference filters shall be of the same size and material as the sample filter. If the specific weight of any reference filter changes by more than ± 5 μg between sample filter weighings, the sample filter and reference filters shall be reconditioned in the weighing room and then reweighed. This shall be based on a comparison of the specific weight of the reference filter and the rolling average of that filter’s specific weights. The rolling average shall be calculated from the specific weights collected in the period since the reference filters were placed in the weighing room. The averaging period shall be between one day and 30 days. Multiple reconditioning and reweighings of the sample and reference filters are permitted up to 80 hours after the measurement of gases from the emissions test. If, within this period, more than half the reference filters meet the ± 5 μg criterion, the sample filter weighing can be considered valid. If, at the end of this period, two reference filters are used and one filter fails to meet the ± 5 μg criterion, the sample filter weighing may be considered valid provided that the sum of the absolute differences between specific and rolling averages from the two reference filters is no more than 10 μg. If fewer than half of the reference filters meet the ± 5 μg criterion, the sample filter shall be discarded and the emissions test repeated. All reference filters shall be discarded and replaced within 48 hours. In all other cases, reference filters shall be replaced at least every 30 days and in such a manner that no sample filter is weighed without comparison with a reference filter that has been in the weighing room for at least one day. If the weighing room stability criteria outlined in point 4.5.3.12.1.3.4. are not met but the reference filter weighings meet the criteria listed in point 5.2.3.5.3, the vehicle manufacturer has the option of accepting the sample filter weights or voiding the tests, fixing the weighing room control system and re-running the test. Figure 1-6 Particulate sampling probe configuration 5.2.3.6. Reference gases 5.2.3.6.1. Pure gases The following pure gases shall be available, if necessary, for calibration and operation: 5.2.3.6.2. Calibration and span gases Mixtures of gases with the following chemical compositions shall be available: The true concentration of a calibration gas shall be within ± 2 percent of the stated figure. 5.2.3.6. Calibration and verification of the dilution system The dilution system shall be calibrated and verified and shall comply with the requirements of Appendix 4. 5.2.4. Test vehicle preconditioning 5.2.4.1. The test vehicle shall be moved to the test area and the following operations performed: 5.2.4.2. Practice runs over the prescribed driving schedule may be performed at test points, provided an emission sample is not taken, for the purpose of finding the minimum throttle action to maintain the proper speed-time relationship, or to permit sampling system adjustments. 5.2.4.3. Within five minutes of completion of preconditioning, the test vehicle shall be removed from the dynamometer and may be driven or pushed to the soak area to be parked. The vehicle shall be stored for between six and 36 hours prior to the cold start type I test or until the engine oil temperature T O or the coolant temperature T C or the sparkplug seat/gasket temperature T P (only for air-cooled engine) equals the air temperature of the soak area within 2 K. 5.2.4.4. For the purpose of measuring particulates, between six and 36 hours before testing, the applicable test cycle from Part A of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall be conducted on the basis of Annex IV to that Regulation. The technical details of the applicable test cycle are laid down in Appendix 6 and the applicable test cycle shall also be used for vehicle pre-conditioning. Three consecutive cycles shall be driven. The dynamometer setting shall be indicated as in point 4.5.6. 5.2.4.5. At the request of the manufacturer, vehicles fitted with indirect injection positive-ignition engines may be preconditioned with one Part One, one Part Two and two Part Three driving cycles, if applicable, from the WMTC. In a test facility where a test on a low particulate emitting vehicle could be contaminated by residue from a previous test on a high particulate emitting vehicle, it is recommended that, in order to pre-condition the sampling equipment, the low particulate emitting vehicle undergo a 20 minute 120 km/h steady state drive cycle or at 70% of the maximum design speed for vehicles not capable of attaining 120 km/h followed by three consecutive Part Two or Part Three WMTC cycles, if feasible. After this preconditioning, and before testing, vehicles shall be kept in a room in which the temperature remains relatively constant between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). This conditioning shall be carried out for at least six hours and continue until the engine oil temperature and coolant, if any, are within ±2 K of the temperature of the room. If the manufacturer so requests, the test shall be carried out not later than 30 hours after the vehicle has been run at its normal temperature. 5.2.4.6. Vehicles equipped with a positive-ignition engine, fuelled with LPG, NG/biomethane, H 2 NG, hydrogen or so equipped that they can be fuelled with either petrol, LPG, NG/biomethane, H 2 NG or hydrogen between the tests on the first gaseous reference fuel and the second gaseous reference fuel, shall be preconditioned before the test on the second reference fuel. This preconditioning on the second reference fuel shall involve a preconditioning cycle consisting of one Part One, Part Two and two Part Three WMTC cycles, as described in Appendix 6. At the manufacturer’s request and with the agreement of the technical service, this preconditioning may be extended. The dynamometer setting shall be as indicated in point 4.5.6 of this Annex. 5.2.5. Emissions tests 5.2.5.1. Engine starting and restarting 5.2.5.1.1. The engine shall be started according to the manufacturer’s recommended starting procedures. The test cycle run shall begin when the engine starts. 5.2.5.1.2. Test vehicles equipped with automatic chokes shall be operated according to the instructions in the manufacturer’s operating instructions or owner’s manual covering choke-setting and ‘kick-down’ from cold fast idle. In the case of the WMTC set out in Appendix 6, the transmission shall be put in gear 15 seconds after the engine is started. If necessary, braking may be employed to keep the drive wheels from turning. In the case of the ECE R40 or 47 cycles, the transmission shall be put in gear five seconds before the first acceleration. 5.2.5.1.3. Test vehicles equipped with manual chokes shall be operated according to the manufacturer’s operating instructions or owner’s manual. Where times are provided in the instructions, the point for operation may be specified, within 15 seconds of the recommended time. 5.2.5.1.4. The operator may use the choke, throttle, etc. where necessary to keep the engine running. 5.2.5.1.5. If the manufacturer’s operating instructions or owner’s manual do not specify a warm engine starting procedure, the engine (automatic and manual choke engines) shall be started by opening the throttle about half way and cranking the engine until it starts. 5.2.5.1.6. If, during the cold start, the test vehicle does not start after ten seconds of cranking or ten cycles of the manual starting mechanism, cranking shall cease and the reason for failure to start determined. The revolution counter on the constant volume sampler shall be turned off and the sample solenoid valves placed in the ‘standby’ position during this diagnostic period. In addition, either the CVS blower shall be turned off or the exhaust tube disconnected from the tailpipe during the diagnostic period. 5.2.5.1.7. If failure to start is an operational error, the test vehicle shall be rescheduled for testing from a cold start. If failure to start is caused by vehicle malfunction, corrective action (following the unscheduled maintenance provisions) lasting less than 30 minutes may be taken and the test continued. The sampling system shall be reactivated at the same time cranking is started. The driving schedule timing sequence shall begin when the engine starts. If failure to start is caused by vehicle malfunction and the vehicle cannot be started, the test shall be voided, the vehicle removed from the dynamometer, corrective action taken (following the unscheduled maintenance provisions) and the vehicle rescheduled for test. The reason for the malfunction (if determined) and the corrective action taken shall be reported. 5.2.5.1.8. If the test vehicle does not start during the hot start after ten seconds of cranking or ten cycles of the manual starting mechanism, cranking shall cease, the test shall be voided, the vehicle removed from the dynamometer, corrective action taken and the vehicle rescheduled for test. The reason for the malfunction (if determined) and the corrective action taken shall be reported. 5.2.5.1.9. If the engine ‘false starts’, the operator shall repeat the recommended starting procedure (such as resetting the choke, etc.) 5.2.5.2. Stalling 5.2.5.2.1. If the engine stalls during an idle period, it shall be restarted immediately and the test continued. If it cannot be started soon enough to allow the vehicle to follow the next acceleration as prescribed, the driving schedule indicator shall be stopped. When the vehicle restarts, the driving schedule indicator shall be reactivated. 5.2.5.2.2. If the engine stalls during some operating mode other than idle, the driving schedule indicator shall be stopped, the test vehicle restarted and accelerated to the speed required at that point in the driving schedule, and the test continued. During acceleration to this point, gearshifts shall be performed in accordance with point 4.5.5. 5.2.5.2.3. If the test vehicle will not restart within one minute, the test shall be voided, the vehicle removed from the dynamometer, corrective action taken and the vehicle rescheduled for test. The reason for the malfunction (if determined) and the corrective action taken shall be reported. 5.2.6. Drive instructions 5.2.6.1. The test vehicle shall be driven with minimum throttle movement to maintain the desired speed. No simultaneous use of brake and throttle shall be permitted. 5.2.6.2. If the test vehicle cannot accelerate at the specified rate, it shall be operated with the throttle fully opened until the roller speed reaches the value prescribed for that time in the driving schedule. 5.2.7. Dynamometer test runs 5.2.7.1. The complete dynamometer test consists of consecutive parts as described in point 4.5.4. 5.2.7.2. The following steps shall be taken for each test: 6. Analysis of results 6.1. Type I tests 6.1.1. Exhaust emission and fuel consumption analysis 6.1.1.1. Analysis of the samples contained in the bags The analysis shall begin as soon as possible, and in any event not later than 20 minutes after the end of the tests, in order to determine: 6.1.1.2. Calibration of analysers and concentration results The analysis of the results has to be carried out in the following steps: 6.1.1.3. Measuring the distance covered The distance (S) actually covered for a test part shall be calculated by multiplying the number of revolutions read from the cumulative counter (see point 5.2.7.) by the circumference of the roller. This distance shall be expressed in km. 6.1.1.4. Determination of the quantity of gas emitted The reported test results shall be computed for each test and each cycle part by use of the following formulae. The results of all emission tests shall be rounded, using the ‘rounding-off method’ in ASTM E 29-67, to the number of decimal places indicated by expressing the applicable standard to three significant figures. 6.1.1.4.1. Total volume of diluted gas The total volume of diluted gas, expressed in m 3 /cycle part, adjusted to the reference conditions of 273,2 K (0 °C ) and 101,3 kPa, is calculated by Equation 2-32: where: 6.1.1.4.2. Hydrocarbons (HC) The mass of unburned hydrocarbons emitted by the exhaust of the vehicle during the test shall be calculated using the following formula: Equation 2-33: where: Equation 2-34: where: The non-methane hydrocarbon (NMHC) concentration is calculated as follows: Equation 2-35: where: Rf CH 4 is the FID response factor to methane as defined in point 5.2.3.4.1. 6.1.1.4.3. Carbon monoxide (CO) The mass of carbon monoxide emitted by the exhaust of the vehicle during the test shall be calculated using the following formula: Equation 2-36: where: Equation 2-37: where: 6.1.1.4.4. Nitrogen oxides (NOx) The mass of nitrogen oxides emitted by the exhaust of the vehicle during the test shall be calculated using the following formula: Equation 2-38: where: 6.1.1.4.5. Particulate matter mass Particulate emission Mp (mg/km) is calculated by means of the following equation: Equation 2-42: where exhaust gases are vented outside the tunnel; Equation 2-43: where exhaust gases are returned to the tunnel; where: Where correction for the particulate background level from the dilution system has been used, this shall be determined in accordance with point 5.2.1.5. In this case, the particulate mass (mg/km) shall be calculated as follows: Equation 2-44: where exhaust gases are vented outside the tunnel; Equation 2-45: where exhaust gases are returned to the tunnel; where: Where application of a background correction results in a negative particulate mass (in mg/km), the result shall be considered to be zero mg/km particulate mass. 6.1.1.4.6. Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) The mass of carbon dioxide emitted by the exhaust of the vehicle during the test shall be calculated using the following formula: Equation 2-46: where: Equation 2-47: where: 6.1.1.4.7. Dilution factor (DF) The dilution factor is calculated as follows: 6.1.1.5. Weighting of type I test results 6.1.1.5.1. With repeated measurements (see point 5.1.1.2.), the pollutant (mg/km), and CO 2 emission results obtained by the calculation method described in point 6.1.1. and fuel / energy consumption and electric range determined according to Annex VII are averaged for each cycle part. 6.1.1.5.1.1 Weighting of results from UNECE regulation No 40 and regulation No 47 test cycles The (average) result of the cold phase of UNECE regulation No 40 and of regulation No 47 test cycle is called R 1 ; the (average) result of the warm phase of UNECE regulation No 40 and of regulation No 47 test cycle is called R 2 . Using these pollutant (mg/km) and CO 2 (g/km) emission results, the final result R, depending on the vehicle class as defined in point 6.3., shall be calculated using the following equations: Equation 2-52: where: 6.1.1.5.1.2 Weighting of WMTC results The (average) result of Part 1 or Part 1 reduced vehicle speed is called R1, the (average) result of Part 2 or Part 2 reduced vehicle speed is called R2 and the (average) result of Part 3 or part 3 reduced vehicle speed is called R3. Using these emission (mg/km) and fuel consumption (litres/100 km) results, the final result R, depending on the vehicle category as defined in point 6.1.1.6.2., shall be calculated using the following equations: Equation 2-53: where: Equation 2-54: where: 6.1.1.6.2. For each pollutant emission constituent, the carbon dioxide emission weightings shown in Tables 1-9 (Euro 4) and 1-10 (Euro 5) shall be used. Table 1-9 Type I test cycles (also applicable for test types VII and VIII) for Euro 4 compliant L-category vehicles, applicable weighting equations and weighting factors Table 1-10 Type I test cycles (also applicable for test types VII and VIII) for Euro 5 compliant L-category vehicles, applicable weighting equations and weighting factors 7. Records required The following information shall be recorded with respect to each test: Appendix 1 Symbols used in Annex II Table Ap 1-1 Symbols used in Annex II Appendix 2 Reference fuels 1. Specifications of reference fuels for testing vehicles in environmental tests, in particular for tailpipe and evaporative emissions testing ( 1 ) The values quoted in the specifications are ‘true values’. For establishing the limit values, the terms of ISO 4259:2006 (Petroleum products — Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test) have been applied and for fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; for fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for technical reasons, the fuel manufacturer shall nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value when quoting maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ISO 4259:2006 shall be applied. ( 2 ) The fuel may contain oxidation inhibitors and metal deactivators normally used to stabilise refinery petrol streams, but detergent/dispersive additives and solvent oils shall not be added. ( 3 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the type I test shall be reported. ( 4 ) Ethanol meeting the specification of prEN 15376 is the only oxygenate that shall be intentionally added to the reference fuel. ( 5 ) There shall be no intentional addition to this reference fuel of compounds containing phosphorus, iron, manganese or lead. ( 6 ) The values quoted in the specifications are ‘true values’. For establishing the limit values, the terms of ISO 4259:2006 (Petroleum products — Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test) have been applied and for fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; for fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for technical reasons, the fuel manufacturer shall nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value when quoting maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ISO 4259:2006 shall be applied. ( 7 ) In cases of dispute, the procedures for resolving the dispute and interpreting the results based on test method precision, as described in EN ISO 4259:2006, shall be used. ( 8 ) In cases of national dispute concerning sulphur content, either EN ISO 20846:2011 or EN ISO 20884:2011 shall be referred to in the same way as in the national annex of EN 228. ( 9 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the type I test shall be reported. ( 10 ) The unleaded petrol content can be determined as 100 minus the sum of the percentage content of water and alcohols. ( 11 ) There shall be no intentional addition to this reference fuel of compounds containing phosphorus, iron, manganese or lead. ( 12 ) Ethanol meeting the specification of EN 15376 is the only oxygenate that shall be intentionally added to this reference fuel. ( 13 ) The values quoted in the specifications are ‘true values’. For establishing the limit values, the terms of ISO 4259:2006 (Petroleum products — Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test) have been applied and for fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; for fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for technical reasons, the fuel manufacturer shall nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value when quoting maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ISO 4259:2006 shall be applied. ( 14 ) The range for Cetane number is not in accordance with the requirements of a minimum range of 4R. However, the terms of ISO 4259:2006 may be used to resolve disputes between fuel supplier and fuel user, provided replicate measurements, of sufficient number to archive the necessary precision, are taken in preference to single determinations. ( 15 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the type I test shall be reported. ( 16 ) Even though oxidation stability is controlled, it is likely that shelf life will be limited. Advice shall be sought from the supplier as to storage conditions and shelf life. ( 17 ) FAME content to meet the specification of EN 14214. ( 18 ) Oxidation stability can be demonstrated by EN ISO 12205:1995 or EN 14112:1996. This requirement shall be reviewed based on CEN/TC19 evaluations of oxidative stability performance and test limits. ( 19 ) Balance has to be read as follows: ( 20 ) This method may not accurately determine the presence of corrosive materials if the sample contains corrosion inhibitors or other chemicals which diminish the corrosivity of the sample to the copper strip. Therefore, the addition of such compounds for the sole purpose of biasing the test method is prohibited. ( 21 ) Biofuel’ means liquid or gaseous fuel for transport, produced from biomass. ( 22 ) Inerts (different from N 2 ) + C 2 + C 2+ . ( 23 ) Value to be determined at 293,2 K (20 °C) and 101,3 kPa. ( 24 ) Value to be determined at 273,2 K (0 °C) and 101,3 kPa. ( 25 ) Not to be condensed. ( 26 ) Combined water, oxygen, nitrogen and argon: 1 900 μmol/mol. ( 27 ) The hydrogen shall not contain dust, sand, dirt, gums, oils or other substances in an amount sufficient to damage the fuelling station equipment of the vehicle (engine) being fuelled. ( 28 ) The hydrogen fuel index is determined by subtracting the total content of non-hydrogen gaseous constituents listed in the table (total gases), expressed in mole percent, from 100 mole percent. It is less than the sum of the maximum allowable limits of all non-hydrogen constituents shown in the table. ( 29 ) The value of total gases is the sum of the values of the non-hydrogen constituents listed in the table, except the particulates. Appendix 3 Chassis dynamometer system 1. Specification 1.1. General requirements 1.2. Specific requirements 2. Dynamometer calibration procedure 2.1. Introduction This section describes the method to be used to determine the load absorbed by a dynamometer brake. The load absorbed comprises the load absorbed by frictional effects and the load absorbed by the power-absorption device. The dynamometer is brought into operation beyond the range of test speeds. The device used for starting up the dynamometer is then disconnected; the rotational speed of the driven roller decreases. The kinetic energy of the rollers is dissipated by the power-absorption unit and by the frictional effects. This method disregards variations in the roller’s internal frictional effects caused by rollers with or without the vehicle. The frictional effects of the rear roller shall be disregarded when the roller is free. 2.2. Calibration of the load indicator at 80 km/h or of the load indicator referred to in point 1.1.3.1. for vehicles that cannot attain 80 km/h. The following procedure shall be used for calibration of the load indicator to 80 km/h or the applicable load indicator referred to in point 1.1.3.1. for vehicles that cannot attain 80 km/h, as a function of the load absorbed (see also Figure Ap3-1): 2.2.1. Measure the rotational speed of the roller if this has not already been done. A fifth wheel, a revolution counter or some other method may be used. 2.2.2. Place the vehicle on the dynamometer or devise some other method for starting up the dynamometer. 2.2.3. Use the flywheel or any other system of inertia simulation for the particular inertia class to be used. Figure Ap3-1 Power absorbed by the chassis dynamometer Legend: LOAD (N) 2.2.4. Bring the dynamometer to a vehicle speed of 80 km/h or to the reference vehicle speed referred to in point 1.1.3.1. for vehicles that cannot attain 80 km/h. 2.2.5. Note the load indicated F i (N). 2.2.6. Bring the dynamometer to a speed of 90 km/h or to the respective reference vehicle speed referred to in to in point 1.1.3.1. plus 5 km/h for vehicles that cannot attain 80 km/h 2.2.7. Disconnect the device used to start up the dynamometer. 2.2.8. Note the time taken by the dynamometer to pass from a vehicle speed of 85 to 75 km/h, or for vehicles that cannot attain 80 km/h referred to in Table Ap8-1 of Appendix 8, note the time between v j + 5 km/h to v j – 5 km/h. 2.2.9. Set the power-absorption device at a different level. 2.2.10. The requirements of points 2.2.4. to 2.2.9. shall be repeated sufficiently often to cover the range of loads used. 2.2.11. Calculate the load absorbed using the formula: Equation Ap3-2: where: 2.2.12. Figure Ap3-2 shows the load indicated at 80 km/h in terms of load absorbed at 80 km/h. Figure Ap3-2 Load indicated at 80 km/h in terms of load absorbed at 80 km/h Load indicated (N) Load absorbed (N) 2.2.13. The requirements laid down in points 2.2.3. to 2.2.12. shall be repeated for all inertia classes to be used. 2.3. Calibration of the load indicator at other speeds The procedures described in point 2.2. shall be repeated as often as necessary for the chosen vehicle speeds. 2.4. Calibration of force or torque The same procedure shall be used for force or torque calibration. 3. Verification of the load curve 3.1. Procedure The load-absorption curve of the dynamometer from a reference setting at a speed of 80 km/h or for vehicles that cannot attain 80 km/h at the respective reference vehicle speeds referred to in point 1.1.3.1., shall be verified as follows: 4 Verification of simulated inertia 4.1. Object The method described in this Appendix makes it possible to check that the simulated total inertia of the dynamometer is carried out satisfactorily in the running phase of the operating cycle. The manufacturer of the chassis dynamometer shall specify a method for verifying the specifications according to point 4.3. 4.2. Principle 4.2.1. Drawing-up working equations Since the dynamometer is subjected to variations in the rotating speed of the roller(s), the force at the surface of the roller(s) can be expressed by: Equation Ap3-3: where: Note : An explanation of this formula with reference to dynamometers with mechanically simulated inertia is appended. Thus, total inertia is expressed as follows: Equation Ap3-4: where: The total inertia (I) will be determined during an acceleration or deceleration test with values no lower than those obtained on an operating cycle. 4.2.2. Specification for the calculation of total inertia The test and calculation methods shall make it possible to determine the total inertia I with a relative error (ΔI/I) of less than ± 2 percent. 4.3. Specification 4.3.1. The mass of the simulated total inertia I shall remain the same as the theoretical value of the equivalent inertia (see Appendix 5) within the following limits: 4.4. Verification procedure 4.4.1. Verification is carried out during each test throughout the test cycles defined in Appendix 6 of Annex II. 4.4.2. However, if the requirements laid down in point 4.3. are met, with instantaneous accelerations which are at least three times greater or smaller than the values obtained in the sequences of the theoretical cycle, the verification described in point 4.4.1. will not be necessary. Appendix 4 Exhaust dilution system 1. System specification 1.1. System overview A full-flow exhaust dilution system shall be used. This requires that the vehicle exhaust be continuously diluted with ambient air under controlled conditions. The total volume of the mixture of exhaust and dilution air shall be measured and a continuously proportional sample of the volume shall be collected for analysis. The quantities of pollutants are determined from the sample concentrations, corrected for the pollutant content of the ambient air and the totalised flow over the test period. The exhaust dilution system shall consist of a transfer tube, a mixing chamber and dilution tunnel, a dilution air conditioning, a suction device and a flow measurement device. Sampling probes shall be fitted in the dilution tunnel as specified in Appendices 3, 4 and 5. The mixing chamber described in this point shall be a vessel, such as those illustrated in Figures Ap4-1 and Ap4-2, in which vehicle exhaust gases and the dilution air are combined so as to produce a homogeneous mixture at the chamber outlet. 1.2. General requirements 1.2.1. The vehicle exhaust gases shall be diluted with a sufficient amount of ambient air to prevent any water condensation in the sampling and measuring system under any conditions which may occur during a test. 1.2.2. The mixture of air and exhaust gases shall be homogeneous at the point where the sampling probe is located (see point 1.3.3.). The sampling probe shall extract a representative sample of the diluted exhaust gas. 1.2.3. The system shall enable the total volume of the diluted exhaust gases to be measured. 1.2.4. The sampling system shall be gas-tight. The design of the variable dilution sampling system and the materials that go to make it up shall be such that they do not affect the pollutant concentration in the diluted exhaust gases. Should any component in the system (heat exchanger, cyclone separator, blower, etc.) change the concentration of any of the pollutants in the diluted exhaust gases and the fault cannot be corrected, sampling for that pollutant shall be carried out upstream from that component. 1.2.5. All parts of the dilution system that are in contact with raw and diluted exhaust gas shall be designed to minimise deposition or alteration of the particulates or particles. All parts shall be made of electrically conductive materials that do not react with exhaust gas components and shall be electrically grounded to prevent electrostatic effects. 1.2.6. If the vehicle being tested is equipped with an exhaust pipe comprising several branches, the connecting tubes shall be connected as near as possible to the vehicle without adversely affecting its operation. 1.2.7. The variable-dilution system shall be designed so as to enable the exhaust gases to be sampled without appreciably changing the back-pressure at the exhaust pipe outlet. 1.2.8. The connecting tube between the vehicle and dilution system shall be so designed as to minimise heat loss. 1.3. Specific requirements 1.3.1. Connection to vehicle exhaust The connecting tube between the vehicle exhaust outlets and the dilution system shall be as short as possible and satisfy the following requirements: 1.3.2. Dilution air conditioning The dilution air used for the primary dilution of the exhaust in the CVS tunnel shall be passed through a medium capable of reducing particles in the most penetrating particle size of the filter material by ≥ 99,95 percent, or through a filter of at least class H13 of EN 1822:1998. This represents the specification of High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters. The dilution air may be charcoal scrubbed before being passed to the HEPA filter. It is recommended that an additional coarse particle filter is situated before the HEPA filter and after the charcoal scrubber, if used. At the vehicle manufacturer’s request, the dilution air may be sampled according to good engineering practice to determine the tunnel contribution to background particulate mass levels, which can then be subtracted from the values measured in the diluted exhaust. 1.3.3. Dilution tunnel Provision shall be made for the vehicle exhaust gases and the dilution air to be mixed. A mixing orifice may be used. In order to minimise the effects on the conditions at the exhaust outlet and to limit the drop in pressure inside the dilution-air conditioning device, if any, the pressure at the mixing point shall not differ by more than ± 0,25 kPa from atmospheric pressure. The homogeneity of the mixture in any cross-section at the location of the sampling probe shall not vary by more than ±2 percent from the average of the values obtained for at least five points located at equal intervals on the diameter of the gas stream. For particulate and particle emissions sampling, a dilution tunnel shall be used which: 1.3.4. Suction device This device may have a range of fixed speeds to ensure sufficient flow to prevent any water condensation. This result is generally obtained if the flow is either: 1.3.5. Volume measurement in the primary dilution system The method for measuring total dilute exhaust volume incorporated in the constant volume sampler shall be such that measurement is accurate to ± 2 percent under all operating conditions. If the device cannot compensate for variations in the temperature of the mixture of exhaust gases and dilution air at the measuring point, a heat exchanger shall be used to maintain the temperature to within ± 6 K of the specified operating temperature. If necessary, some form of protection for the volume measuring device may be used, e.g. a cyclone separator, bulk stream filter, etc. A temperature sensor shall be installed immediately before the volume measuring device. This sensor shall have an accuracy and a precision of ± 1 K and a response time of 0,1 s at 62 percent of a given temperature variation (value measured in silicone oil). The difference from atmospheric pressure shall be measured upstream and, if necessary, downstream from the volume measuring device. The pressure measurements shall have a precision and an accuracy of ± 0,4 kPa during the test. 1.4. Recommended system descriptions Figure Ap 4-1 and Figure Ap 4-2 are schematic drawings of two types of recommended exhaust dilution systems that meet the requirements of this Annex. Since various configurations can produce accurate results, exact conformity with these figures is not essential. Additional components such as instruments, valves, solenoids and switches may be used to provide additional information and coordinate the functions of the component system. 1.4.1. Full-flow dilution system with positive displacement pump Figure Ap4-1 Positive displacement pump dilution system The positive displacement pump (PDP) full-flow dilution system satisfies the requirements of this Annex by metering the flow of gas through the pump at constant temperature and pressure. The total volume is measured by counting the revolutions of the calibrated positive displacement pump. The proportional sample is achieved by sampling with pump, flow meter and flow control valve at a constant flow rate. The collecting equipment consists of: 1.4.2. Full-flow dilution system with critical-flow venturi Figure Ap4-2 Critical-flow venturi dilution system The use of a critical-flow venturi (CFV) for the full-flow dilution system is based on the principles of flow mechanics for critical flow. The variable mixture flow rate of dilution and exhaust gas is maintained at sonic velocity which is directly proportional to the square root of the gas temperature. Flow is continually monitored, computed and integrated throughout the test. The use of an additional critical-flow sampling venturi ensures the proportionality of the gas samples taken from the dilution tunnel. As pressure and temperature are both equal at the two venturi inlets, the volume of the gas flow diverted for sampling is proportional to the total volume of diluted exhaust-gas mixture produced, and thus the requirements of this Annex are met. The collecting equipment consists of: 2. CVS calibration procedure 2.1. General requirements The CVS system shall be calibrated by using an accurate flow-meter and a restricting device. The flow through the system shall be measured at various pressure readings and the control parameters of the system measured and related to the flows. The flow-meter shall be dynamic and suitable for the high flow-rate encountered in CVS testing. The device shall be of certified accuracy traceable to an approved national or international standard. 2.1.1. Various types of flow-meter may be used, e.g. calibrated venturi, laminar flow-meter, calibrated turbine-meter, provided that they are dynamic measurement systems and can meet the requirements of point 1.3.5. of this Appendix. 2.1.2. The following points give details of methods of calibrating PDP and CFV units, using a laminar flow-meter which gives the required accuracy, together with a statistical check on the calibration validity. 2.2. Calibration of the positive displacement pump (PDP) 2.2.1. The following calibration procedure outlines the equipment, the test configuration and the various parameters that are measured to establish the flow-rate of the CVS pump. All the parameters relating to the pump are simultaneously measured with the parameters relating to the flow-meter which is connected in series with the pump. The calculated flow rate (given in m 3 /min at pump inlet, absolute pressure and temperature) can then be plotted against a correlation function that is the value of a specific combination of pump parameters. The linear equation that relates the pump flow and the correlation function is then determined. If a CVS has a multiple speed drive, a calibration shall be performed for each range used. 2.2.2. This calibration procedure is based on the measurement of the absolute values of the pump and flow-meter parameters that relate to the flow rate at each point. Three conditions shall be maintained to ensure the accuracy and integrity of the calibration curve: 2.2.3. During an exhaust emission test, the measurement of these same pump parameters enables the user to calculate the flow rate from the calibration equation. 2.2.4. Figure Ap 4-3 of this Appendix shows one possible test set-up. Variations are permissible, provided that the technical service approves them as being of comparable accuracy. If the set-up shown in Figure Ap 4-3 is used, the following data shall be found within the limits of precision given: Figure Ap4-3 PDP calibration configuration 2.2.5. After the system has been connected as shown in Figure Ap 4-3, set the variable restrictor in the wide-open position and run the CVS pump for 20 minutes before starting the calibration. 2.2.6. Reset the restrictor valve to a more restricted condition in an increment of pump inlet depression (about 1 kPa) that will yield a minimum of six data points for the total calibration. Allow the system to stabilise for three minutes and repeat the data acquisition. 2.2.7. The air flow rate (Qs) at each test point is calculated in standard m 3 /min from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer’s prescribed method. 2.2.8. The air flow-rate is then converted to pump flow (V0) in m 3 /rev at absolute pump inlet temperature and pressure. Equation Ap 4-1: where: V 0 = pump flow rate at T p and P p (m 3 /rev); Q s = air flow at 101,33 kPa and 273,2 K (m 3 /min); T p = pump inlet temperature (K); P p = absolute pump inlet pressure (kPa); n = pump speed (min -1 ). 2.2.9. To compensate for the interaction of pump speed pressure variations at the pump and the pump slip rate, the correlation function (x 0 ) between the pump speed (n), the pressure differential from pump inlet to pump outlet, and the absolute pump outlet pressure is calculated as follows: Equation Ap 4-2: where: x 0 = correlation function; ΔP p = pressure differential from pump inlet to pump outlet (kPa); P e = absolute outlet pressure (PPO + P b ) (kPa). 2.2.10. A CVS system that has multiple speeds shall be calibrated on each speed used. The calibration curves generated for the ranges shall be approximately parallel and the intercept values (D0) shall increase as the pump flow range decreases. 2.2.11 If the calibration has been performed carefully, the calculated values from the equation will be within 0.5 percent of the measured value of V0.Values of M will vary from one pump to another. Calibration is performed at pump start-up and after major maintenance. 2.3. Calibration of the critical-flow venturi (CFV) 2.3.1. Calibration of the CFV is based on the flow equation for a critical-flow venturi: Equation Ap 4-4: where: Q s = flow; K v = calibration coefficient; P = absolute pressure (kPa); T = absolute temperature (K). Gas flow is a function of inlet pressure and temperature. The calibration procedure described in points 2.3.2. to 2.3.7. shall establish the value of the calibration coefficient at measured values of pressure, temperature and air flow. 2.3.2. The manufacturer’s recommended procedure shall be followed for calibrating electronic portions of the CFV. 2.3.3. Measurements for flow calibration of the critical-flow venturi are required and the following data shall be found within the limits of precision given: 2.3.4. The equipment shall be set up as shown in Figure Ap 4-4 and checked for leaks. Any leaks between the flow-measuring device and the critical-flow venturi will seriously affect the accuracy of the calibration. Figure Ap4-4 CFV calibration configuration 2.3.5. The variable-flow restrictor shall be set to the open position, the blower shall be started and the system stabilised. Data from all instruments shall be recorded. 2.3.6. The flow restrictor shall be varied and at least eight readings shall be taken across the critical flow range of the venturi. 2.3.7. The data recorded during the calibration shall be used in the following calculations. The air flow-rate (Qs) at each test point is calculated from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer’s prescribed method. Calculate values of the calibration coefficient (K v) for each test point: Equation Ap 4-5: where: Q s = flow-rate in m 3 /min at 273,2 K and 101,3 kPa; T v = temperature at the venturi inlet (K); P v = absolute pressure at the venturi inlet (kPa). Plot K v as a function of venturi inlet pressure. For sonic flow, K v will have a relatively constant value. As pressure decreases (vacuum increases), the venturi becomes unchoked and K v decreases. The resultant K v changes are not permissible. For a minimum of eight points in the critical region, calculate an average K v and the standard deviation. If the standard deviation exceeds 0,3 percent of the average K v , take corrective action. 3. System verification procedure 3.1. General requirements The total accuracy of the CVS sampling system and analytical system shall be determined by introducing a known mass of a pollutant gas into the system while it is being operated as if during a normal test and then analysing and calculating the pollutant mass according to the formula in point 4, except that the density of propane shall be taken as 1,967 grams per litre at standard conditions. The two techniques described in points 3.2. and 3.3. are known to give sufficient accuracy. The maximum permissible deviation between the quantity of gas introduced and the quantity of gas measured is 5 percent. 3.2. CFO method 3.2.1. Metering a constant flow of pure gas (CO or C 3 H 8 ) using a critical-flow orifice device 3.2.2. A known quantity of pure gas (CO or C 3 H 8 ) is fed into the CVS system through the calibrated critical orifice. If the inlet pressure is high enough, the flow-rate (q), which is adjusted by means of the critical-flow orifice, is independent of orifice outlet pressure (critical flow). If deviations exceeding 5 percent occur, the cause of the malfunction shall be determined and corrected. The CVS system is operated as in an exhaust emission test for about five to ten minutes. The gas collected in the sampling bag is analysed by the usual equipment and the results compared to the concentration of the gas samples which was known beforehand. 3.3. Gravimetric method 3.3.1. Metering a limited quantity of pure gas (CO or C 3 H 8 ) by means of a gravimetric technique 3.3.2. The following gravimetric procedure may be used to verify the CVS system. The weight of a small cylinder filled with either carbon monoxide or propane is determined with a precision of ± 0,01 g. For about five to ten minutes, the CVS system is operated as in a normal exhaust emission test, while CO or propane is injected into the system. The quantity of pure gas involved is determined by means of differential weighing. The gas accumulated in the bag is analysed using the equipment normally used for exhaust-gas analysis. The results are then compared to the concentration figures computed previously. Appendix 5 Classification of equivalent inertia mass and running resistance ( *1 ) The value shall be rounded to one decimal place. ( *2 ) The value shall be rounded to four decimal places. Appendix 6 Driving cycles for type I tests (1) UNECE Regulation No 47 (ECE R47)-based test cycle 1. Description of the ECE R47 test cycle The ECE R47 test cycle to be used on the chassis dynamometer shall be as depicted in the following graph: Figure Ap6-1 ECE R47-based test cycle The ECE R47-based test cycle lasts 896 seconds and consists of eight elementary cycles to be carried out without interruption. Each cycle shall comprise of seven driving condition phases (idling, acceleration, steady speed, deceleration, etc.) as set out in points 2 and 3. The truncated vehicle speed trace restricted to maximum 25 km/h is applicable for L1e-A and L1e-B vehicles with a maximum design speed of 25 km/h. 2. The following elementary cycle characteristic in the shape of the dynamometer-roller speed profile versus test time shall be repeated eight times in total. The cold phase means the first 448 s (four cycles) after cold start of the propulsion and warming-up of the engine. The warm or hot phase is the last 448 s (four cycles), when the propulsion is further warming up and finally running at operating temperature. Table Ap6-1 ECE R47 single cycle characteristic vehicle speed profile versus test time 3. ECE R47 test cycle tolerances The test cycle tolerances indicated in Figure Ap 6-2 for one elementary cycle of the ECE R47 test cycle shall be respected in principle during the whole test cycle. Figure Ap6-2 ECE R47 based test cycle tolerances (2) UNECE Regulation No 40 (ECE R40)-based driving cycle 1. Description of the test cycle The ECE R40 test cycle to be used on the chassis dynamometer shall be as depicted in the following graph: Figure Ap6-3 ECE R40-based test cycle The ECE R40-based test cycle lasts 1 170 seconds and consists of six elementary urban operating cycle cycles to be carried out without interruption. Each elementary urban cycle shall comprise fifteen driving condition phases (idling, acceleration, steady speed, deceleration, etc.) as set out in points 2 and 3. 2. The following cycle characteristic dynamometer-roller speed profile versus test time shall be repeated 6 times in total. The cold phase means the first 195 s (one elementary urban cycle) after cold start of the propulsion and warming up. The warm phase is the last 975 s (five elementary urban cycles), when the propulsion is further warming up and finally running at operating temperature. Table Ap6-2 ECE R40 elementary urban cycle characteristic, vehicle speed profile versus test time 3. ECE R40 test cycle tolerances The test cycle tolerances indicated in Figure Ap 6-4 for one elementary urban cycle of the ECE R40 test cycle shall be respected in principle during the whole test cycle. Figure Ap6-4 ECE R40-based test cycle tolerances K = Declutching The speed tolerance (± 1 km/h) and the time tolerance (± 1 sec) shall be combined geometrically for each common point shown opposite. PM = Neutral R = Idling 4. Generic applicable ECE R40 and R47 test cycle tolerances 5. Sampling of the exhaust flow of the vehicle in the ECE R40 and R47 test cycles 5.1. Check of back-pressure from sampling device During the preliminary tests, a check shall be made to ensure that the back-pressure set up by the sampling device is equal to the atmospheric pressure to within ± 1 230 Pa. 5.2. Sampling shall start as of t=0 just before cranking and starting-up of the combustion engine if that engine makes part of the propulsion type. 5.3. The combustion engine shall be started up by means of the devices provided for that purpose — the choke, the starter valve, etc. — in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 5.4. The sampling bags shall be hermetically closed as soon as filling is completed. 5.5. At the end of the test cycle, the system for collecting dilute exhaust mixture and dilution air shall be closed and the gases produced by the engine shall be released into the atmosphere. 6. Gearshift procedures (3) World Harmonised Motorcycle Test Cycle (WMTC), stage 2 1. Description of the test cycle The WMTC stage 2 to be used on the chassis dynamometer shall be as depicted in the following graph: Figure Ap6-5 WMTC stage 2 Vehicle speed 1, 2 & 3 Vehicle speed 1, 2 & 3 reduced 1.1. The WMTC stage 2 includes the same vehicle speed trace as WMTC stage 1 with supplemental gear shift prescriptions. The WMTC stage 2 lasts 1 800 seconds and consists of three parts to be carried out without interruption. The characteristic driving conditions (idling, acceleration, steady speed, deceleration, etc.). are set out in the following points and tables. 2. WMTC stage 2, cycle part 1 Figure Ap6-6 WMTC stage 2, part 1 Vehicle class 2-2 & 3 Vehicle class 1 & 2-1 2.1 The WMTC stage 2 includes the same vehicle speed trace as WMTC stage 1 with supplemental gear shift prescriptions. The characteristic roller speed versus test time of WMTC stage 2, cycle part 1 is set out in the following tables. 3. WMTC stage 2, part 2 Figure Ap6-7 WMTC stage 2, part 2 Vehicle class 2-2 & 3 Vehicle class 2-1 3.1. The WMTC stage 2 includes the same vehicle speed trace as WMTC stage 1 with supplemental gear shift prescriptions. The characteristic roller speed versus test time of WMTC stage 2, part 2 is set out in the following tables. 4. WMTC stage 2, part 3 Figure Ap6-8 WMTC stage 2, part 3 Vehicle class 3-2 Vehicle class 3-1 4.1 The WMTC stage 2 includes the same vehicle speed trace as WMTC stage 1 with supplemental gear shift prescriptions. The characteristic roller speed versus test time of WMTC stage 2, part 3 is set out in the following tables. (4) World Harmonised Motorcycle Test Cycle (WMTC) stage 3 (Revised WMTC) 1. Description of the WMTC stage 3 test cycle for L3e, L4e, L5e-A, L7e-A, L7e-B and L7e-C (sub-)category vehicles The WMTC stage 3 to be used on the chassis dynamometer shall be as depicted in the following graph for (sub-)category L3e, L4e, L5e-A, L7e-A, L7e-B and L7e-C vehicles: Figure Ap6-9 WMTC stage 3 for L3e, L4e, L5e-A, L7e-A, L7e-B and L7e-C category vehicles Vehicle speed parts 1, 2 & 3 Vehicle speed parts 1, 2 & 3 reduced The ‘revised WMTC’ also referred to as ‘WMTC stage 3’ as shown in Figure Ap 6-9 is applicable for L3e, L4e, L5e-A, L7e-A, L7e-B and L7e-C vehicles and the vehicle speed trace of WMTC stage 3 is equivalent to WMTC stages 1 and 2. The WMTC stage 3 lasts 1 800 seconds and consists of two parts for vehicles with a low maximum design vehicle speed and three parts for the other L-category vehicles to be carried out without interruption if allowed by maximum vehicle speed limitation. The characteristic driving conditions (idling, acceleration, steady speed, deceleration, etc.) of WMTC stage 3 are laid down in chapter 3, which sets out the detailed vehicle speed trace of the WMTC stage 2. 2. Description of the WMTC stage 3 for L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L5e-B, L6e-A and L6e-B (sub-)category vehicles The WMTC stage 3 to be used on the chassis dynamometer shall be a depicted in the following graph for (sub-)category L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L6e-A and L6e-B vehicles with a low maximum vehicle design speed: Figure Ap6-10 WMTC stage 3 for L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L5e-B, L6e-A and L6e-B vehicles. The truncated vehicle speed trace limited to 25 km/h is applicable for L1e-A and L1e-B vehicles with a limited maximum design vehicle speed of 25 km/h Vehicle class 1 45 km/h limit Vehicle class 1 25 km/h limit 2.1 The cold and warm vehicle speed traces are identical. 3. Description of the WMTC stage 3 for L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L5e-B, L6e-A and L6e-B (sub-)category vehicles Figure Ap6-11 WMTC stage 3 for L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L5e-B, L6e-A and L6e-B (sub-)category vehicles. The truncated vehicle speed trace limited to 25 km/h is applicable for L1e-A and L1e-B vehicles with a limited maximum vehicle design speed of 25 km/h Vehicle class 1 45 km/h limit Vehicle class 1 45 km/h limit 3.1. The vehicle speed trace WMTC stage 3 shown in Figure Ap 6-10 is applicable for L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L5e-B, L6e-A and L6e-B (sub-)category vehicles and is equivalent to the vehicle speed trace WMTC stages 1 and 2, part 1 for class 1 vehicles, driven once cold followed by the same vehicle speed driven with a warmed-up propulsion. The WMTC stage 3 for L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L5e-B, L6e-A and L6e-B (sub-)category vehicles lasts 1 200 seconds and consists of two equivalent parts to be carried out without interruption. 3.2. The characteristic driving conditions (idling, acceleration, steady speed, deceleration, etc.) of WMTC stage 3 for L1e-A, L1e-B, L2e, L5e-B, L6e-A and L6e-B vehicles are set out in the following points and tables. ( *1 ) PM = gears in neutral, clutch engaged. K = clutch disengaged. Appendix 7 Road tests of L-category vehicles equipped with one wheel on the driven axle or with twinned wheels for the determination of test bench settings 1. Requirements for the rider 2. Requirement for the road and ambient conditions 3. Condition of the test vehicle 3.1. The test vehicle shall comply with the conditions described in point 1 of Appendix 8. 3.2. When installing the measuring instruments on the test vehicle, care shall be taken to minimise their effects on the distribution of the load across the wheels. When installing the speed sensor outside the vehicle, care shall be taken to minimise the additional aerodynamic loss. 3.3. Checks The following checks shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications for the use considered: wheels, wheel rims, tyres (make, type and pressure), front axle geometry, brake adjustment (elimination of parasitic drag), lubrication of front and rear axles, adjustment of the suspension and vehicle ground clearance, etc. Check that during freewheeling, there is no electrical braking. 4. Specified coast-down speeds 5. Measurement of coast-down time 6. Data processing 6.1. Calculation of running resistance force 6.2. Running resistance curve fitting The running resistance force, F, shall be calculated as follows: 6.3. Target running resistance force F* for chassis dynamometer setting The target running resistance force F*(v 0 ) on the chassis dynamometer at the reference vehicle speed v 0 , in Newton, is determined using the following equation: Equation Ap7-10: Appendix 8 Road tests of L-category vehicles equipped with two or more wheels on the powered axles for the determination of test bench settings 1. Preparation of the vehicle 1.1. Running-in The test vehicle shall be in normal running order and adjustment after having been run in for at least 300 km. The tyres shall be run in at the same time as the vehicle or shall have a tread depth within 90 and 50 percent of the initial tread depth. 1.2. Checks The following checks shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications for the use considered: wheels, wheel rims, tyres (make, type and pressure), front axle geometry, brake adjustment (elimination of parasitic drag), lubrication of front and rear axles, adjustment of the suspension and vehicle ground clearance, etc. Check that during freewheeling, there is no electrical braking. 1.3. Preparation for the test 2. Specified vehicle speed v The specified speed is required for determining the running resistance at the reference speed from the running resistance curve. To determine the running resistance as a function of vehicle speed in the vicinity of the reference speed v 0 , running resistances shall be measured at the specified speed v. At least four to five points indicating the specified speeds, along with the reference speeds, shall be measured. The calibration of the load indicator referred to in point 2.2. of Appendix 3 shall be performed at the applicable reference vehicle speed (v j ) referred to in Table Ap8-1. Table Ap8-1 Specified vehicle speeds to perform the coast-down time test as well as the designated reference vehicle speed v j depending on the maximum design speed (v max ) of the vehicle 3. Energy variation during coast-down procedure 3.1. Total road load power determination 3.1.1. Measurement equipment and accuracy The margin of measurement error shall be less than 0,1 second for time and less than ± 0,5 km/h for speed. Bring the vehicle and the chassis dynamometer to the stabilised operating temperature, in order to approximate the road conditions. 3.1.2. Test procedure 3.1.2.1. Accelerate the vehicle to a speed of 5 km/h greater than the speed at which test measurement begins. 3.1.2.2. Put the gearbox to neutral or disconnect the power supply. 3.1.2.3. Measure the time t1 taken by the vehicle to decelerate from: where: 3.1.2.4. Carry out the same test in the opposite direction, measuring time t 2 . 3.1.2.5. Take the average t i of the two times t 1 and t 2 . 3.1.2.6. Repeat these tests until the statistical accuracy (p) of the average: Equation Ap 8-1: The statistical accuracy (p) is defined by: Equation Ap 8-2: where: Equation Ap 8-3: n is the number of tests Table Ap8-2 Factors t and t/√n depending on the number of coast-down tests performed 3.1.2.7. Calculation of the running resistance force The running resistance force F at the specified vehicle speeds v is calculated as follows: Equation Ap 8-4: where: m ref = reference mass (kg); Δ v = vehicle speed deviation (km/h); Δ t = calculated coast down time difference (s); 3.1.2.8. The running resistance determined on the track shall be corrected to the reference ambient conditions as follows: Equation Ap 8-5: Equation Ap 8-6: where: The ratios R R /R T and R AERO /R T shall be specified by the vehicle manufacturer on the basis of the data normally available to the company and to the satisfaction of the technical service. If these values are not available or if the technical service or approval authority do not accept these values, the following figures for the rolling/total resistance ratio given by the following formula may be used: Equation Ap 8-7: where: m HP is the test mass and for each speed the coefficients a and b are as shown in the following table: Table Ap8-3 Coefficients a and b to calculate rolling resistance ratio 3.2. Setting of the chassis dynamometer The purpose of this procedure is to simulate on the dynamometer the total road load power at a given speed. 3.2.1. Measurement equipment and accuracy The measuring equipment shall be similar to that used on the test track and shall comply with point 4.5.7. of Annex II and point 1.3.5 of this Appendix. 3.2.2. Test procedure ( *1 ) Applicable reference vehicle speed v j ( *2 ) if the vehicle speed can be attained by the vehicle. Appendix 9 Explanatory note on the gearshift procedure for a type I test 0. Introduction This explanatory note explains matters specified or described in this Regulation, including its Annexes or Appendices, and matters related thereto with regard to the gearshift procedure. 1. Approach 2. Calculation example 2.1 Figure Ap 9-1 shows an example of gearshift use for a small vehicle: 2.2 Where vehicle speed increases gradually during cruise phases, upshift speeds (v 1—2 , v 2—3 and v i—i+1 ) in km/h may be calculated using the following equations: Figure Ap9-1 Example of a gearshift sketch — Gear use during deceleration and cruise phases acc. gear 1 acc. gear 2 acc. gear 3 acc. gear 4 acc. gear 5 acc. gear 6 rated speed idling speed Gear use during acceleration phases dec. gear 1 dec. gear 2 dec. gear 3 dec. gear 4 dec. gear 5 dec. gear 6 rated speed idling speed In order to allow the technical service more flexibility and to ensure driveability, the gearshift regression functions should be considered as lower limits. Higher engine speeds are permitted in any cycle phase. 3. Phase indicators 3.1 In order to avoid different interpretations in the application of the gearshift equations and thus to improve the comparability of the test, fixed-phase indicators are assigned to the speed pattern of the cycles. The specification of the phase indicators is based on the definition from the Japan Automobile Research Institute (JARI) of the four driving modes as shown in the following table: Table Ap9-1 Definition of driving modes 3.2 The indicators were then modified in order to avoid frequent changes during relatively homogeneous cycle parts and thus improve driveability. Figure Ap9-2 shows an example from cycle part 1. Figure Ap9-2 Example for modified phase indicators 4 mode definition, see table A13- acceleration cruise deceleration 4. Calculation example ( *1 ) ndv means the ratio between engine speed in min -1 and vehicle speed in km/h ( *2 ) pmr means the power-to-mass ratio calculated by ( *3 ) n_norm means the value calculated using equations Ap9-1 and Ap9-2. ( *4 ) ‘cl’ means ‘Clutch-Off’ timing. Appendix 10 Type-approval tests of a replacement pollution-control device type for L-category vehicles as separate technical units 1. Scope of the Appendix This Appendix applies to the type-approval of separate technical units within the meaning of Article 23(10) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, of pollution-control devices to be fitted as replacement parts on one or more types of L-category vehicle. 2. Definitions 3. Application for environmental performance type-approval 4. Requirements 4.1. General requirements The design, construction and mounting of the replacement pollution-control device type shall be such that: 4.2. Requirements regarding emissions 4.3. Testing of the propulsion performance of the vehicle ( 1 ) As provided for in this Regulation in the version applicable to the type-approval of that vehicle. Appendix 11 Type I test procedure for hybrid L-category vehicles 1. Introduction 2. Categories of hybrid vehicles Table Ap11-1 Hybrid vehicle categories 3. Type I test methods For the type I test, hybrid electric L-category vehicles shall be tested according to the applicable procedure in Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. For each test condition, the pollutant emission test result shall comply with the limits in Parts A1 and A2 of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, whichever is applicable in accordance with Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.1. Externally chargeable vehicles (OVC HEVs) without an operating mode switch 3.1.1. Two tests shall be performed under the following conditions: The profile of the state of charge (SOC) of the electrical energy/power storage device during different stages of the test is given in Appendix 3.1. to Annex VII. 3.1.2. Condition A 3.1.2.1. The procedure shall start with the discharge of the electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle while driving (on the test track, on a chassis dynamometer, etc.) in any of the following conditions: The fuel-consuming engine shall be stopped within ten seconds of being automatically started. 3.1.2.2. Conditioning of vehicle The vehicle shall be conditioned by driving the applicable type I driving cycle as set out in Appendix 6. 3.1.2.3. After this preconditioning and before testing, the vehicle shall be kept in a room in which the temperature remains relatively constant between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). This conditioning shall be carried out for at least six hours and continue until the temperature of the engine oil and coolant, if any, are within ± 2 K of the temperature of the room, and the electrical energy/power storage device is fully charged as a result of the charging prescribed in point 3.1.2.4. 3.1.2.4. During soak, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged with any of the following: This procedure excludes all types of special charges that could be automatically or manually initiated, e.g. equalisation or servicing charges. The manufacturer shall declare that a special charge procedure has not occurred during the test; End-of-charge criterion. The end-of-charge criterion corresponds to a charging time of 12 hours, except where the standard instrumentation gives the driver a clear indication that the electrical energy storage device is not yet fully charged. In this case, the maximum time is = 3 times the claimed battery capacity (Wh) / mains power supply (W). 3.1.2.5. Test procedure 3.1.3. Condition B 3.1.3.1. Conditioning of vehicle. The vehicle shall be conditioned by driving the applicable type I driving cycle as set out in Appendix 6. 3.1.3.2. The electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle shall be discharged while driving (on the test track, on a chassis dynamometer, etc.): The fuel-consuming engine shall be stopped within ten seconds of being automatically started. 3.1.3.3. After this preconditioning and before testing, the vehicle shall be kept in a room in which the temperature remains relatively constant between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). This conditioning shall be carried out for at least six hours and continue until the temperature of the engine oil and coolant, if any, are within ± 2 K of the temperature of the room. 3.1.3.4. Test procedure 3.1.3.5. The test results shall be compared with the limits in Part A of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and the average emission of each pollutant for Condition B shall be calculated (M 2i ). The test results M 2i , multiplied by the appropriate deterioration and K i factors, shall be less than the limits prescribed in Part A of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.1.4. Test results 3.1.4.1. Testing in accordance with point 3.1.2.5.2.1. For reporting, the weighted values shall be calculated as follows: Equation Ap11-2: where: 3.1.4.2. Testing in accordance with point 3.1.2.5.2.2. For communication, the weighted values shall be calculated as follows: Equation Ap11-3: where: 3.2. Externally chargeable vehicles (OVC HEVs) with an operating mode switch. 3.2.1. Two tests shall be performed under the following conditions: 3.2.1.1. Condition A: the test shall be carried out with a fully charged electrical energy/power storage device. 3.2.1.2. Condition B: the test shall be carried out with an electrical energy/power storage device in minimum state of charge (maximum discharge of capacity). 3.2.1.3. The operating mode switch shall be positioned in accordance with the table Ap11-2. Table Ap11-2 Look-up table to determine Condition A or B depending on different hybrid vehicle concepts and on the hybrid mode selection switch position 3.2.2. Condition A 3.2.2.1. If the pure electric range of the vehicle is higher than one complete cycle, the type I test may at the manufacturer’s request be carried out in pure electric mode. In this case, the engine preconditioning prescribed in point 3.2.2.3.1. or 3.2.2.3.2. can be omitted. 3.2.2.2. The procedure shall start with the discharge of the electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle while driving with the switch in pure electric position (on the test track, on a chassis dynamometer, etc.) at a steady speed of 70 percent ± 5 percent of the maximum design speed of the vehicle, which is to be determined according to the test procedure set out in Appendix 1 to Annex X. Stopping the discharge occurs in any of the following conditions: If the vehicle is not equipped with a pure electric mode, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be discharged by driving the vehicle (on the test track, on a chassis dynamometer, etc.) in any of the following conditions: The fuel-consuming engine shall be stopped within ten seconds of being automatically started. By means of derogation if the manufacturer can prove to the technical service to the satisfaction of the approval authority that the vehicle is physically not capable of achieving the thirty minutes speed the maximum fifteen minute speed may be used instead. 3.2.2.3. Conditioning of vehicle 3.2.2.4. After this preconditioning and before testing, the vehicle shall be kept in a room in which the temperature remains relatively constant between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 3 °C). This conditioning shall be carried out for at least six hours and continue until the temperature of the engine oil and coolant, if any, are within ± 2 K of the temperature of the room, and the electrical energy/power storage device is fully charged as a result of the charging prescribed in point 3.2.2.5. 3.2.2.5. During soak, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged with any of the following chargers: This procedure excludes all types of special charges that could be automatically or manually initiated, e.g. equalisation charges or servicing charges. The manufacturer shall declare that a special charge procedure has not occurred during the test. The end-of-charge criterion corresponds to a charging time of 12 hours, except where the standard instrumentation gives the driver a clear indication that the electrical energy storage device is not yet fully charged. In this case, the maximum time is = 3 × claimed battery capacity (Wh) / mains power supply (W). 3.2.2.6. Test procedure 3.2.2.7. The test results shall be compared to the emission limits set out in Annex VI(A) to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and the average emission of each pollutant (expressed in mg/km) for Condition A shall be calculated (M 1i ). The test result of each combined cycle run M 1ia , multiplied by the appropriate deterioration and K i factors, shall be less than the emission limits in Part A or B of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. For the purposes of the calculation in point 3.2.4., M 1i shall be calculated according to Equation Ap11-1. 3.2.3. Condition B 3.2.3.1. Conditioning of vehicle. The vehicle shall be conditioned by driving the applicable type I driving cycle set out in Appendix 6. 3.2.3.2. The electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle shall be discharged in accordance with point 3.2.2.2. 3.2.3.3. After this preconditioning, and before testing, the vehicle shall be kept in a room in which the temperature remains relatively constant between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). This conditioning shall be carried out for at least six hours and continue until the temperature of the engine oil and coolant, if any, are within ± 2 K of the temperature of the room. 3.2.3.4. Test procedure 3.2.3.5. The test results shall be compared with the pollutant limits in Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and the average emission of each pollutant for Condition B shall be calculated (M 2i ). The test results M 2i , multiplied by the appropriate deterioration and K i factors, shall be less than the limits in Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.2.4. Test results 3.3. Not externally chargeable vehicles (not-OVC HEVs) without an operating mode switch 3.3.1. These vehicles shall be tested according to Appendix 6. 3.3.2. For preconditioning, at least two consecutive complete driving cycles are carried out without soak. 3.3.3. The vehicle shall be driven in accordance with to the provisions of Appendix 6. 3.4. Not externally chargeable vehicles (not-OVC HEVs) with an operating mode switch 3.4.1. These vehicles are preconditioned and tested in hybrid mode in accordance with Annex II. If several hybrid modes are available, the test shall be carried out in the mode that is automatically set after the ignition key is turned (normal mode). On the basis of information provided by the manufacturer, the technical service shall ensure that the limit values are complied with in all hybrid modes. 3.4.2. For preconditioning, at least two consecutive complete applicable driving cycles shall be carried out without soak. 3.4.3. The vehicle shall be driven in accordance with the provisions of Annex II. ( 1 ) Also known as ‘externally chargeable’. ( 2 ) Also known as ‘not externally chargeable’. ( 3 ) For instance: sport, economic, urban, extra-urban position, etc. ( 4 ) Most electric hybrid mode: the hybrid mode which can be proven to have the highest electricity consumption of all selectable hybrid modes when tested in accordance with condition A of point 4 of Annex 10 to UNECE Regulation No 101, to be established based on information provided by the manufacturer and in agreement with the technical service. ( 5 ) Most fuel-consuming mode: the hybrid mode which can be proven to have the highest fuel consumption of all selectable hybrid modes when tested in accordance with condition B of point 4 of Annex 10 to UNECE regulation No 101, to be established based on information provided by the manufacturer and in agreement with the technical service. Appendix 12 Type I test procedure for L-category vehicles fuelled with LPG, NG/biomethane, flex fuel H 2 NG or hydrogen 1. Introduction 2. Granting of type-approval for an L-category vehicle equipped with a gaseous fuel system Type-approval is granted subject to the following requirements: 2.1. Exhaust emissions approval of a vehicle equipped with a gaseous fuel system It shall be demonstrated that the parent vehicle equipped with a representative LPG, NG/biomethane, H 2 NG or hydrogen fuel system can adapt to any fuel composition that may appear on the market and comply with the following: 2.2. Exhaust emissions approval of a member of the propulsion family For the type-approval of mono-fuel gas vehicles and bi-fuel vehicles operating in gas mode, fuelled by LPG, NG/biomethane, H 2 NG or hydrogen, as a member of the propulsion family in Annex XI, a type I test shall be performed with one gaseous reference fuel. For LPG, NG/biomethane and H 2 NG vehicles, this reference fuel may be either of the reference fuels in Appendix 2. The gas-fuelled vehicle is considered to comply if the following requirements are met: Appendix 13 Type I test procedure for L-category vehicles equipped with a periodically regenerating system 1. Introduction This Appendix contains specific provisions regarding the type-approval of vehicles equipped with a periodically regenerating system. 2. Scope of the type-approval for vehicles with a periodically regenerating system as regards type I tests 2.1. L-category vehicles falling within the scope of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 that are equipped with periodically regenerating systems shall comply with the requirements in this Appendix. 2.2. Instead of carrying out the test procedures in the following point, a fixed K i value of 1,05 may be used if the technical service sees no reason why this value could be exceeded and after approval of the approval authority. 2.3. During cycles where regeneration occurs, emission standards can be exceeded. If a regeneration of an anti-pollution device occurs at least once per Type I test and that has already regenerated at least once during the vehicle preparation cycle, it will be considered as a continuously regenerating system which does not require a special test procedure. 3. Test procedure The vehicle may be equipped with a switch capable of preventing or permitting the regeneration process provided that its operation has no effect on original engine calibration. This switch shall be used for the purpose of preventing regeneration only during loading of the regeneration system and during the pre-conditioning cycles. However, it shall not be used during the measurement of emissions in the regeneration phase; rather, the emission test shall be carried out with the unchanged original equipment manufacturer’s powertrain control unit / engine control unit / drive train control unit if applicable and powertrain software. 3.1. Measurement of carbon dioxide emission and fuel consumption between two cycles where regenerative phases occur. 3.1.1. The average of carbon dioxide emission and fuel consumption between regeneration phases and during loading of the regenerative device shall be determined from the arithmetic mean of several approximately equidistant (if more than two) type I operating cycles. As an alternative, the manufacturer may provide data to show that carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption remain constant (+4 percent) between regeneration phases. In this case, the carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption measured during the regular type I test may be used. In any other case, emissions shall be measured for at least two type I operating cycles: one immediately after regeneration (before new loading) and one as immediately as possible before a regeneration phase. All emissions measurements and calculations shall be carried out in accordance with Annex II. Average emissions for a single regenerative system shall be determined in accordance with point 3.3 and for multiple regeneration systems in accordance with point 3.4. 3.1.2. The loading process and K i determination shall be carried out on a chassis dynamometer during the type I operating cycles. These cycles may be run continuously (i.e. without the need to switch the engine off between cycles). After any number of completed cycles, the vehicle may be removed from the chassis dynamometer and the test continued at a later time. 3.1.3. The number of cycles (D) between two cycles in which regeneration phases occur, the number of cycles over which emissions measurements are taken (n) and each emissions measurement (M’si j ) shall be reported according to the template of the test report referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU0 No 168/2013. 3.2. Measurement of carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption during regeneration 3.2.1. If necessary, the vehicle may be prepared for the emissions test during a regeneration phase using the preparation cycles in Appendix 6. 3.2.2. The test and vehicle conditions for the type I test described in Annex II apply before the first valid emission test is carried out. 3.2.3. Regeneration shall not occur during the preparation of the vehicle. This may be ensured by one of the following methods: 3.2.4. A cold-start exhaust emission test including a regeneration process shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable type I operating cycle. 3.2.5. If the regeneration process requires more than one operating cycle, subsequent test cycle(s) shall be driven immediately, without switching the engine off, until complete regeneration has been achieved (each cycle shall be completed). The time necessary to set up a new test shall be as short as possible (e.g. as required to change a particulate matter filter on the analysing equipment). The engine shall be switched off during this period. 3.2.6. The emission values, including pollutant and carbon dioxide emission values, and fuel consumption during regeneration (M ri ) shall be calculated in accordance with Annex II and point 3.3. The number of operating cycles (d) measured for complete regeneration shall be recorded. 3.3. Calculation of the combined exhaust emissions of a single regenerative system: where for each pollutant (i) considered: Figure Ap13-1 Example of measurement parameters. Parameters measured during emissions or fuel consumption test during and between cycles in which regeneration occurs (schematic example – the emissions during ‘D’ may increase or decrease) Emission [g/km] Number of cycles 3.3.1. Calculation of the regeneration factor K for each pollutant (i), carbon dioxide emission and fuel consumption (i) considered: Equation Ap13-4: M si , M pi and K i results shall be recorded in the test report delivered by the technical service. K i may be determined following the completion of a single sequence. 3.4. Calculation of combined exhaust emissions, carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption of multiple periodic regenerating systems where for each pollutant (i) considered: Figure Ap13-2 Parameters measured during emissions test during and between cycles in which regeneration occurs (schematic example) Number of cycles Figure Ap13-3 Parameters measured during emissions test during and between cycles where regeneration occurs (schematic example) For application of a simple and realistic case, the following description gives a detailed explanation of the schematic example shown in Figure Ap13-3: The calculation of the factor (K i ) for multiple periodic regenerating systems is possible only after a certain number of regeneration phases for each system. After performing the complete procedure (A to B, see Figure Ap13-2), the original starting conditions A should be reached again. 3.4.1. Extension of approval for a multiple periodic regeneration system ANNEX III Test type II requirements: tailpipe emissions at (increased) idle and free acceleration 1. Introduction This Annex describes the procedure for type II testing, as referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, designed to ensure the requisite measurement of emissions during roadworthiness testing. The purpose of the requirements laid down in this Annex is to demonstrate that the approved vehicle complies with the requirements laid down in Directive 2009/40/EC ( 1 ) . 2. Scope 2.1. During the environmental performance type-approval process, it shall be demonstrated to the technical service and approval authority that the L-category vehicles falling within the scope of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 comply with the test type II requirements. 2.2. Vehicles equipped with a propulsion type of which a positive ignition combustion engine forms part shall be subject only to a type II emission test as set out in points 3, 4 and 5. 2.3. Vehicles equipped with a propulsion type of which a compression ignition combustion engine forms part shall be subject only to a type II free acceleration emission test as set out in points 3, 6 and 7. In this case point 3.8. is not applicable. 3. General conditions of type II emission testing 3.1. A visual inspection of any emission-control equipment shall be conducted prior to start of the type II emission test in order to check that the vehicle is complete, in a satisfactory condition and that there are no leaks in the fuel, air supply or exhaust systems. The test vehicle shall be properly maintained and used. 3.2. The fuel used to conduct the type II test shall be the reference fuel, specifications for which are given in Appendix 2 of Annex II in accordance with the requirements set out in Part B of Annex V of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.3. During the test, the environmental temperature shall be between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). 3.4. In the case of vehicles with manually-operated or semi-automatic-shift gearboxes, the test type II test shall be carried out with the gear lever in the ‘neutral’ position and the clutch engaged. 3.5. In the case of vehicles with automatic-shift gearboxes, the idle type II test shall be carried out with the gear selector in either the ‘neutral’ or the ‘park’ position. Where an automatic clutch is also fitted, the driven axle shall be lifted up to a point at which the wheels can rotate freely. 3.6. The type II emission test shall be conducted immediately after the type I emission test. In any event, the engine shall be warmed up until all coolant and lubricant temperatures and lubricant pressure have reached equilibrium at operational levels. 3.7. The exhaust outlets shall be provided with an air-tight extension, so that the sample probe used to collect exhaust gases may be inserted at least 60 cm into the exhaust outlet without increasing the back pressure of more than 125 mm H 2 O and without disturbing operation of the vehicle. This extension shall be so shaped as to avoid any appreciable dilution of exhaust gases in the air at the location of the sample probe. Where a vehicle is equipped with an exhaust system with multiple outlets, either these shall be joined to a common pipe or the carbon monoxide content shall be collected from each of them and an arithmetical average taken. 3.8. The emission test equipment and analysers to perform the type II testing shall be regularly calibrated and maintained. A flame ionisation detection or NDIR analyser may be used for measuring hydrocarbons. 3.9. The vehicles shall be tested with the fuel-consuming engine running. 4. Test type II – description of test procedure to measure tailpipe emissions at (increased) idle and free acceleration 4.1 Components for adjusting the idling speed 4.2 Determination of measurement points and type II idle test pass/fail criteria 4.3. The following parameters shall be measured and recorded at normal idling speed and at high idle speed: 5. CO concentration calculation in the type II idle test 5.1. The CO (C CO ) and CO 2 (C CO 2 ) concentration shall be determined from the measuring instrument readings or recordings, by use of appropriate calibration curves. 5.2. The corrected concentration for carbon monoxide is: Equation 2-1: 5.3. The C CO concentration (see point 5.1.) shall be measured in accordance with the formulae in point 5.2. and does not need to be corrected if the total of the concentrations measured (C CO + C CO 2 ) is at least: 6 Test type II – free acceleration test procedure 6.1. The combustion engine and any turbocharger or super-charger fitted shall be running at idle before the start of each free acceleration test cycle. 6.2. To initiate each free acceleration cycle, the throttle pedal shall be fully depressed quickly and continuously (in less than one second) but not violently, so as to obtain maximum delivery from the fuel pump. 6.3. During each free acceleration cycle, the engine shall reach cut-off speed or, for vehicles with automatic transmissions, the speed specified by the manufacturer or, if this data is not available, two-thirds of the cut-off speed, before the throttle is released. This could be checked, for instance, by monitoring engine speed or by allowing at least two seconds elapsing between initial throttle depression and release. 6.4. For vehicles equipped with CVT and automatic clutch, the driven wheels may be lifted from the ground. For engines with safety limits in the engine control (e.g. max 1 500 rpm without running wheels or without gear), this maximum engine speed shall be reached. 6.5. The average concentration level of the particulate matter (in m –1 ) in the exhaust flow (opacity) shall be measured during five free acceleration tests. Opacity means an optical measurement of the density of particulate matter in the exhaust flow of an engine, expressed in m –1 ; 7 Test type II – free acceleration test results and requirements 7.1. The test value measured in accordance with point 6.5 shall be in compliance with the requirements laid down in point 8.2.2.2. (b) of Annex II to Directive 2009/40/EC. ( 1 ) OJ L 141, 6.6.2009, p. 12 . ANNEX IV Test type III requirements: emissions of crankcase gases 1. Introduction This Annex describes the procedure for type III testing, as referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2. General provisions 3. Test conditions 4. Test methods 4.1. The type III test shall be conducted according to the following test procedure: 4.1.1. Idling shall be regulated in conformity with the manufacturer’s recommendations. 4.1.2. Measurements shall be taken in the following sets of conditions of engine operation: Table 3-1 Idle operation or steady state vehicle test speeds and power absorbed by the chassis dynamometer during the type III test 4.1.3. For all operation conditions listed in point 4.1.2., the reliable functioning of the crankcase ventilation system shall be checked. 4.1.4. Method of verification of the crankcase ventilation system 4.1.5. For the test method described in points 4.1.4.1. to 4.1.4.3., the pressure in the intake manifold shall be measured to within ±1 kPa. 4.1.6. The vehicle speed as indicated at the dynamometer shall be measured to within ± 2 km/h. 4.1.7. The pressures measured in the crankcase and the ambient pressure shall be measured to within ± 0,1 kPa and shall be sampled with a frequency ≥ 1 Hz within a time period of ≥ 60 s when the conditions in point 4.1.2. are continuously operated and stabilised. 4.2. If, in one or more of the conditions of measurement in point 4.1.2., the highest pressure value measured in the crankcase within the time period in point 4.1.7. exceeds the atmospheric pressure, an additional test as defined in point 4.2.1. or 4.2.3. (as chosen by the manufacturer) shall be performed to the satisfaction of the approval authority. 4.2.1. Additional type III test method (No 1) 4.2.2. If the structural layout of the engine is such that the test cannot be performed by the methods described in point 4.2.1., the measurements shall be effected by that method modified as follows: 4.2.3. Alternative additional type III test method (No 2) ANNEX V Test type IV requirements: evaporative emissions 1. Introduction 2. General requirements Appendix 1 Fuel storage permeability test procedure 1. Scope 1.1. This requirement shall apply to all L-category vehicles equipped with a non-metallic fuel tank to store liquid, volatile fuel, as applicable for vehicles equipped with a positive ignition combustion engine. 1.2. Vehicles complying with the requirements set out in Appendix 2 or 3 or vehicles equipped with a compression ignition engine using low volatile fuel shall comply with the requirements of this Appendix only as preconditioning procedure for fuel storage testing referred to in Number C8 of Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. The fuel tanks on those vehicles are exempted from the evaporative requirements set out in points 2.1.5, 2.1.6, 2.3. and 2.4. 2. Fuel tank permeability test 2.1. Test method 2.1.1. Test temperature The fuel tank shall be tested at a temperature of 313,2 ± 2 K (40 ± 2 °C). 2.1.2. Test fuel The test fuel to be used shall be the reference fuel set out in Appendix 2 of Annex II. If this test procedure is used only as preconditioning for subsequent fuel storage testing referred to in Number C8 of Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, a commercial premium-grade fuel may be used at the choice of the manufacturer and to the satisfaction of the approval authority. 2.1.3. The tank is filled with the test fuel up to 50 % of its total rated capacity and allowed to rest in the ambient air at a temperature of 313,2 ± 2 K until there is a constant weight loss. That period shall be at least four weeks (pre-storage period). The tank is emptied and then refilled with test fuel to 50 % of its rated capacity. 2.1.4. The tank is stored under the stabilising conditions at a temperature of 313,2 ± 2 K until its contents are at the test temperature. The tank is then sealed. The pressure rise in the tank during the test may be compensated. 2.1.5. The weight loss due to diffusion shall be measured during the eight-week test. During that period, a maximum quantity of 20 000 mg may escape from the fuel tank, on average, every 24 hours. 2.1.6. If the diffusion losses are greater, the fuel loss shall also be determined at a test temperature of 296,2 ± 2 K (23 ± 2 °C), all other conditions being maintained (pre-storage at 313,2 ± 2 K). The loss determined under those conditions shall not exceed 10 000 mg per 24 hours. 2.2. All fuel tanks that will undergo this test procedure as preconditioning for testing referred to in Number C8 of Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall be duly identified. 2.3. The permeability evaporation test results shall not be averaged between the different tested fuel tanks, but the worst-case diffusion loss rate observed of any one of those fuel tanks shall be taken and compared against the maximum permitted loss rate set out in point 2.1.5 and, if applicable, in point 2.1.6. 2.4. Fuel tank permeability test conducted with internal pressure compensation If the fuel tank permeability test is conducted with internal pressure compensation, which shall be noted in the test report, the fuel loss resulting from the pressure compensation shall be taken into account when the diffusion loss is calculated. Appendix 2 Fuel storage and delivery system permeation test procedure 1 Scope and test limits 1.1. As of the date of first application laid down in Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, fuel system permeation shall be tested in accordance with the test procedure laid down in point 2. This base requirement shall apply to all L-category vehicles equipped with a fuel tank to store liquid, high volatile fuel, as applicable for a vehicle equipped with a positive ignition combustion engine, in accordance with Part B of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and pending the results of the environmental effect study laid down in Article 23 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 1.2. For the purposes of the requirements of this Appendix, the minimum fuel system components falling within the scope of this Appendix consist of a fuel storage tank and fuel line sub-assembly. Other components that form part of the fuel delivery system, fuel metering and control system are not subject to the requirements of this Appendix. 2. Description of the fuel tank permeation test 2.1 Measure permeation emissions by weighing a sealed fuel tank before and after a temperature-controlled soak according to the following flow charts Figure Ap2-1 Fuel tank permeation full and short tests 1: Full Test Procedure with DF (*) Determination begin with new tank preconditioning fuel soak 28 ± 5 C 20 weeks (**) baseline permeation test run 28 ± 2 C Durability Testing Pressure Cycling 10 000 × – 0,5 to 2,0 psi UV Exposure 24 W/m 2 Slosh Testing 1 million cycles fuel soak 28 ± 5 C 20 weeks (**) final permeation test run 28 ± 2 C use final permeation test result for type-approval 2: Short Test without DF Determination begin test Durability Testing Pressure Cycling 10 000 × – 0,5 to 2,0 psi UV Exposure 24 W/m Slosh Testing 1 million cycles fuel soak 28 ± 5 C 20 weeks (**) final permeation test run 28 ± 2 C use final permeation test result for type-approval (**) The length of “soak” during durability testing may be included in the fuel soak period provided that fuel remains in the tank. Soak periods can be shortened to 10 weeks if performed at 43 ± 5 C 2.2. Metallic tanks are exempted from durability testing. 3. Preconditioning fuel soak for the fuel tank permeation test To precondition the fuel tank in the fuel tank permeation test, the following five steps shall be followed: 3.1. The tank shall be filled with reference fuel specified in Appendix 2 to Annex II, and sealed. The filled tank shall be soaked at an ambient temperature of 301,2 ± 5 K (28 ± 5 °C) for 20 weeks or at 316,2 ± 5 K (43 ± 5 °C) for ten weeks. Alternatively, a shorter period of time at a higher -temperature may be used as soak time if the manufacturer can prove to the approval authority that the hydrocarbon permeation rate has stabilised. 3.2. The fuel tank’s internal surface area shall be determined in square metres accurate to at least three significant figures. The manufacturer may use less accurate estimates of the surface area if it is ensured that the surface area will not be overestimated. 3.3. The fuel tank shall be filled with the reference fuel to its nominal capacity. 3.4. The tank and fuel shall equilibrate to 301,2 ± 5 K (28 ± 5 °C) or 316,2 ± 5 K (43 ± 5 °C) in the case of the alternative short test. 3.5. The fuel tank shall be sealed using fuel caps and other fittings (excluding petcocks) that can be used to seal openings in a production fuel tank. In cases where openings are not normally sealed on the fuel tank (such as hose-connection fittings and vents in fuel caps), these openings may be sealed using non-permeable fittings such as metal or fluoropolymer plugs. 4. Fuel tank permeation test procedure To run the test, the following steps shall be taken for a tank preconditioned as specified in point 3. 4.1. Weigh the sealed fuel tank and record the weight in mg. This measurement shall be taken within eight hours of filling of the tank with test fuel. 4.2. The tank shall be placed in a ventilated, temperature-controlled room or enclosure. 4.3. The test room or enclosure shall be closed and sealed and the test time shall be recorded. 4.4. The test room or enclosure temperature shall be continuously maintained at 301,2 ± 2 K (28 ± 5 °C) for 14 days. This temperature shall be continuously monitored and recorded. 5. Fuel tank permeation test result calculation 5.1. At the end of the soak period, the weight in mg of the sealed fuel tank shall be recorded. Unless the same fuel is used in the preconditioning fuel soak and the permeation test run, weight measurements shall be recorded on five separate days per week of testing. The test is void if a linear plot of tank weight vs. test days for the full soak period for permeation testing yields a linear regression correlation coefficient r 2 < 0,8. 5.2. The weight of the filled fuel tank at the end of the test shall be subtracted from the weight of the filled fuel tank at the beginning of the test. 5.3. The difference in mass shall be divided by the internal surface area of the fuel tank. 5.4. The result of the calculation under point 5.3., expressed in mg/m 2 , shall be divided by the number of test days to calculate the mg/m 2 /day emission rate and rounded to the same number of decimal places as the emission standard laid down in Part C2 of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 5.5. In cases where permeation rates during a soak period of 14 days are such that the manufacturer considers that period not long enough to be able to measure significant weight changes, the period may be extended by a maximum of 14 additional days. In this case, the test steps in points 4.5 to 4.8 shall be repeated to determine the weight change for the full 28 days. 5.6. Determination of the deterioration factor when applying the full permeation test procedure The deterioration factor (DF) shall be determined from any of the following at the choice of the manufacturer: 5.7. Determination of the final tank permeation test results 5.7.1. Full test procedure To determine the permeation test result, the deterioration factor determined in point 5.6. shall be multiplied by the measured permeation test result determined in point 5.4. The product of multiplication shall be no greater than the applicable permeation test limit set out in Part C2 of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 5.7.2. Accelerated (short) test procedure The measured permeation test result determined in point 5.4 shall be no greater than the applicable permeation test limit set out in Part C2 of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 6. Fuel tank durability testing 6.1. A separate durability demonstration for each substantially different combination of treatment approaches and non-metallic tank materials shall be performed by taking the following steps: 6.1.1. Pressure cycling A pressure test shall be conducted by sealing the tank and cycling it between 115,1 kPa absolute pressure(+ 2,0 psig) and 97,9 kPa absolute pressure (– 0,5 psig) and back to 115,1 kPa absolute pressure(+ 2,0 psig) for 10 000 cycles at a rate of 60 seconds per cycle. 6.1.2. UV exposure A sunlight exposure test shall be conducted by exposing the fuel tank to an ultraviolet light of at least 24 W/m 2 (0,40 W-hr/m 2 /min) on the tank surface for at least 450 hours. Alternatively, the non-metallic fuel tank may be exposed to direct natural sunlight for an equivalent period of time, as long as it is ensured that it is exposed to at least 450 daylight hours. 6.1.3. Slosh testing A slosh test shall be conducted by filling the non-metallic fuel tank to 40 percent of its capacity with the reference fuel set out in Appendix 2 to Annex II or with a commercial premium-grade fuel at the choice of the manufacturer and to the satisfaction of the approval authority. The fuel tank assembly shall be rocked at a rate of 15 cycles per minute until one million total cycles are reached. An angle deviation of + 15° to – 15° from level shall be used and the slosh test shall be conducted at an ambient temperature of 301,2 ± 5 K (28 ± 5 °C). 6.2. Final fuel tank durability test results Following the durability testing, the fuel tank shall be soaked according to the requirements of point 3 to ensure that the permeation rate is stable. The period of slosh testing and the period of ultraviolet testing may be considered to be part of this soak, provided that the soak begins immediately after the slosh testing. To determine the final permeation rate, the fuel tank shall be drained and refilled with fresh test fuel as set out in Appendix 2 to Annex II. The permeation test run laid down in point 4 shall be repeated immediately after this soak period. The same test fuel requirement shall be used for this permeation test run as for the permeation test run conducted prior to the durability testing. The final test results shall be calculated in accordance with point 5. 6.3. The manufacturer may request that any of the durability tests be excluded if it can be clearly demonstrated to the approval authorities that this does not affect the emissions from the fuel tank. 6.4. The length of ‘soak’ during durability testing may be included in the fuel soak period provided that fuel remains in the tank. Soak periods may be shortened to ten weeks if performed at 316,2 ± 5 K (43 ± 5 °C). 7. Fuel line assembly test requirements 7.1. Fuel line assembly permeation physical testing procedure The manufacturer shall conduct a fuel line assembly test, including the fuel hose clamps and the material to which the fuel lines are connected on both sides, by performing a physical test in accordance with any of the following test procedures: 7.2. Fuel line assembly permeation test limits in the case of physical testing The test limits for fuel tubing in Part C2 of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall be met when conducting the test procedures laid down in point 7.1. 7.3. Physical testing of fuel-line assembly permeation is not required if: If the fuel hoses fitted on the vehicle meet all three specifications, the fuel tubing test limit requirements in Part C2 of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall be considered as fulfilled. Appendix 3 Sealed Housing for Evaporation Determination (SHED) test procedure 1. Scope 2. Description of SHED test The evaporative emission SHED test (Figure Ap3-1) consists of a conditioning phase and a test phase, as follows: Mass emissions of hydrocarbons from the tank breathing loss and the hot soak loss phases are added together to provide an overall result for the test. Figure Ap3-1 Flow chart – evaporative emission SHED test Minimum according to vehicle category Maximum 36 hours 288,5 to 308,5 K in 60 minutes Starts within 60 minutes from the end of the diumal test Starts 7 minutes from end of driving cycle Driving Cycle Vehicle Soak Diumal (breathing loss) Test Driving Cycle Hot Soak Test Conditioning Phase Test Phase 3. Test vehicles and test fuel requirement 3.1. Test vehicles The SHED test shall be conducted at the choice of the manufacturer with one or more degreened test vehicles equipped with: 3.2. Test vehicles The degreened test vehicle, which shall be representative of the vehicle type with regard to environmental performance to be approved, shall be in good mechanical condition and, before the evaporative test, have been run in and driven at least 1 000 km after first start on the production line. The evaporative emission-control system shall be connected and functioning correctly over this period and the carbon canister and evaporative emission control valve subjected to normal use, undergoing neither abnormal purging nor abnormal loading. 3.3. Test fuel The appropriate test fuel, as defined in Appendix 2 to Annex II, shall be used. 4. Chassis dynamometer and evaporative emissions enclosure 4.1. The chassis dynamometer shall meet the requirements of Appendix 3 of Annex II. 4.2. Evaporative emission measurement enclosure (SHED) The evaporative emission measurement enclosure shall be a gas-tight rectangular measuring chamber able to contain the vehicle under test. The vehicle shall be accessible from all sides when inside and the enclosure when sealed shall be gas-tight. The inner surface of the enclosure shall be impermeable to hydrocarbons. At least one of the surfaces shall incorporate a flexible impermeable material or other device to allow the equilibration of pressure changes resulting from small changes in temperature. Wall design shall be such as to promote good dissipation of heat. 4.3. Analytical systems 4.3.1. Hydrocarbon analyser 4.3.2. Hydrocarbon analyser data recording system 4.4. Fuel tank heating 4.4.1. The fuel tank heating system shall consist of two separate heat sources with two temperature controllers. Typically, the heat sources will be electric heating strips, but other sources may be used at the request of the manufacturer. Temperature controllers may be manual, such as variable transformers, or automated. Since vapour and fuel temperature are to be controlled separately, an automatic controller is recommended for the fuel. The heating system shall not cause hot-spots on the wetted surface of the tank which would cause local overheating of the fuel. Heating strips for the fuel should be located as low as practicable on the fuel tank and shall cover at least 10 % of the wetted surface. The centre line of the heating strips shall be below 30 % of the fuel depth as measured from the bottom of the fuel tank, and approximately parallel to the fuel level in the tank. The centre line of the vapour heating strips, if used, shall be located at the approximate height of the centre of the vapour volume. The temperature controllers shall be capable of controlling the fuel and vapour temperatures to the heating function described in 5.3.1.6. 4.4.2. With temperature sensors positioned as in point 4.5.2., the fuel heating device shall make it possible to evenly heat the fuel and fuel vapour in the tank in accordance with the heating function described in 5.3.1.6. The heating system shall be capable of controlling the fuel and vapour temperatures to ± 1,7 K of the required temperature during the tank heating process. 4.4.3. Notwithstanding the requirements of point 4.4.2., if a manufacturer is unable to meet the heating requirement specified, due to use of thick-walled plastic fuel tanks for example, then the closest possible alternative heat slope shall be used. Prior to the commencement of any test, the manufacturer shall submit engineering data to the technical service to support the use of an alternative heat slope. 4.5. Temperature recording 4.5.1. The temperature in the chamber is recorded at two points by temperature sensors which are connected so as to show a mean value. The measuring points are extended approximately 0,1 m into the enclosure from the vertical centre line of each side wall at a height of 0,9 ± 0,2 m. 4.5.2. The temperatures of the fuel and fuel vapour shall be recorded by means of sensors positioned in the fuel tank as described in point 5.1.1. When sensors cannot be positioned as specified in point 5.1.1, e.g. where a fuel tank with two ostensibly separate chambers is used, sensors shall be located at the approximate mid-volume of each fuel- or vapour-containing chamber. In this case, the average of these temperature readings shall constitute the fuel and vapour temperatures. 4.5.3. Throughout the evaporative emission measurements, temperatures shall be recorded or entered into a data processing system at a frequency of at least once per minute. 4.5.4. The accuracy of the temperature recording system shall be within ± 1,7 K and capable of resolving temperatures to 0,5 K. 4.5.5. The recording or data processing system shall be capable of resolving time to ± 15 seconds. 4.6. Fans 4.6.1. It shall be possible to reduce the hydrocarbon concentration in the chamber to the ambient hydrocarbon level by using one or more fans or blowers with the SHED door(s) open. 4.6.2. The chamber shall have one or more fans or blowers of likely capacity 0,1 to 0,5 m 3 /s with which to thoroughly mix the atmosphere in the enclosure. It shall be possible to attain an even temperature and hydrocarbon concentration in the chamber during measurements. The vehicle in the enclosure shall not be subjected to a direct stream of air from the fans or blowers. 4.7. Gases 4.7.1. The following pure gases shall be available for calibration and operation: 4.7.2. Calibration and span gases shall be available containing mixtures of propane (C 3 H 8 ) and purified synthetic air. The true concentrations of a calibration gas shall be within ± 2 % of the stated figures. The accuracy of the diluted gases obtained when using a gas divider shall be to within ± 2 % of the true value. The concentrations specified in Appendix 1 may also be obtained by the use of a gas divider using synthetic air as the diluting gas. 4.8. Additional equipment 4.8.1. The relative humidity in the test area shall be measurable to within ± 5 %. 4.8.2. The pressure within the test area shall be measurable to within ± 0,1 kPa. 4.9. Alternative equipment 4.9.1. At the request of the manufacturer and with the agreement of the approval authority, the technical service may authorise the use of alternative equipment provided that it can be demonstrated that it gives equivalent results. 5. Test procedure 5.1. Test preparation 5.1.1. The vehicle is mechanically prepared before the test as follows: 5.2. Conditioning phase 5.2.1. The vehicle shall be taken into the test area where the ambient temperature is between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). 5.2.2. The vehicle is placed on a chassis dynamometer and driven through the test cycle specified in Part A of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 as appropriate for the class of vehicle being tested. Exhaust emissions may be sampled during this operation but the results shall not be used for the purpose of exhaust emission type-approval. 5.2.3. The vehicle is parked in the test area for the minimum period stated in Table Ap3-1. Table Ap3-1 SHED test – minimum and maximum soak periods 5.3. Test phases 5.3.1. Tank breathing (diurnal) evaporative emission test 5.3.2. Driving cycle 5.3.3. Hot soak evaporative emissions test The determination for evaporative emissions is concluded with the measurement of hydrocarbon emissions over a 60-minute hot soak period. The hot soak test shall begin within seven minutes of the completion of the driving cycle specified in point 5.3.2.1. 5.4. Alternative test procedures 5.4.1. At the request of the manufacturer, with the agreement of the technical service and to the satisfaction of the approval authority, alternative methods may be used to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Appendix. In such cases, the manufacturer shall satisfy the technical service that the results from the alternative test can be correlated with those resulting from the procedure described in this Annex. This correlation shall be documented and added to the information folder provided for in Article 27 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 6. Calculation of results 6.1. The evaporative emission tests described in chapter 5 allow the hydrocarbon emissions from the tank breathing and hot soak phases to be calculated. Evaporative losses from each of these phases is calculated using the initial and final hydrocarbon concentrations, temperatures and pressures in the enclosure, together with the net enclosure volume. The following formula shall be used: Equation Ap3-3: where: where: 6.2. Overall results of test The overall evaporative hydrocarbon mass emission for the vehicle is taken to be: Equation Ap3-4: where: 7. Limit values When tested according to this Annex, overall evaporative hydrocarbon mass emission for the vehicle (M total ) shall be as specified in Part C of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 8. Further provisions At the request of the manufacturer, evaporative emission approval shall be granted without testing if a California Executive Order for the vehicle type with regard to environmental performance for which application is made can be provided to the approval authority. Appendix 3.1 Preconditioning requirements for a hybrid application before start of the SHED test 1. Scope 2. Test methods Appendix 3.2 Ageing test procedure for evaporative emission control devices 1. Test methods for ageing of evaporative emission control devices The SHED test shall be conducted with aged evaporative emission control devices fitted. The ageing tests for those devices shall be conducted according to the procedures in this Appendix. 2. Carbon canister ageing Figure Ap3.2-1 Carbon canister gas flow diagram and ports A carbon canister representative of the propulsion family of the vehicle as set out in Annex XI shall be selected as test canister and shall be marked in agreement with the approval authority and the technical service. 2.1. Canister ageing test procedure In the case of a multiple canister system, each canister shall undergo the procedure separately. The number of test cycles of canister loading and discharging shall correspond to the number set-out in table Ap3.1-1, dwell time and subsequent purging of fuel vapour shall be run to age the test canister at an ambient temperature of 297 ± 2 K as follows: 2.1.1. Canister loading part of the test cycle 2.1.2. Dwell time A five minute dwell period between canister loading and purging as part of the test cycle shall be applied. 2.1.3 Canister purging part of the test cycle Table Ap3.2-1 Amount of test cycles of charging and purging the test canister 3. Ageing test procedure of evaporative emission control valves, cables and linkages 4. Reporting The manufacturer shall report the results of the tests referred to in points 2 and 3 in a test report drafted according to the template referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. Appendix 4 Calibration of equipment for evaporative emission testing 1. Calibration frequency and methods 1.1. All equipment shall be calibrated before its initial use and then as often as necessary, and in any case in the month before type-approval testing. The calibration methods to be used are described in this Appendix. 2. Calibration of the enclosure 2.1. Initial determination of enclosure internal volume 2.2. Determination of chamber background emissions This operation determines that the chamber contains no materials that emit significant amounts of hydrocarbons. The check shall be carried out when the enclosure is brought into service, after any operations in it which may affect background emissions and at least once per year. 2.3. Calibration and hydrocarbon retention test of the chamber The calibration and hydrocarbon retention test in the chamber provides a check on the calculated volume in point 2.1. and also measures any leak rate. 2.4. Calculations The calculation of net hydrocarbon mass change within the enclosure shall be used to determine the chamber’s hydrocarbon background and leak rate. Initial and final readings of hydrocarbon concentration, temperature and barometric pressure are used in the following formula to calculate the mass change: Equation Ap3-5: where: where: 3. Checking of FID hydrocarbon analyser 3.1. Detector response optimisation The FID analyser shall be adjusted as specified by the instrument manufacturer. Propane in air shall be used to optimise the response on the most common operating range. 3.2. Calibration of the HC analyser The analyser shall be calibrated using propane in air and purified synthetic air. A calibration curve shall be established as described in points 4.1 to 4.5. 3.3. Oxygen interference check and recommended limits The response factor (Rf) for a particular hydrocarbon species is the ratio of the FID C1 reading to the gas cylinder concentration, expressed as ppm C1. The concentration of the test gas shall be such as to give a response of approximately 80 % of full scale deflection, for the operating range. The concentration shall be known to an accuracy of ± 2 % in reference to a gravimetric standard expressed in volume. In addition, the gas cylinder shall be preconditioned for 24 hours at between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). Response factors shall be determined when introducing an analyser into service and thereafter at major service intervals. The reference gas to be used is propane balanced with purified air which shall be taken to give a response factor of 1,00. The test gas to be used for oxygen interference and the recommended response factor range are given the following response factor range for Propane and Nitrogen: 0,95 ≤ Rf ≤ 1,05. 4. Calibration of the hydrocarbon analyser Each of the normally used operating ranges are calibrated by the following procedure: ANNEX VI Test type V requirements: durability of pollution-control devices 0. Introduction 1. General requirements 2. Specific requirements 2.1 Test vehicle requirements 2.1.1. The test vehicles used for type V durability testing and in particular the pollution-control and peripheral devices that are relevant for the emission abatement system shall be representative of the vehicle type with regard to environmental performance produced in series and placed on the market. 2.1.2. The test vehicles shall be in good mechanical order at the start of mileage accumulation and it shall not have more than 100 km accumulated after it was first started at the end of the production line. The propulsion and pollution-control devices shall not have been used since its manufacture, with the exception of quality control tests and accumulation of the first 100 km. 2.1.3. Regardless of the durability test procedure selected by the manufacturer, all pollution-control devices and systems, both including hardware, powertrain software and powertrain calibration, fitted on the test vehicles shall be installed and operating for the entire mileage accumulation period. 2.1.4. The pollution-control devices on the test vehicles shall be permanently marked under surveillance of the technical service before the start of mileage accumulation and be listed together with the vehicle identification number, powertrain software and powertrain calibration sets. The manufacturer shall make that list available at the request of the approval authority. 2.1.5. Maintenance, adjustments and the use of the controls of the test vehicles shall be as recommended by the manufacturer in the appropriate repair and maintenance information and in the user manual. 2.1.6. The durability test shall be conducted with a suitable commercially available fuel at the discretion of the manufacturer. If the test vehicles is/are equipped with a two-stroke engine, lubricating oil shall be used in the proportion and of the grade recommended by the manufacturer in the user manual. 2.1.7. The test vehicles’ cooling system shall enable the vehicle to operate at temperatures similar to those obtained during normal road use conditions (oil, coolant, exhaust system, etc.). 2.1.8. If the durability test is completed on a test track or road, the reference mass of the test vehicle shall be at least equal to that used for type I emission tests conducted on a chassis dynamometer. 2.1.9. If approved by the technical service and to the satisfaction of the approval authority, the type V test procedure may be carried out using a test vehicle of which the body style, gear box (automatic or manual) and wheel or tyre size differ from those of the vehicle type for which the environmental performance type-approval is sought. 2.2. In the type V test procedure, mileage shall be accumulated by driving the test vehicles either on a test track, on the road or on a chassis dynamometer. The test track or test road shall be selected at the discretion of the manufacturer. 2.2.1. Chassis dynamometer used for mileage accumulation 2.3. The type I emission verification tests before, during and after durability mileage accumulation shall be conducted according to the test procedures for emissions after cold start set out in Annex II. All type I emission verification test results shall be listed and made available to the technical service and to the approval authority upon request. The results of type I emission verification tests at the start and the finish of durability mileage accumulation shall be included in the test report. At least the first and last type I emission verification tests shall be conducted or witnessed by the technical service and reported to the approval authority. The test report shall confirm and state whether the technical service conducted or witnessed the type I emission verification testing. 2.4. Type V test requirements for an L-category vehicle equipped with a hybrid propulsion 2.4.1. For OVC vehicles: The electrical energy/power storage device may be charged twice a day during mileage accumulation. For OVC vehicles with an operating mode switch, mileage accumulation shall be driven in the mode which is automatically set after the ignition key is turned (normal mode). During the mileage accumulation, a change to another hybrid mode is allowed if necessary in order to continue the mileage accumulation, after agreement of the technical service and to the satisfaction of the approval authority. This hybrid mode change shall be recorded in the test report. Pollutant emissions shall be measured under the same conditions as specified by Condition B of the type I test (points 3.1.3. and 3.2.3.). 2.4.2. For NOVC vehicles: For NOVC vehicles with an operating mode switch, mileage accumulation shall be driven in the mode which is automatically set after the ignition key is turned on (normal mode). Pollutant emissions shall be measured in the same conditions as in the type I test. 3. Test type V, durability test procedure specifications The specifications of the three durability test procedures set out in Article 23(3) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 are as follows: 3.1. Actual durability testing with full mileage accumulation The durability test procedure with full mileage accumulation to age the test vehicles shall refer to Article 23(3)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. Full mileage accumulation shall mean full completion of the assigned test distance laid down in Part A of Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. by repeating the driving manoeuvres laid down in Appendix 1 or, if applicable in Appendix 2. 3.1.1. The manufacturer shall provide evidence that the emission limits in the applicable type I emission laboratory test cycle, as set out in Part A or B of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, of the aged test vehicles are not exceeded when starting mileage accumulation, during the accumulation phase and after full mileage accumulation has been finalised. 3.1.2. Multiple type I emission tests shall be conducted during the full mileage accumulation phase with a frequency and amount of type I test procedures at the choice of the manufacturer and to the satisfaction of the technical service and approval authority. The type I emission test results shall provide sufficient statistical relevance to identify the deterioration trend, which shall be representative of the vehicle type with regard to environmental performance as placed on the market (see Figure 5-1). Figure 5-1 Test type V – durability test procedure with full mileage accumulation New vehicle(s) from (proto-type) production line Start Type V test: conduct Type I emission tests, degreened vehicle Multiple Type I emission tests, partially aged vehicle Finish type V test: conduct Type I emission tests, fully aged vehicle Maximum allowed mileage prior to start mileage accumulation: 100 km Full mileage accumulation durability cycle: 1) SRC-LeCV for all L-vehicle categories or if applicable; 2) AMA-L3e (for L3e & L4e motorcycles only) 3.2. Actual durability testing with partial mileage accumulation The durability test procedure for L-category vehicles with partial mileage accumulation shall refer to Article 23(3)(b) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. Partial mileage accumulation shall involve completion of a minimum of 50 % of the test distance specified in Part A of Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 and compliance with the stop criteria in point 3.2.3. 3.2.1. The manufacturer shall provide evidence that the emission limits in the applicable type I emission laboratory test cycle, as set out in Part A of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, of the tested aged vehicles are not exceeded at the start of mileage accumulation, during the accumulation phase and after the partial accumulation. 3.2.2. Multiple type I emission tests shall be conducted during the partial mileage accumulation phase, with the frequency and number of type I test procedures chosen by the manufacturer. The type I emission test results shall provide sufficient statistical relevance to identify the deterioration trend, which shall be representative of the vehicle type with regard to the environmental performance placed on the market (see Figure 5-2). Figure 5-2 Test type V – accelerated durability test procedure with partial mileage accumulation New vehicle(s) from (proto-type) production line Start Type V test: conduct Type I emission tests, degreened vehicle Multiple Type I emission tests, partially aged vehicle Finish type V test: conduct Type I emission tests, partially aged vehicle Maximum allowed mileage prior to start mileage accumulation: 100 km Partial mileage accumulation, minimum 50 % of assigned distance: 1) SRC-LeCV for all L-vehicle categories or if applicable; 2) AMA-L3e (for L3e & L4e motorcycles only) 3.2.3. Stop criteria for the durability test procedure with partial mileage accumulation Partial mileage accumulation may stop if the following criteria are met: 3.2.4. Data processing and reporting for the durability test procedure with partial mileage accumulation 3.3. The mathematical durability procedure L-category vehicles using the mathematical durability procedure shall refer to point 3(c) of Article 23 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.3.1. The emission results of the vehicle that has accumulated more than 100 km after it was first started at the end of the production line, the applied deterioration factors set out in Part B of Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, and the product of the multiplication of both and the emission limit set out in Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall be added to the test report. 3.4. Durability mileage accumulation cycles One of the following two durability mileage accumulation test cycles shall be conducted to age the test vehicles until the assigned test distance laid down in Part A of Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 is fully completed according to the full mileage accumulation test procedure set out in point 3.1. or partially completed according to the partial mileage accumulation test procedure in point 3.2.: 3.4.1. The Standard Road Cycle (SRC-LeCV) for L-category vehicles The Standard Road Cycle (SRC-LeCV) custom tailored for L-category vehicles is the principle durability type V test cycle composed of a set of four mileage accumulation durability cycles. One of these durability mileage accumulation cycles shall be used to accumulate mileage by the test vehicles according to the technical details laid down in Appendix 1. 3.4.2. The USA EPA Approved Mileage Accumulation cycle At the choice of the manufacturer, the AMA durability mileage accumulation cycle may be conducted as alternative type V mileage accumulation cycle up to and including the last date of registration set out in point 1.5.2. of Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. The AMA durability mileage accumulation cycle shall be conducted according to the technical details laid down in Appendix 2. 3.5. Test type V durability verification testing using ‘golden’ pollution-control devices 3.5.1. The pollution-control devices may be removed from the test vehicles after: 3.5.2. At the choice of the manufacturer, ‘golden’ pollution-control devices may repeatedly be used for durability performance verification and approval demonstration testing on the same vehicle type with regard to the environmental performance by fitting them on (a) representative parent vehicles representing the propulsion family set out in Annex XI, later on in vehicle development. 3.5.3. The ‘golden’ pollution-control devices shall be permanently marked and the marking number, the associated type I test results and the specifications shall be made available to the approval authority upon request. 3.5.4. In addition, the manufacturer shall mark and store new, non-aged pollution-control devices with the same specifications as those of the ‘golden’ pollution-control devices and, in the event of a request under point 3.5.5., make these available also to the approval authority, as a reference base. 3.5.5. The approval authority and technical service shall be given access at any time during or after the environmental performance type-approval process both to the ‘golden’ pollution-control devices and ‘new, non-aged’ pollution-control devices. The approval authority or technical service may request and witness a verification test by the manufacturer or may have the ‘new, non-aged’ and ‘golden’ pollution-control devices tested by an independent test laboratory in a non-destructive way. Appendix 1 The Standard Road Cycle for L-Category Vehicles (SRC-LeCV) 1. Introduction 2. SRC-LeCV test requirements 2.1. If the SRC-LeCV is performed on a kilometre accumulation chassis dynamometer: 2.2. If the SRC-LeCV is not performed on a kilometre accumulation chassis dynamometer: 2.2.1. the test track or test road shall be selected at the discretion of the manufacturer to the satisfaction of the approval authority; 2.2.2. the track or road selected shall be shaped so as not to significantly hinder the proper execution of the test instructions; 2.2.3. the route used shall form a loop to allow continuous execution; 2.2.4. track lengths which are multiples, half or quarter of this length shall be permitted. The length of the lap may be changed to accommodate the length of the mileage accumulation track or road; 2.2.5. four points shall be marked, or landmarks identified, on the track or road which equate to quarter intervals of the lap; 2.2.6. the distance accumulated shall be calculated from the number of cycles required to complete the test distance. This calculation shall take into account the length of the road or track and chosen lap length. Alternatively, an electronic means of accurately measuring the actual distance travelled may be used. The odometer of the vehicle shall not be used. 2.2.7. Examples of test track configurations: Figure Ap1-1 Simplified graphic of possible test track configurations 2.3. The total distance travelled shall be the applicable durability mileage set out in Part A of Annex VII to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, plus one complete SRC-LeCV sub-cycle (30 km). 2.4. No stopping is permitted mid-cycle. Any stops for type I emission tests, maintenance, soak periods, refuelling, etc. shall be performed at the end of one complete SRC-LeCV sub-cycle, i.e. the culmination of step 47 in Table Ap1-4. If the vehicle travels to the testing area under its own power, only moderate acceleration and deceleration shall be used and the vehicle shall not be operated at full throttle. 2.5. The four cycles shall be selected on the basis of the maximum design vehicle speed of the L-category vehicle and the engine capacity or, in the case of pure electric or hybrid propulsions, the maximum design speed of the vehicle and the net power. 2.6. For the purpose of accumulating mileage in the SRC-LeCV, the L-vehicle categories shall be grouped as follows: Table Ap1-1 L-vehicle category groups for the SRC-LeCV where: V d = engine displacement volume in cm 3 v max = maximum design vehicle speed in km/h 2.7. SRC-LeCV general driving instructions 2.7.1. Idle instructions 2.7.2. Acceleration instructions: 2.7.3. Deceleration instructions: 2.7.4. Cruise instruction: 2.7.5. A driving instruction shall be performed in its entirety. Additional idling time, acceleration to above, and deceleration to below, the target vehicle speed is permitted in order to ensure that actions are performed fully. 2.7.6. Gear changes should be carried out according to the guidance laid down in point 4.5.5. of Appendix 9 of Annex II. Alternatively, guidance provided by the manufacturer to the consumer may be used if approved by the approval authority. 2.7.7. Where the test vehicle cannot reach the target vehicle speeds set out in the applicable SRC-LeCV, it shall be operated at wide open throttle and using other available options to attain maximum design speed. 2.8. SRC-LeCV test steps The SRC-LeCV test shall consist of the following steps: 2.9. SRC-LeCV detailed test cycle description 2.9.1. Graphical overview of the SRC-LeCV Figure Ap1-2 SRC-LeCV, example distance accumulation characteristics for all four cycles cycle 1 cycle 2 cycle 3 cycle 4 2.9.2. SRC-LeCV detailed cycle instructions Table Ap1-3 Actions and sub-actions for each cycle and sub-cycle, lap 1, 2 and 3 Table Ap1-4 Actions and sub-actions for each cycle and sub-cycle, lap 4 and 5 2.9.3. Soak procedures in the SRC-LeCV The SRC-LeCV soak procedure shall consist of the following steps: Appendix 2 The USA EPA Approved Mileage Accumulation durability cycle (AMA) 1. Introduction 2. AMA test cycle requirements ANNEX VII Test type VII requirements: CO 2 emissions, fuel consumption, electric energy consumption and electric range 1. Introduction 2. Specification and tests 2.1. General The components liable to affect CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption or the electric energy consumption shall be so designed, constructed and assembled as to enable the vehicle, in normal use, despite the vibrations to which it may be subjected, to comply with the provisions of this Annex. The test vehicles shall be properly maintained and used. 2.2. Description of tests for vehicles powered by a combustion engine only 2.3. Description of tests for vehicles powered by an electric powertrain only 2.4. Description of tests for vehicles powered by a hybrid electric powertrain 2.5. Interpretation of test results 3. Modification and extension of approval of the approved type 4. Conditions of extension of vehicle environmental performance type-approval 4.1. Vehicles powered by an internal combustion engine only, except those equipped with a periodically regenerating emission-control system A type-approval may be extended to vehicles produced by the same manufacturer that are of the same type or of a type that differs with regard to the following characteristics in Appendix 1, provided the CO 2 emissions measured by the technical service do not exceed the type-approved value by more than 4 percent: 4.2. Vehicles powered by an internal combustion engine only and equipped with a periodically regenerating emission-control system. The type-approval may be extended to vehicles produced by the same manufacturer that are of the same type or of a type that differs with regard to the characteristics in Appendix 1, as referred to in points 4.1.1. to 4.1.6., without exceeding the propulsion family characteristics of Annex XI, provided the CO 2 emissions measured by the technical service do not exceed the type-approved value by more than 4 percent, where the same K i factor is applicable. The type-approval may also be extended to vehicles of the same type, but with a different K i factor, provided the corrected CO 2 value measured by the technical service does not exceed the type-approved value by more than 4 percent. 4.3. Vehicles powered by an electric powertrain only Extensions may be granted after agreement with the approval authority. 4.4. Vehicles powered by a hybrid electric powertrain The type-approval may be extended to vehicles of the same type or of a type that differs with regard to the following characteristics in Appendix 3 provided the CO 2 emissions and the electric energy consumption measured by the technical service do not exceed the type-approved value by more than 4 percent: 4.5. Where any other characteristic is changed, extensions may be granted after agreement with the approval authority. 5. Special provisions Vehicles produced in the future with new energy-efficient technologies may be subject to complementary test programmes, to be specified at a later stage. Such testing will enable manufacturers to demonstrate the advantages of the technologies. ( 1 ) Mean value of G20 and G25 reference fuels at 288,2 K (15 °C). Appendix 1 Method of measuring carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption of vehicles powered by a combustion engine only 1. Specification of the test 1.1. The carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions and fuel consumption of vehicles powered by a combustion engine only shall be determined according to the procedure for the type I test in Annex II in force at the time of the approval of the vehicle. 1.2. In addition to the CO 2 emission and fuel consumption results for the entire type I test, CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption shall also be determined separately for parts 1, 2 and 3, if applicable, by using the applicable type I test procedure in force at the time of the approval of the vehicle in accordance with point 1.1.1. of Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 1.3. In addition to the conditions in Annex II in force at the time of the approval of the vehicle, the following conditions shall apply: 1.4. Calculation of CO 2 and fuel consumption values Appendix 2 Method of measuring the electric energy consumption of a vehicle powered by an electric powertrain only 1. Test sequence 2. Test method 2.1. Principle The following test method shall be used for measuring of the electric energy consumption, expressed in Wh/km: Table Ap2-1 Parameters, units and accuracy of measurement 2.3. Test vehicle 2.3.1. Condition of the vehicle 2.3.1.1. The vehicle tyres shall be inflated to the pressure specified by the vehicle manufacturer when the tyres are at ambient temperature. 2.3.1.2. The viscosity of the oils for the mechanical moving parts shall conform to the vehicle manufacturer’s specification. 2.3.1.3. The lighting, signalling and auxiliary devices shall be off, except those required for the testing and usual day-time operation of the vehicle. 2.3.1.4. All energy storage systems for other than traction purposes (electric, hydraulic, pneumatic, etc.) shall be charged to their maximum level as specified by the manufacturer. 2.3.1.5. If the batteries are operated above the ambient temperature, the operator shall follow the procedure recommended by the vehicle manufacturer in order to keep the battery temperature in the normal operating range. The manufacturer shall be in a position to attest that the thermal management system of the battery is neither disabled nor reduced. 2.3.1.6. The vehicle shall have travelled at least 300 km in the seven days before the test with the batteries installed for the test. 2.3.2. Classification of the pure electric test vehicle in the type I test cycle. In order to measure its electric consumption in the type I test cycle, the test vehicle shall be classified according to the achievable maximum design vehicle speed thresholds only, set-out in point 4.3. of Annex II. 2.4. Operation mode All the tests are conducted at a temperature of between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). The test method includes the four following steps: If the vehicle moves between the steps, it shall be pushed to the next test area (without regenerative recharging). 2.4.1. Initial charge of the battery Charging the battery consists of the following procedures: 2.4.1.1. Discharge of the battery The battery is discharged while the vehicle is driven (on the test track, on a chassis dynamometer, etc.) at a steady speed of 70 percent ± 5 percent of the maximum design vehicle speed, as determined according to the test procedure in Appendix 1 to Annex X. Discharging shall stop: By means of derogation if the manufacturer can prove to the technical service to the satisfaction of the approval authority that the vehicle is physically not capable of achieving the thirty minutes speed the maximum fifteen minute speed may be used instead. 2.4.1.2. Application of a normal overnight charge The battery shall be charged according to the following procedure: 2.4.1.2.1. Normal overnight charge procedure The charge shall be carried out: This procedure excludes all types of special charges that could be automatically or manually initiated, e.g. equalisation or servicing charges. The vehicle manufacturer shall declare that no special charge procedure has occurred during the test. 2.4.1.2.2. End-of-charge criteria The end-of-charge criteria shall correspond to a charging time of 12 hours except where the standard instrumentation indicates clearly that the battery is not yet fully charged, in which case: Equation Ap2-1: 2.4.1.2.3. Fully charged battery Propulsion batteries shall be deemed as fully charged when they have been charged according to the overnight charge procedure until the end-of-charge criteria are fulfilled. 2.4.2. Application of the type I test cycle and measurement of the distance The end of charging time t 0 (plug off) shall be reported. The chassis dynamometer shall be set according to the method in point 4.5.6. of Annex II. Starting within four hours of t 0 , the applicable type I test shall be run twice on a chassis dynamometer, following which the distance covered in km (D test ) is recorded. If the manufacturer can demonstrate to the approval authority that twice the type I test distance can physically not be attained by the vehicle, the test cycle shall be conducted once and subsequently followed by a partial second test run. The second test run may stop if the minimum state of charge of the propulsion battery is reached as referred to in Appendix 3.1. 2.4.3. Charge of the battery The test vehicle shall be connected to the mains within 30 minutes of the second run of the applicable type I test cycle. The vehicle shall be charged according to the normal overnight charge procedure in point 2.4.1.2. The energy measurement equipment, placed between the mains socket and the vehicle charger, measures the energy charge E delivered from the mains and its duration. Charging shall stop 24 hours after the end of the previous charging time (t 0 ). In the event of a mains power cut, the 24 hour period may be extended in line with the duration of the cut. The validity of the charge shall be discussed between the technical services of the approval laboratory and the vehicle manufacturer to the satisfaction of the approval authority. 2.4.4. Electric energy consumption calculation Energy E in Wh and charging time measurements are to be recorded in the test report. The electric energy consumption c shall be determined using the formula: Equation Ap2-2: where D test is the distance covered during the test (in km). ( 1 ) International Electrotechnical Commission. Appendix 3 Method of measuring the carbon dioxide emissions, fuel consumption, electric energy consumption and driving range of vehicles powered by a hybrid electric powertrain 1. Introduction 1.1. This Appendix lays down specific provisions on the type-approval of hybrid electric L-category vehicles (HEV) as regards measuring carbon dioxide emissions, fuel consumption, electric energy consumption and driving range. 1.2. As a general principle for type VII tests, HEVs shall be tested according to the specified type I test cycles and requirements and in particular Appendix 6 to Annex II, except where modified by this Appendix. 1.3. OVC (externally chargeable) HEVs shall be tested under Conditions A and B. The test results under Conditions A and B and the weighted average referred to in point 3 shall be given in the test report. 1.4. Driving cycles and gear-shift points 2. Categories of hybrid electric vehicles (HEV) Table Ap3-1 3. OVC (externally chargeable) HEV without an operating mode switch 3.1. Two type I tests shall be performed under the following conditions: The profile of the state of charge (SOC) of the electrical energy/power storage device at different stages of the test is set out in Appendix 3.1. 3.2. Condition A 3.2.1. The procedure shall start with the discharge of the electrical energy/power storage device in accordance with point 3.2.1.1.: 3.2.1.1. Discharge of the electrical energy/power storage device The electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle is discharged while driving (on the test track, on a chassis dynamometer, etc.) in any of the following conditions: The fuel-consuming engine shall be stopped within ten seconds of being automatically started. 3.2.2. Conditioning of the vehicle 3.2.2.1. The test vehicle shall be preconditioned by conducting the applicable type I test cycle in combination with the applicable gear-shifting in point 4.5.5. of Annex II. 3.2.2.2. After this preconditioning and before testing, the vehicle shall be kept in a room in which the temperature remains relatively constant between 293,2 and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). This conditioning shall be carried out for at least six hours and continue until the temperatures of the engine oil and coolant, if any, are within ± 2 K of the temperature of the room, and the electrical energy/power storage device is fully charged as a result of the charging in point 3.2.2.4. 3.2.2.3. During soak, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged in accordance with the normal overnight charging procedure described in point 3.2.2.4. 3.2.2.4. Application of a normal overnight charge The electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged according to the following procedure: 3.2.2.4.1. Normal overnight charge procedure The charging shall be carried out as follows: 3.2.2.4.2. End-of-charge criteria The end-of-charge criteria shall correspond to a charging time of twelve hours, except where the standard instrumentation indicates clearly that the electrical energy/power storage device is not yet fully charged, in which case: Equation Ap3-1: 3.2.3. Test procedure 3.2.3.1. The vehicle shall be started up by the means provided for normal use by the driver. The first cycle starts on the initiation of the vehicle start-up procedure. 3.2.3.2. The test procedures defined in either point 3.2.3.2.1. or 3.2.3.2.2. may be used. 3.2.3.2.1. Sampling shall begin (BS) before or at the initiation of the vehicle start-up procedure and end on conclusion of the final idling period in the applicable type I driving cycle (end of sampling (ES)). 3.2.3.2.2. Sampling shall begin (BS) before or at the initiation of the vehicle start-up procedure and continue over a number of repeat test cycles. It shall end on conclusion of the applicable type I driving cycle during which the battery reached the minimum state of charge in accordance with the following procedure (end of sampling (ES)): 3.2.3.3. The vehicle shall be driven according to the applicable type I driving cycle and gear-shifting prescriptions in Annex II. 3.2.3.4. The tailpipe emissions of the vehicle shall be analysed according to the provisions of Annex II in force at the time of approval of the vehicle. 3.2.3.5. The CO 2 emission and fuel consumption results from the test cycle(s) for Condition A shall be recorded (respectively m 1 (g) and c 1 (l)). Parameters m 1 and c 1 shall be the sums of the results of the N combined cycles run. Equation Ap3-2: Equation Ap3-3: 3.2.4. Within the 30 minutes after the conclusion of the cycle, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged according to point 3.2.2.4. The energy measurement equipment, placed between the mains socket and the vehicle charger, measures the charge energy e 1 (Wh) delivered from the mains. 3.2.5. The electric energy consumption for Condition A shall be e 1 (Wh). 3.3. Condition B 3.3.1. Conditioning of the vehicle 3.3.1.1. The electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle shall be discharged in accordance with point 3.2.1.1. At the manufacturer’s request, a conditioning in accordance with point 3.2.2.1. may be carried out before electrical energy/power storage discharge. 3.3.1.2. Before testing, the vehicle shall be kept in a room in which the temperature remains relatively constant between 293,2 K and 303,2 K (20 °C and 30 °C). This conditioning shall be carried out for at least six hours and continue until the temperatures of the engine oil and coolant, if any, are within ± 2 K of the temperature of the room. 3.3.2. Test procedure 3.3.2.1. The vehicle shall be started up by the means provided for normal use by the driver. The first cycle starts on the initiation of the vehicle start-up procedure. 3.3.2.2. Sampling shall begin (BS) before or at the initiation of the vehicle start-up procedure and end on conclusion of the final idling period in the applicable type I driving cycle (end of sampling (ES)). 3.3.2.3. The vehicle shall be driven using the applicable type I driving cycle and gear-shifting prescriptions set out in Appendix 6 to Annex II. 3.3.2.4. The tailpipe emissions of the vehicle shall be analysed according to the provisions of Annex II. 3.3.2.5. The test results for Condition B shall be recorded (m 2 (g) and c 2 (l) respectively). 3.3.3. Within 30 minutes of the end of the cycle, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged in accordance with point 3.2.2.4. The energy measurement equipment, placed between the mains socket and the vehicle charger, measures the energy charge e 2 (Wh) delivered from the mains. 3.3.4. The electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle shall be discharged in accordance with point 3.2.1.1. 3.3.5. Within 30 minutes of the discharge, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged in accordance with point 3.2.2.4. The energy measurement equipment, placed between the mains socket and the vehicle charger, measures the energy charge e 3 (Wh) delivered from the mains. 3.3.6. The electric energy consumption e 4 (Wh) for Condition B is: Equation Ap3-4: 3.4. Test results 3.4.1. The CO 2 values shall be: Equation Ap3-5: Equation Ap3-6: where: 3.4.2.1. For testing in accordance with point 3.2.3.2.1: The weighted CO 2 values shall be calculated as follows: Equation Ap3-7: where: 3.4.2.2. For testing in accordance with point 3.2.3.2.2.: Equation Ap3-8: where: 3.4.3. The fuel consumption values shall be: Equation Ap3-9: Equation Ap3-10: where: 3.4.4. The weighted fuel consumption values shall be calculated as follows: 3.4.4.1. For testing in accordance with point 3.2.3.2.1.: Equation Ap3-11: where: 3.4.4.2. For testing in accordance with point 3.2.3.2.2.: Equation Ap3-12: where: 3.4.5. The electric energy consumption values shall be: Equation Ap3-13: Equation Ap3-14: with D test1 and D test2 the actual distances driven in the tests performed under Conditions A (point 3.2.) and B (point 3.3.) respectively, and e1 and e4 determined in points 3.2.5. and 3.3.6. respectively. 3.4.6. The weighted electric energy consumption values shall be calculated as follows: 3.4.6.1. For testing in accordance with point 3.2.3.2.1.: Equation Ap3-15: where: 3.4.6.2. For testing in accordance with point 3.2.3.2.2.: Equation Ap3-16: where: 4. Externally chargeable (OVC HEV) with an operating mode switch 4.1. Two tests shall be performed under the following conditions: 4.1.1. Condition A: test carried out with a fully charged electrical energy/power storage device. 4.1.2. Condition B: test carried out with an electrical energy/power storage device in minimum state of charge (maximum discharge of capacity). 4.1.3. The operating mode switch shall be positioned in accordance with Table Ap11-2, point 3.2.1.3. of Appendix 11 of Annex II. 4.2. Condition A 4.2.1. If the electric range of the vehicle, as measured in accordance with Appendix 3.3., is higher than one complete cycle, the type I test for electric energy measurement may be carried out in pure electric mode at the request of the manufacturer after agreement of the technical service and to the satisfaction of the approval authority. In this case, the values of M 1 and C 1 in point 4.4. shall be taken as equal to 0. 4.2.2. The procedure shall start with the discharge of the electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle as described in point 4.2.2.1. 4.2.3. Conditioning of the vehicle 4.2.4. Test procedure 4.2.5. Within 30 minutes of the end of the cycle, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged in accordance with point 3.2.2.4. The energy measurement equipment, placed between the mains socket and the vehicle charger, shall measure the energy charge e 1 (Wh) delivered from the mains. 4.2.6. The electric energy consumption for Condition A shall be e 1 (Wh). 4.3. Condition B 4.3.1. Conditioning of the vehicle 4.3.2. Test procedure 4.3.3. Within 30 minutes of the end of the cycle, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged in accordance with point 3.2.2.4. The energy measurement equipment, placed between the mains socket and the vehicle charger, shall measure the energy charge e 2 (Wh) delivered from the mains. 4.3.4. The electrical energy/power storage device of the vehicle shall be discharged in accordance with point 4.2.2.1. 4.3.5. Within 30 minutes of the discharge, the electrical energy/power storage device shall be charged in accordance with point 3.2.2.4. The energy measurement equipment, placed between the mains socket and the vehicle charger, shall measure the energy charge e 3 (Wh) delivered from the mains. 4.3.6. The electric energy consumption e 4 (Wh) for Condition B shall be: Equation Ap3-19: 4.4. Test results 4.4.1. The CO 2 values shall be: Equation Ap3-20: Equation Ap3-21: where: 4.4.2. The weighted CO 2 values shall be calculated as follows: 4.4.3. The fuel consumption values shall be: Equation Ap3-24: Equation Ap3-25: where: 4.4.4. The weighted fuel consumption values shall be calculated as follows: 4.4.5. The electric energy consumption values shall be: Equation Ap3-28: Equation Ap3-29: where: 4.4.6. The weighted electric energy consumption values shall be calculated as follows: 5. Not externally chargeable hybrid electric vehicle (NOVC HEV) without an operating mode switch 5.1. The test vehicle shall be preconditioned by conducting the applicable type I test cycle in combination with the applicable gear-shifting prescriptions in point 4.5.5. of Annex II. 5.1.1. Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions and fuel consumption shall be determined separately for parts 1, 2 and 3, if applicable, of the applicable driving cycle in Appendix 6 to Annex II. 5.2. For preconditioning, at least two consecutive complete driving cycles shall be carried out without intermediate soak, using the applicable driving cycle and gear-shifting prescriptions set out in point 4.5.5. of Annex II. 5.3. Test results 5.3.1. The test results (fuel consumption C (l/100 km for liquid fuels or kg/100 km for gaseous fuels) and CO 2 -emission M (g/km)) of this test shall be corrected in line with the energy balance ΔE batt of the battery of the vehicle. The corrected values C 0 (l/100 km or kg/100 km) and M 0 (g/km) shall correspond to a zero energy balance (ΔE batt = 0) and shall be calculated using a correction coefficient determined by the manufacturer for storage systems other than electric batteries as follows: ΔE batt shall represent ΔE storage , the energy balance of the electric energy storage device. 5.3.2. the uncorrected measured values C and M may be taken as the test results under the following conditions: The change in battery energy content ΔE batt shall be calculated from the measured electricity balance Q as follows: Equation Ap3-32: where: 5.3.3. Fuel consumption correction coefficient (K fuel ) defined by the manufacturer 5.3.4. Fuel consumption at zero battery energy balance (C 0 ) 5.3.5. CO 2 -emission correction coefficient (K CO 2 ) defined by the manufacturer 5.3.6. CO 2 -emission at zero battery energy balance (M 0 ) 6. Not Externally Chargeable (not OVC HEV) with an operating mode switch 6.1. These vehicles shall be tested in hybrid mode in accordance with Appendix 1, using the applicable driving cycle and gear-shifting prescriptions in point 4.5.5. of Annex II. If several hybrid modes are available, the test shall be carried out in the mode that is automatically set after the ignition key is turned on (normal mode). 6.1.1. Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions and fuel consumption shall be determined separately for parts 1, 2 and 3 of the type I test cycle in Annex II. 6.2. For preconditioning, at least two consecutive complete driving cycles shall be carried out without intermediate soak, using the applicable type I test cycle and gear-shifting prescriptions in Annex II. 6.3. Test results 6.3.1. The fuel consumption C (l/100 km) and CO 2 -emission M (g/km)) results of this test shall be corrected in line with the energy balance ΔE batt of the battery of the vehicle. The corrected values (C 0 (l/100 km for liquid fuels or kg/100 km for gaseous fuels) and M 0 (g/km)) shall correspond to a zero energy balance (ΔE batt = 0), and are to be calculated using a correction coefficient determined by the manufacturer as defined in 6.3.3 and 6.3.5. For storage systems other than electric batteries, ΔE batt shall represent ΔE storage , the energy balance of the electric energy storage device. 6.3.2. The uncorrected measured values C and M may be taken as the test results under the following conditions: 6.3.3. Fuel consumption correction coefficient (K fuel ) defined by the manufacturer 6.3.4. Fuel consumption at zero battery energy balance (C 0 ) 6.3.5. CO 2 -emission correction coefficient (K CO 2 ) defined by the manufacturer 6.3.6. CO 2 emission at zero battery energy balance (M 0 ) ( 1 ) Also known as ‘externally chargeable’. ( 2 ) Also known as ‘not externally chargeable’. Appendix 3.1 Electrical energy/power storage device State Of Charge (SOC) profile for an Externally chargeable Hybrid Electric Vehicle (OVC HEV) in a type VII test 1. State of charge (SOC) profile for OVC HEV type VII test The SOC profiles for OVC-HEVs tested under Conditions A and B of the test type VII shall be: 1.1. Condition A: Figure Ap3.1-1 Condition A of the type VII test 1.2. Condition B: Figure Ap3.1-2 Condition B of the type VII test Appendix 3.2 Method for measuring the electricity balance of the battery of OVC and NOVC HEV 1. Introduction 2. Measurement equipment and instrumentation 3. Measurement procedure Appendix 3.3 Method of measuring the electric range of vehicles powered by an electric powertrain only or by a hybrid electric powertrain and the OVC range of vehicles powered by a hybrid electric powertrain 1. Measurement of the electric range The following test method set out in point 4 shall be used to measure the electric range, expressed in km, of vehicles powered by an electric power train only or the electric range and OVC range of vehicles powered by a hybrid electric powertrain with off-vehicle charging (OVC HEV) as defined in Appendix 3. 2. Parameters, units and accuracy of measurements Parameters, units and accuracy of measurements shall be as follows: Table Ap3.3.-1 Parameters, units and accuracy of measurements 3. Test conditions 3.1. Condition of the vehicle 3.2. Climatic conditions For testing performed outdoors, the ambient temperature shall be between 278,2 K and 305,2 K (5 °C and 32 °C). The indoor testing shall be performed at a temperature of between 275,2 K and 303,2 K (2 °C and 30 °C). 4. Operation modes The test method includes the following steps: If the vehicle shall move between the steps, it shall be pushed to the next test area (without regenerative recharging). 4.1. Initial charge of the battery Charging the battery consists of the following procedure: 4.1.1. The ‘initial charge’ of the battery means the first charge of the battery, on reception of the vehicle. Where several combined tests or measurements are carried out consecutively, the first charge shall be an ‘initial charge’ and the subsequent charges may follow the ‘normal overnight charge’ procedure set out in 3.2.2.4. of Appendix 3. 4.1.2. Discharge of the battery 4.1.2.1. For pure electric vehicles: 4.1.2.2. For externally chargeable hybrid electric vehicles (OVC HEV) without an operating mode switch as defined in Appendix 3: 4.1.2.3. For externally chargeable hybrid electric vehicles (OVC HEV) with an operating mode switch as defined in Appendix 3: 4.1.3. Normal overnight charge For a pure electric vehicle, the battery shall be charged according to the normal overnight charge procedure, as defined in point 2.4.1.2. of Appendix 2, for a period not exceeding twelve hours. For an OVC HEV, the battery shall be charged according to the normal overnight charge procedure as described in point 3.2.2.4. of Appendix 3. 4.2. Application of the cycle and measurement of the range 4.2.1. For pure electric vehicles: 4.2.1.1. The test sequence set out in the Appendices shall be carried out on a chassis dynamometer adjusted as described in Annex II, until the test criteria are met. 4.2.1.2. The test criteria shall be deemed as having been met when the vehicle is unable to meet the target curve up to 50 km/h, or when the standard on-board instrumentation indicates that the vehicle should be stopped. The vehicle shall then be slowed to 5 km/h without braking by releasing the accelerator pedal, and then stopped by braking. 4.2.1.3. At speeds of over 50 km/h, when the vehicle does not reach the acceleration or speed required for the test cycle, the accelerator pedal shall remain fully depressed, or the accelerator handle shall be turned fully, until the reference curve has been reached again. 4.2.1.4. Up to three interruptions, of no more than 15 minutes in total, are permitted between test sequences. 4.2.1.5. The distance covered in km (D e ) is the electric range of the electric vehicle. It shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 4.2.2. For hybrid electric vehicles: 4.2.2.2. Determining the OVC range of a hybrid electric vehicle 4.2.2.3. At speeds of over 50 km/h, when the vehicle does not reach the acceleration or speed required for the test cycle, the accelerator pedal shall remain fully depressed, or the accelerator handle shall be turned fully, until the reference curve has been reached again. 4.2.2.4. Up to three interruptions, of no more than 15 minutes in total, are permitted between test sequences. 4.2.2.5. The distance covered in km (D OVC ) is the electric range of the hybrid electric vehicle. It shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. ANNEX VIII Test type VIII requirements: OBD environmental tests 1. Introduction 2. OBD stage I and stage II 2.1. OBD stage I The test procedures in this Annex shall be mandatory for L-category vehicles equipped with an OBD stage I system as referred to in Article 19 of and Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. This obligation concerns compliance with all provisions of this Annex except those relating to OBD stage II requirements referred to in point 2.2. 2.2. OBD stage II 3. Description of tests 3.1. Test vehicle 3.2. The OBD system shall indicate the failure of an emission-related component or system when that failure results in emissions exceeding the OBD threshold in Part B of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 or any powertrain fault that triggers an operation mode that significantly reduces torque in comparison with normal operation. 3.3. The test type I data in the test report referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, including the used dynamometer settings and applicable emission laboratory test cycle, shall be provided for reference. 3.4. The list with PCU/ECU malfunctions shall be provided pursuant to the requirements referred to in Number C11 of Annex II of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 as follows: 4. OBD environmental test procedure 5. Test vehicle and fuel 5.1. Test vehicle The test vehicles shall meet the requirements of point 2 of Annex VI. 5.2. The manufacturer shall set the system or component for which detection is to be demonstrated at or beyond the criteria limit prior to operating the vehicle over the emissions test cycle appropriate for the classification of the L-category vehicle. To determine correct functionality of the diagnostic system, the L-category vehicle shall then be operated over the appropriate type I test cycle according to its classification set out in point 4.3. of Annex II. 5.3. Test fuel The appropriate reference fuel as described in Appendix 2 to Annex II shall be used for testing. For mono-fuelled and bi-fuelled gas vehicles, the fuel type for each failure mode to be tested may be selected by the approval authority from the reference fuels described in Appendix 2 to Annex II. The selected fuel type shall not be changed during any of the test phases. Where LPG or NG/biomethane for alternative fuel vehicles are used as a fuel, the engine may be started on petrol and switched to LPG or NG/biomethane (automatically and not by the driver) after a pre-determined period of time. 6. Test temperature and pressure 7. Test equipment 7.1. Chassis dynamometer The chassis dynamometer shall meet the requirements of Annex II. 8. OBD environmental verification test procedures 8.1. The operating test cycle on the chassis dynamometer shall meet the requirements of Annex II. 8.2. Vehicle preconditioning 8.3. Failure modes to be tested 8.4. OBD system environmental verification tests ANNEX IX Test type IX requirements: sound level 1. Introduction This Annex describes the procedure for type IX testing, as referred to in Part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. It lays down specific provisions regarding permissible sound level test procedures for L-category vehicles. 2. Test procedure, measurements and results 3. Test vehicle ( 1 ) OJ L 317, 14.11.2012, p. 1 . Appendix 1 Sound level test requirements for powered cycles and two-wheel mopeds (category L1e) For the purposes of this Appendix: 2. Component type-approval in respect of the sound level and original exhaust system, as a separate technical unit, of a type of two-wheel moped 2.1. Noise made by the two-wheel moped in motion (measuring conditions and method for testing of the vehicle during component type-approval) 2.1.1. Noise limits: see Part D of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.1.2. Measuring instruments 2.1.2.1. Acoustic measurements The apparatus used for measuring the sound-level shall be a precision sound-level meter of the type described in International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) publication 179 Precision sound-level meters , second edition. Measurements shall be taken using the ‘fast’ response and the ‘A’ weighting also described in that publication. At the beginning and end of each series of measurements, the sound-level meter shall be calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, using an appropriate noise source (e.g. piston phone). 2.1.2.2. Speed measurements Engine speed and moped speed on the test track shall be determined to within ± 3 %. 2.1.3. Conditions of measurement 2.1.3.1. Condition of the moped The combined weight of the rider and the test equipment used on the moped shall be between 70 kg and 90 kg. If necessary, weights shall be added to the moped to bring the combined weight up to at least 70 kg. During the measurements, the moped shall be in running order (including coolant, oils, fuel, tools, spare wheel and rider). Before the measurements are taken, the moped shall be brought to the normal operating temperature. If the moped is fitted with fans with an automatic actuating mechanism, this system shall not be interfered with during the sound measurements. For mopeds with more than one driven wheel, only the drive provided for normal road operation may be used. Where a moped is fitted with a sidecar, this shall be removed for the purposes of the test. 2.1.3.2. Test site The test site shall consist of a central acceleration section surrounded by a substantially flat test area. The acceleration section shall be flat; its surface shall be dry and such that surface noise remains low. On the test site, the variations in the free sound field between the sound source at the centre of the acceleration section and the microphone shall not exceed 1 dB. This condition will be deemed to be met if there are no large objects which reflect sound, such as fences, rocks, bridges or buildings, within 50 m of the centre of the acceleration section. The surface covering of the test track shall conform to the requirements of Appendix 7. The microphone shall not be obstructed in any way which could affect the sound field, and no person may stand between the microphone and the sound source. The observer taking the measurements shall so position himself as not to affect the readings of the measuring instrument. 2.1.3.3. Miscellaneous Measurements shall not be taken in poor atmospheric conditions. It shall be ensured that the results are not affected by gusts of wind. For measurements, the A-weighted sound level of sound sources other than those of the vehicle to be tested and of wind effects shall be at least 10 dB(A) below the sound level produced by the vehicle. A suitable windscreen may be fitted to the microphone provided that account is taken of its effect on the microphone’s sensitivity and directional characteristics. If the difference between the ambient noise and the noise to be measured is between 10 and 16 dB(A), the test results shall be calculated by subtracting the appropriate correction from the readings on the sound-level meter, as in the following graph: Figure Ap1-1 Difference between ambient noise and noise to be measured 2.1.4. Method of measurement 2.1.4.1. Nature and number of measurements The maximum sound level expressed in A-weighted decibels (dB(A)) shall be measured as the moped travels between lines AA′ and BB′ (Figure Ap1-2). The measurement will be invalid if an abnormal discrepancy is recorded between the peak value and the general noise level. At least two measurements shall be taken on each side of the moped. 2.1.4.2. Positioning of the microphone The microphone shall be positioned 7,5 m ± 0,2 m from the reference line CC′ (Figure Ap1-2) of the track and 1,2 m ± 0,1 m above ground level. 2.1.4.3. Conditions of operation The moped shall approach line AA′ at an initial steady speed as specified in point 2.1.4.3.1 and 2.1.4.3.2. When the front of the moped reaches line AA′, the throttle shall be fully opened as quickly as practically possible and kept in that position until the rear of the moped reaches line BB′; the throttle shall then be returned as quickly as possible to the idle position. For all measurements, the moped shall be ridden in a straight line over the acceleration section, keeping the median longitudinal plane of the moped as close as possible to line CC′. 2.1.4.3.1. Approach speed The moped shall approach line AA′ at a steady speed of 30 km/h or at its top speed if this is less. 2.1.4.3.2. Selection of gear ratio If the moped is fitted with a manual-shift gearbox, the highest gear which allows it to cross line AA′ at a speed at least half the full-power engine speed shall be selected. If the moped has an automatic transmission, it shall be ridden at the speeds indicated in 2.1.4.3.1. 2.1.5. Results (test report) 2.1.5.1. The test report according to the template referred to Article 32(1) to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 drawn up for the purpose of issuing the document shall indicate any circumstances and factors affecting the measurements. 2.1.5.2. The measurements shall be rounded to the nearest decibel. If the figure following the decimal point is between 0 and 4, the total is rounded down and if between 5 and 9, it is rounded up. Only measurements which vary by 2,0 dB(A) or less in two consecutive tests on the same side of the moped shall be used. 2.1.5.3. To take account of inaccuracies, 1,0 dB(A) shall be deducted from each value obtained in accordance with point 2.1.5.2. 2.1.5.4. If the average of the four measurements does not exceed the maximum permissible level for the category of moped in question, the limits laid down in point 2.1.1 will be deemed as being complied with. This average value shall be taken as the result of the test. Figure Ap1-2 Test for vehicle in motion Figure Ap1-3 Test for stationary vehicle Test for stationary vehicle 2.2. Noise from stationary moped (measuring conditions and method for testing of the vehicle in use) 2.2.1. Sound-pressure level in the immediate vicinity of the moped In order to facilitate subsequent noise tests on mopeds in use, the sound-pressure level in the immediate vicinity of the exhaust-system outlet (silencer) shall be measured in accordance with the following requirements, the result being entered in the test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the document according to the template referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.2.2. Measuring instruments A precision sound-level meter as defined in point 2.1.2.1 shall be used. 2.2.3. Conditions of measurement 2.2.3.1. Condition of the moped Before the measurements are taken, the moped engine shall be brought to normal operating temperature. If the moped is fitted with fans with an automatic actuating mechanism, this system shall not be interfered with during the noise measurements. During the measurements, the gearbox shall be in neutral gear. If it is impossible to disconnect the drive train, the driving wheel of the moped shall be allowed to rotate freely, e.g. by placing the vehicle on its centre stand. 2.2.3.2. Test site (Figure Ap1-2) Any area in which there are no significant acoustic disturbances may be used as a test site. Flat surfaces which are covered with concrete, asphalt or some other hard material and are highly reflective are suitable; surfaces consisting of earth which has been tamped down shall not be used. The test site shall be in the form of a rectangle the sides of which are at least 3 m from the outer edge of the moped (handlebars excluded). There shall be no significant obstacles, e.g. no persons other than the rider and the observer may stand within this rectangle. The moped shall be positioned within the rectangle so that the microphone used for measurement is at least 1 m from any kerb. 2.2.3.3. Miscellaneous Instrument readings caused by ambient noise and wind effects shall be at least 10,0 dB(A) lower than the noise levels to be measured. A suitable windshield may be fitted to the microphone provided that account is taken of its effect on the microphone’s sensitivity. 2.2.4. Method of measurement 2.2.4.1. Nature and number of measurements The maximum noise level expressed in A-weighted decibels (dB(A)) shall be measured during the period of operation laid down in point 2.2.4.3. At least three measurements shall be taken at each measuring point. 2.2.4.2. Positioning of the microphone (Figure Ap1-3) The microphone shall be positioned level with the exhaust outlet or 0,2 m above the surface of the track, whichever is higher. The microphone diaphragm shall face towards the exhaust outlet at a distance of 0,5 m from it. The axis of maximum sensitivity of the microphone shall be parallel to the surface of the track at an angle of 45° ± 10° to the vertical plane of the direction of the exhaust emissions. In relation to this vertical plane, the microphone shall be positioned on the side on which there is the maximum possible distance between the microphone and the outline of the moped (handlebars excluded). If the exhaust system has more than one outlet at centres less than 0,3 m apart, the microphone shall face the outlet which is nearest the moped (handlebars excluded) or the outlet which is highest above the surface of the track. If the centres of the outlets are more than 0,3 m apart, separate measurements shall be taken for each of them; the highest figure recorded being taken as the test value. 2.2.4.3. Operating conditions The engine speed shall be held steady at: where ‘S’ is the engine speed at which maximum power is developed. When a constant engine speed is reached, the throttle shall be returned swiftly to the idle position. The noise level shall be measured during an operating cycle consisting of a brief period of constant engine speed and throughout the deceleration period, the highest sound-level meter reading being taken as the test value. 2.2.5. Results (test report) 2.2.5.1. The test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the document according to the template referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall indicate all relevant data and particularly those used in measuring the noise of the stationary moped. 2.2.5.2. Values shall be read off the measuring instrument and rounded to the nearest decibel. Only measurements which vary by 2,0 dB(A) or less in three consecutive tests will be used. 2.2.5.3. The highest of the three measurements shall be taken as the test result. 2.3. Original exhaust system (silencer) 2.3.1. Requirements for silencers containing absorbent fibrous materials 2.3.1.1. Absorbent fibrous material shall be asbestos-free and may be used in the construction of silencers only if it is held securely in place throughout the service life of the silencer and meets the requirements of point 2.3.1.2, 2.3.1.3 or 2.3.1.4. 2.3.1.2. After removal of the fibrous material, the noise level shall comply with the requirements of point 2.1.1. 2.3.1.3. The absorbent fibrous material may not be placed in those parts of the silencer through which the exhaust gases pass and shall comply with the following requirements: 2.3.1.3.1. The material shall be heated at a temperature of 923,2 ± 5 K (650 ± 5 °C) for four hours in a furnace without reduction in the average length, diameter or bulk density of the fibre; 2.3.1.3.2. After being heated at 923,2 ± 5 K (650 ± 5 °C) for one hour in a furnace, at least 98 % of the material shall be retained in a sieve of nominal mesh size 250 μm complying with technical standard ISO 3310-1:2000 when tested in accordance with ISO standard 2559:2011; 2.3.1.3.3. The material shall lose no more than 10 % of its weight after being soaked for 24 hours at 362,2 ± 5 K (90 ± 5 °C) in a synthetic condensate of the following composition: Note: The material shall be washed in distilled water and dried for one hour at 378,2 K (105 °C) before weighing. 2.3.1.4. Before the system is tested in accordance with point 2.1, it shall be put into normal working order by one of the following methods: 2.3.1.4.1. Conditioning by continuous road operation 2.3.1.4.2. Conditioning by pulsation 2.3.1.4.3. Conditioning on a test bench 2.3.2. Diagram and markings 2.3.2.1. A diagram and a cross-sectional drawing indicating the dimensions of the exhaust system(s) shall be attached to the information document referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.3.2.2. All original silencers shall bear at least the following: This reference shall be legible, indelible and visible in the position at which it is to be fitted. 2.3.2.3. Any packing of original replacement silencer systems shall be marked legibly with the words ‘original part’ and the make and type 2.3.3. Intake silencer If the engine intake has to be fitted with an air filter or intake silencer in order to comply with the permissible noise level, the filter or silencer shall be regarded as part of the silencer and the requirements of point 2.3 will also apply to them. 3. Component type-approval of a non-original exhaust system or components thereof, as a separate technical unit, for two-wheel mopeds This point applies to the component type-approval, as separate technical units, of exhaust systems or components thereof intended to be fitted to one or more particular types of moped as non-original replacement parts. 3.1. Definition 3.1.1. ‘Non-original replacement exhaust system or components thereof’ means any exhaust system component as defined in point 1.2 intended to be fitted to a moped to replace that of the type fitted to the moped when the information document provided for in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 was issued. 3.2. Application for component type-approval 3.2.1. Applications for component type-approval for replacement exhaust systems or components thereof as separate technical units shall be submitted by the manufacturer of the system or by his authorised representative. 3.2.2. For each type of replacement exhaust system or components thereof for which approval is requested, the component type-approval application shall be accompanied by the following documents in triplicate, and by the following particulars: 3.2.3. The applicant shall submit, at the request of the technical service: 3.3. Specifications 3.3.1. General specifications The design, construction and mounting of the silencer shall be such that: 3.3.2. Specifications for noise levels 3.3.3. Testing of moped performance 3.3.4. Additional provisions relating to silencers as separate technical units containing fibrous material Fibrous material may not be used in the construction of such silencers unless the requirements set out in point 2.3.1 of this Annex are met. 3.3.5. Evaluation of the pollutant emissions of vehicles equipped with a replacement silencer system The vehicle referred to in point 3.2.3.3, equipped with a silencer of the type for which approval is requested, shall undergo the applicable environmental tests according to the type-approval of the vehicle. The requirements regarding environmental performance shall be deemed to be fulfilled if the results meet the limit values according to the type-approval of the vehicle as set out in Annex VI(D) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.3.6. The marking of non-original exhaust systems or components thereof shall comply with the provisions of Article 39 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.4. Component type-approval 3.4.1. Upon completion of the tests laid down in this Appendix, the approval authority shall issue a certificate corresponding to the model referred to in Article 30 (2) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. The component type-approval number shall be preceded by a rectangle surrounding the letter ‘e’ followed by the distinguishing number or letters of the Member State which issued or refused the component type-approval. The exhaust system which is granted system type-approval shall conform to the provisions of Annexes II and VI. Appendix 2 Sound level test requirements for motorcycles (categories L3e and L4e) 1. Definitions For the purposes of this Appendix: 2. Component type-approval in respect of the sound level and original exhaust system, as a separate technical unit, of a type of motorcycle 2.1. Noise of the motorcycle in motion (measuring conditions and method for testing of the vehicle during component type-approval) 2.1.1. Limits: see Part D of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.1.2. Measuring instruments 2.1.2.1. Acoustic measurements The apparatus used for measuring the sound level shall be a precision sound-level meter of the type described in International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) publication 179 Precision sound-level meters , second edition. Measurements shall be taken using the ‘fast’ response and the ‘A’ weighting also described in that publication. At the beginning and end of each series of measurements, the sound-level meter shall be calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, using an appropriate noise source (e.g. piston phone). 2.1.2.2. Speed measurements Engine speed and motorcycle speed on the test track shall be determined to within ± 3 %. 2.1.3. Conditions of measurement 2.1.3.1. Condition of the motorcycle During the measurements, the motorcycle shall be in running order. Before the measurements are taken, the motorcycle shall be brought to normal operating temperature. If the motorcycle is fitted with fans with an automatic actuating mechanism, this system shall not be interfered with during the noise measurements. For motorcycles with more than one driven wheel, only the drive provided for normal road operation may be used. Where a motorcycle is fitted with a sidecar, this shall be removed for the purposes of the test. 2.1.3.2. Test site The test site shall consist of a central acceleration section surrounded by a substantially flat test area. The acceleration section shall be flat; its surface shall be dry and such that surface noise remains low. On the test site, the variations in the free sound field between the sound source at the centre of the acceleration section and the microphone shall not exceed 1,0 dB. This condition will be deemed to be met if there are no large objects which reflect sound, such as fences, rocks, bridges or buildings, within 50 m of the centre of the acceleration section. The surface covering of the test site shall conform to the requirements of Appendix 4. The microphone shall not be obstructed in any way which could affect the sound field, and no person may stand between the microphone and the sound source. The observer carrying out the measurements shall so position himself as not to affect the readings of the measuring instrument. 2.1.3.3. Miscellaneous Measurements shall not be taken in poor atmospheric conditions. It shall be ensured that the results are not affected by gusts of wind. For measurements, the A-weighted sound level of noise sources other than those of the vehicle to be tested and of wind effects shall be at least 10,0 dB(A) below the sound level produced by the vehicle. A suitable windscreen may be fitted to the microphone provided that account is taken of its effect on the microphone’s sensitivity and directional characteristics. If the difference between the ambient noise and the measured noise is between 10,0 and 16,0 dB(A), the test results shall be calculated by subtracting the appropriate correction from the readings on the sound-level meter, as in the following graph: Figure Ap2-1 Difference between ambient noise and noise to be measured Difference between ambient noise and noise to be measured 2.1.4. Method of measurement 2.1.4.1. Nature and number of measurements The maximum noise level expressed in A-weighted decibels (dB(A)) shall be measured as the motorcycle travels between lines AA′ and BB′ (Figure Ap2-2). The measurement will be invalid if an abnormal discrepancy is recorded between the peak value and the general sound level. At least two measurements shall be taken on each side of the motorcycle. 2.1.4.2. Positioning of the microphone The microphone shall be positioned 7.5 m ± 0.2 m from the reference line CC′ (Figure Ap2-2) of the track and 1.2 m ± 0.1 m above ground level. 2.1.4.3. Conditions of operation The motorcycle shall approach line AA′ at an initial steady speed as specified in points 2.1.4.3.1 and 2.1.4.3.2. When the front of the motorcycle reaches line AA′, the throttle shall be fully opened as quickly as practically possible and kept in that position until the rear of the motorcycle reaches line BB′; the throttle shall then be returned as quickly as possible to the idle position. For all measurements, the motorcycle shall be ridden in a straight line over the acceleration section keeping the longitudinal median plane of the motorcycle as close as possible to line CC′. 2.1.4.3.1. Motorcycles with non-automatic gearboxes 2.1.4.3.1.1. Approach speed The motorcycle shall approach line AA′ at a steady speed whichever is the lower. 2.1.4.3.1.2. Selection of gear ratio 2.1.4.3.1.2.1. Motorcycles fitted with a gearbox with four ratios or fewer, whatever the cylinder capacity of their engines, shall be tested only in second gear. 2.1.4.3.1.2.2. Motorcycles fitted with engines with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 175 cm 3 and a gearbox with five ratios or more shall be tested only in third gear. 2.1.4.3.1.2.3. Motorcycles fitted with engines having a cylinder capacity of more than 175 cm 3 and a gearbox with five ratios or more shall be tested once in second gear and once in third gear. The result used shall be the average of the two tests. 2.1.4.3.1.2.4. If, during the test carried out in second gear (see points 2.1.4.3.1.2.1 and 2.1.4.3.1.2.3), the engine speed on the approach to the line marking the end of the test track exceeds 100 % of the engine speed at which maximum net power is developed, the test shall be carried out in third gear and the noise level measured shall be the only one recorded as the test result. 2.1.4.3.2 Motorcycles with automatic gearboxes 2.1.4.3.2.1. Motorcycles without a manual selector 2.1.4.3.2.1.1. Approach speed The motorcycle shall approach line AA′ at steady speeds of 30, 40 and 50 km/h or 75 % of the maximum road speed if that value is lower. The condition giving the highest sound level is chosen. 2.1.4.3.2.2. Motorcycles equipped with a manual selector with X forward drive positions 2.1.4.3.2.2.1. Approach speed The motorcycle shall approach line AA′ at a steady speed of: If, in the test at a steady speed of 50 km/h, the gears change down to first, the approach speed of the motorcycle may be increased to a maximum of 60 km/h to avoid the downshift. 2.1.4.3.2.2.2. Position of the manual selector If the motorcycle is equipped with a manual selector with ‘X’ forward drive positions, the test shall be carried out with the selector in the highest position; the voluntary device for changing down (e.g. kick-down) shall not be used. If an automatic downshift takes place after line AA′, the test shall be started again using the second-highest position, or the third-highest position if necessary, in order to find the highest position of the selector at which the test can be performed without an automatic downshift (without using the kick-down). 2.1.4.4. For hybrid L-category vehicles, the tests shall be performed twice under the following conditions: 2.1.5. Results (test report) 2.1.5.1. The test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the information folder according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall indicate any circumstances and factors affecting the results of the measurements. 2.1.5.2. Readings taken shall be rounded to the nearest decibel. If the figure following the decimal point is between 0 and 4, the total is rounded down and if between 5 and 9, it is rounded up. Only measurements which vary by 2,0 dB(A) or less in two consecutive tests on the same side of the motorcycle may be used for the purpose of issuing the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.1.5.3. To take account of inaccuracies, 1,0 dB(A) shall be deducted from each value obtained in accordance with point 2.1.5.2. 2.1.5.4. If the average of the four measurements does not exceed the maximum permissible level for the vehicle category in question, the limit laid down in Part D of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 will be deemed as being complied with. This average value shall be taken as the result of the test. 2.1.5.5. If the average of four Condition A results and the average of four Condition B results do not exceed the permissible level for the vehicle category in question, the limits laid down in Part D of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall be deemed as being complied with. The highest average value shall be taken as the result of the test. 2.2. Noise from stationary motorcycle (measuring conditions and method for testing of the vehicle in use) 2.2.1. Sound-pressure level in the immediate vicinity of the motorcycle In order to facilitate subsequent noise tests on motorcycles in use, the sound-pressure level in the immediate vicinity of the exhaust-system outlet shall be measured in accordance with the following requirements, the result being entered in the test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.2.2. Measuring instruments A precision sound-level meter as defined in point 2.1.2.1 shall be used. 2.2.3. Conditions of measurement 2.2.3.1. Condition of the motorcycle Before the measurements are taken, the motorcycle engine shall be brought to normal operating temperature. If the motorcycle is fitted with fans with an automatic actuating mechanism, this system shall not be interfered with during the noise measurements. During the measurements, the gearbox shall be in neutral gear. If it is impossible to disconnect the drive train, the driving wheel of the motorcycle shall be allowed to rotate freely, e.g. by placing the vehicle on its centre stand. 2.2.3.2. Test site (Figure Ap2-2) Any area in which there are no significant acoustic disturbances may be used as a test site. Flat surfaces which are covered with concrete, asphalt or some other hard material and are highly reflective are suitable; surfaces consisting of earth which has been tamped down shall not be used. The test site shall be in the form of a rectangle the sides of which are at least 3 m from the outer edge of the motorcycle (handlebars excluded). There shall be no significant obstacles, e.g. no persons other than the rider and the observer may stand within this rectangle. The motorcycle shall be positioned within the rectangle so that the microphone used for measurement is at least 1 m from any kerb. 2.2.3.3. Miscellaneous Instrument readings caused by ambient noise and wind effects shall be at least 10,0 dB(A) lower than the sound levels to be measured. A suitable windshield may be fitted to the microphone provided that account is taken of its effect on the sensitivity of the microphone. 2.2.4. Method of measurement 2.2.4.1. Nature and number of measurements The maximum sound level expressed in A-weighted decibels (dB(A)) shall be measured during the period of operation laid down in point 2.2.4.3. At least three measurements shall be taken at each measuring point. 2.2.4.2. Positioning of the microphone (Figure Ap2-3) The microphone shall be positioned level with the exhaust outlet or 0,2 m above the surface of the track, whichever is the higher. The microphone diaphragm shall face the exhaust outlet at a distance of 0,5 m from it. The axis of maximum sensitivity of the microphone shall be parallel to the surface of the track at an angle of 45 ±10° to the vertical plane of the direction of the exhaust emissions. In relation to this vertical plane, the microphone shall be positioned on the side on which there is the maximum possible distance between the microphone and the outline of the motorcycle (handlebars excluded). If the exhaust system has more than one outlet at centres less than 0.3 m apart, the microphone shall face the outlet which is nearest the motorcycle (handlebars excluded) or the outlet which is highest above the surface of the track. If the centres of the outlets are more than 0.3 m apart, separate measurements shall be taken for each of them, the highest figure recorded being taken as the test value. 2.2.4.3. Operating conditions The engine speed shall be held steady at: where S is the engine speed at which the maximum net power is developed. When a constant engine speed is reached, the throttle shall be returned swiftly to the idle position. The sound level shall be measured during an operating cycle consisting of a brief period of constant engine speed and throughout the deceleration period, the maximum sound-level meter reading being taken as the test value. 2.2.5. Results (test report) 2.2.5.1. The test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall indicate all relevant data and particularly those used in measuring the noise of the stationary motorcycle. 2.2.5.2. Values shall be read off the measuring instrument and rounded to the nearest decibel. If the figure following the decimal point is between 0 and 4, the total is rounded down and if between 5 and 9, it is rounded up. Only measurements which vary by no more than 2,0 dB(A) in three consecutive tests will be used. 2.2.5.3. The highest of the three measurements will be taken as the test result. Figure Ap2-2 Test for vehicle in motion Test for vehicle in motion Figure Ap2-3 Test for stationary vehicle 2.3. Original exhaust system (silencer) 2.3.1. Requirements for silencers containing absorbent fibrous materials 2.3.1.1. Absorbent fibrous material shall be asbestos-free and may be used in the construction of silencers only if it is held securely in place throughout the service life of the silencer and it meets the requirements of point 2.3.1.2 or 2.3.1.3. 2.3.1.2. After removal of the fibrous material, the sound level shall comply with the requirements of point 2.1.1. 2.3.1.3. The absorbent fibrous material may not be placed in those parts of the silencer through which the exhaust gases pass, and shall comply with the following requirements: 2.3.1.3.1. the material shall be heated at a temperature of 650 °C ± 5 °C for four hours in a furnace without reduction in the average length, diameter or bulk density of the fibre; 2.3.1.3.2. after being heated at 650 °C ± 5 °C for one hour in a furnace, at least 98 % of the material shall be retained in a sieve of nominal mesh size 250 μm complying with technical standard ISO 3310-1:2000 when tested in accordance with ISO standard 2559:2011; 2.3.1.3.3. the material shall not lose more than 10.5 % of its weight after being soaked for 24 hours at 90 °C ± 5 °C in a synthetic condensate of the following composition: Note: The material shall be washed in distilled water and dried for one hour at 105 °C before weighing. 2.3.1.4. Before the system is tested in accordance with point 2.1, it shall be put in normal working order by one of the following methods: 2.3.1.4.1. Conditioning by continuous road operation 2.3.1.4.1.1. Table Ap2-1 shows the minimum distance to be travelled for each category of motorcycle during conditioning: Table Ap2-1 Minimum distance to be travelled during conditioning 2.3.1.4.1.2 50 ± 10 % of this conditioning cycle shall consist of town driving and the remainder of long-distance runs at high speed; the continuous road cycle may be replaced by a corresponding test-track programme. 2.3.1.4.1.3. The two types of driving shall be alternated at least six times. 2.3.1.4.1.4. The complete test programme shall include at least ten breaks lasting at least three hours in order to reproduce the effects of cooling and condensation. 2.3.1.4.2. Conditioning by pulsation 2.3.1.4.2.1. The exhaust system or components thereof shall be fitted to the motorcycle or to the engine. In the first case, the motorcycle shall be mounted on a roller dynamometer. In the second case, the engine shall be mounted on a test bench. The test apparatus, as shown in detail in Figure Ap2-4, is fitted at the outlet of the exhaust system. Any other apparatus giving equivalent results is acceptable. 2.3.1.4.2.2. The test equipment shall be adjusted so that the flow of exhaust gases is alternately interrupted and restored 2 500 times by a rapid-action valve. 2.3.1.4.2.3 The valve shall open when the exhaust gas back-pressure, measured at least 100 mm downstream of the intake flange, reaches a value of between 0.35 and 0.40 bar. Should the engine characteristics prevent this, the valve shall open when the gas back-pressure reaches a level equivalent to 90 % of that which can be measured before the engine stops. It shall close when this pressure differs by no more than 10 % from its stabilised value with the valve open. 2.3.1.4.2.4. The time-lapse relay shall be set for the period in which exhaust gases are produced, calculated on the basis of the requirements of point 2.3.1.4.2.3. 2.3.1.4.2.5. Engine speed shall be 75 % of the speed (S) at which the engine develops maximum power. 2.3.1.4.2.6. The power indicated by the dynamometer shall be 50 % of the full-throttle power measured at 75 % of engine speed (S). 2.3.1.4.2.7. Any drainage holes shall be closed off during the test. 2.3.1.4.2.8. The entire test shall be completed within 48 hours. If necessary, a cooling period shall be allowed after each hour. 2.3.1.4.3. Conditioning on a test bench 2.3.1.4.3.1. The exhaust system shall be fitted to an engine representative of the type fitted to the motorcycle for which the system is designed and mounted on a test bench. 2.3.1.4.3.2. Conditioning consists of the specified number of test bench cycles for the category of motorcycle for which the exhaust system was designed. Table Ap2-2 shows the number of cycles for each category of motorcycle: Table Ap2-2 Number of test-bench cycles for conditioning 2.3.1.4.3.3. Each test-bench cycle shall be followed by a break of at least six hours in order to reproduce the effects of cooling and condensation. 2.3.1.4.3.4. Each test-bench cycle consists of six phases. The engine conditions and duration are as follows for each phase: Table Ap2-3 Test cycle phases for bench testing 2.3.1.4.3.5. During this conditioning procedure, at the request of the manufacturer, the engine and the silencer may be cooled so that the temperature recorded at a point not more than 100 mm from the exhaust gas outlet does not exceed that measured when the motorcycle is running at 110 km/h or 75 % S in top gear. The engine or motorcycle speeds shall be determined with an accuracy of ± 3 %. Figure Ap2-4 Test apparatus for conditioning by pulsation 2.3.2. Diagram and markings 2.3.2.1. A diagram and a cross-sectional drawing indicating the dimensions of the exhaust system shall be annexed to the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.3.2.2. All original silencers shall bear at least the following: This reference shall be legible, indelible and visible in the position at which it is to be fitted. 2.3.2.3. Any packing of original replacement silencer systems shall be marked legibly with the words ‘original part’ and the make and type 2.3.3. Intake silencer If the engine intake has to be fitted with an air filter or intake silencer in order to comply with the permissible sound level, the filter or silencer shall be regarded as part of the silencer and the requirements of point 2.3 also apply to them. 3. Component type-approval of a non-original exhaust system or components thereof, as technical units, for motorcycles This section applies to the component type-approval, as technical units, of exhaust systems or components thereof intended to be fitted to one or more particular types of motorcycle as non-original replacement parts. 3.1. Definition 3.1.1. ‘Non-original replacement exhaust system or components thereof’ means any exhaust system component as defined in point 1.2 intended to be fitted to a motorcycle to replace that of the type fitted to the motorcycle when the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 was issued. 3.2. Application for component type-approval 3.2.1. Applications for component type-approval for replacement exhaust systems or components thereof as separate technical units shall be submitted by the manufacturer of the system or by his authorised representative. 3.2.2. For each type of replacement exhaust system or components thereof for which approval is requested, the component type-approval application shall be accompanied by the following documents in triplicate, and by the following particulars: 3.2.3. The applicant shall submit, at the request of the technical service: 3.3. Markings and inscriptions 3.3.1. Non-original exhaust systems or components thereof shall be marked in accordance with the requirements laid down in Article 39 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.4. Component type-approval 3.4.1. Upon completion of the tests laid down in this Appendix, the approval authority shall issue a certificate corresponding to the model referred to in Article 30(2) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. The component type-approval number shall be preceded by a rectangle surrounding the letter ‘e’ followed by the distinguishing number or letters of the Member State which issued or refused the component type-approval. The exhaust system which is granted system type-approval shall conform to the provisions of Annexes II and VI. 3.5. Specifications 3.5.1. General specifications The design, construction and mounting of the silencer shall be such that: 3.5.2. Specifications for sound levels 3.5.3. Testing of motorcycle performance 3.5.4. Additional provisions relating to silencers as separate technical units containing fibrous material Fibrous material may not be used in the construction of such silencers unless the requirements set out in point 2.3.1 are met. 3.5.5. Evaluation of the pollutant emissions of vehicles equipped with a replacement silencer system The vehicle referred to in point 3.2.3.3, equipped with a silencer of the type for which approval is requested, shall undergo a type I, II and V test under the conditions described in the corresponding Annexes II, III and VI according to the type-approval of the vehicle. The requirements regarding emissions shall be deemed to be fulfilled if the results are within the limit values according to the type-approval of the vehicle. Appendix 3 Sound level test requirements for three-wheel mopeds, tricycles and quadricycles (categories L2e, L5e, L6e and L7e) 1. Definitions For the purposes of this Appendix: 2. Component type-approval in respect of the sound level and original exhaust system, as a separate technical unit, of a type of three-wheel moped (L2e), a tricycle (L5e), a light quadricycle (L6e) or heavy quadricycles (L7e) 2.1. Noise of the three-wheel moped, tricycle or quadricycle (measuring conditions and method for testing of the vehicle during component type-approval) 2.1.1. The vehicle, its engine and its exhaust system shall be designed, constructed and assembled so that the vehicle complies with the requirements of this Appendix under normal conditions of use, regardless of any vibrations to which they may be subjected. 2.1.2. The exhaust system shall be designed, constructed and mounted to resist the corrosion phenomena to which it is exposed. 2.2. Specifications for noise levels 2.2.1. Limits: see Part D of Annex VI to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.2.2. Measuring instruments 2.2.2.1. The apparatus used for measuring the noise level shall be a precision sound-level meter of the type described in International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) publication No 179 Precision sound-level meters , second edition. Measurements shall be carried out using the ‘fast’ response of the sound-level meter and the ‘A’ weighting also described in that publication. At the beginning and end of each series of measurements, the sound-level meter shall be calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, using an appropriate noise source (e.g. a piston phone). 2.2.2.2. Speed measurements. Engine speed and vehicle speed on the test track shall be determined to within ±3 %. 2.2.3. Conditions of measurement 2.2.3.1. Condition of the vehicle During the measurements, the vehicle shall be in running order (including coolant, oils, fuel, tools, spare wheel and rider). Before the measurements are taken, the vehicle shall be brought to the normal operating temperature. 2.2.3.1.1. The measurements shall be taken with the vehicles unladen and without trailer or semitrailer. 2.2.3.2. Test site The test site shall consist of a central acceleration section surrounded by a substantially flat test area. The acceleration section shall be flat; its surface shall be dry and such that surface noise remains low. On the test site, the variations in the free sound field between the sound source at the centre of the acceleration section and the microphone shall not exceed ±1.0 dB(A). This condition will be deemed to be met if there are no large objects which reflect sound, such as fences, rocks, bridges or buildings, within 50 m of the centre of the acceleration section. The surface covering of the test track shall conform to the requirements of Appendix 4. The microphone shall not be obstructed in any way which could affect the sound field, and no person may stand between the microphone and the sound source. The observer carrying out the measurements shall so position himself as not to affect the readings of the measuring instrument. 2.2.3.3. Miscellaneous Measurements shall not be taken in poor atmospheric conditions. It shall be ensured that the results are not affected by gusts of wind. For measurements, the A-weighted noise level of noise sources other than those of the vehicle to be tested and of wind effects shall be at least 10,0 dB(A) below the noise level produced by the vehicle. A suitable windscreen may be fitted to the microphone provided that account is taken of its effect on the sensitivity and directional characteristics of the microphone. It the difference between the ambient noise and the measured noise is between 10,0 and 16,0 dB(A), the test results shall be calculated by subtracting the appropriate correction from the readings on the sound-level meter, as in the following graph: Figure Ap3-1 Difference between ambient noise and noise level to be measured 2.2.4. Method of measurement 2.2.4.1. Nature and number of measurements The maximum noise level expressed in A-weighted decibels (dB(A)) shall be measured as the vehicle travels between lines AA′ and BB′ (Figure Ap3-2). The measurement will be invalid if an abnormal discrepancy between the peak value and the general noise level is recorded. At least two measurements shall be taken on each side of the vehicle. 2.2.4.2. Positioning of the microphone The microphone shall be positioned 7,5 m ± 0,2 m from the reference line CC′ (Figure Ap3-2) of the track and 1,2 m ± 0,1 m above ground level. 2.2.4.3. Conditions of operation The vehicle shall approach line AA′ at an initial steady speed as specified in point 2.2.4.4. When the front of the vehicle reaches line AA′, the throttle shall be fully opened as quickly as practically possible and kept in that position until the rear of the vehicle reaches line BB′; the throttle shall then be returned as quickly as possible to the idle position. For all measurements, the vehicle shall be ridden in a straight line over the acceleration section keeping the median longitudinal plane of the vehicle as close as possible to line CC′. 2.2.4.3.1. In the case of articulated vehicles consisting of two inseparable components and regarded as constituting one single vehicle, the semitrailer shall not be taken into account with regard to the crossing of line BB′. 2.2.4.4. Determining the steady speed to be adopted 2.2.4.4.1. Vehicle without gearbox The vehicle shall approach line AA′ at a steady speed corresponding either to a speed of rotation of the engine equal to three-quarters of that at which the engine develops its maximum power, or to three-quarters of the maximum speed of rotation of the engine permitted by the governor, or 50 km/h, whichever is slowest. 2.2.4.4.2. Vehicle with manual gearbox If the vehicle is fitted with a gearbox with two, three or four ratios, second gear shall be used. If the gearbox has more than four ratios, third gear shall be used. If the engine then reaches a speed of rotation beyond its maximum power rating, instead of second or third gear the next higher gear to allow line BB′ on the test track to be reached without exceeding this rating shall be engaged. Overdrive shall not be selected. If the vehicle has a dual-ratio final drive, the ratio selected shall be that corresponding to the highest speed of the vehicle. The vehicle shall approach line AA′ at a steady speed corresponding either to three-quarters of the engine rotation speed at which the engine develops its maximum power, or to three-quarters of the maximum engine rotation speed permitted by the governor, or 50 km/h, whichever is slowest. 2.2.4.4.3. Vehicle with automatic gearbox The vehicle shall approach line AA′ at a steady speed of 50 km/h or three-quarters of its maximum speed, whichever is slower. Where several forward drive positions are available, that producing the highest average acceleration of the vehicle between lines AA′ and BB′ shall be selected. The selector position that is used only for braking, manoeuvring or similar slow movements shall not be used. 2.2.4.5. For hybrid vehicle, the tests shall be performed twice under the following conditions: 2.2.5. Results (test report) 2.2.5.1. The test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall indicate any circumstances and influences affecting the results of the measurements. 2.2.5.2. The values taken shall be rounded to the nearest decibel. If the figure following the decimal point is 5, the total is rounded up. Only measurements which vary by 2.0 dB(A) or less in two consecutive tests on the same side of the vehicle may be used for the purpose of issuing the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.2.5.3. To take account of inaccuracies, 1,0 dB(A) shall be deducted from each value obtained in accordance with point 2.2.5.2. 2.2.5.4. If the average of the four measurements does not exceed the maximum permissible level for the category of vehicle in question, the limit laid down in point 2.2.1 will be deemed as being complied with. This average value will constitute the result of the test. 2.2.5.5. If the average of four results of Condition A and if this average of four results of Condition B do not exceed the maximum permissible level for the category to which the hybrid vehicle being tested belongs, the limits laid down in point 2.2.1 shall be deemed as being complied with. The highest average value shall be taken as the result of the test. 2.3. Measurement of the noise of the stationary vehicle (for testing the vehicle in use) 2.3.1. Sound-pressure level in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle In order to facilitate subsequent noise tests on vehicles in use, the sound-pressure level in the immediate vicinity of the exhaust-system outlet (silencer) shall also be measured in accordance with the following requirements, the measurement being entered in the test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the document according to the template referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.3.2. Measuring instruments A precision sound-level meter conforming in accuracy to point 2.2.2.1 shall be used. 2.3.3. Conditions of measurement 2.3.3.1. Condition of the vehicle Before the measurements are taken, the vehicle engine shall be brought to normal operating temperature. If the vehicle is fitted with fans with an automatic actuating mechanism, this system shall not be interfered with during the noise measurements. During the measurements, the gearbox shall be in neutral gear. If it is impossible to disconnect the drive train, the driving wheels of the moped or tricycle shall be allowed to rotate freely, e.g. by placing the vehicle on its centre stand or on rollers. 2.3.3.2. Test site (see Figure Ap3-3) Any area in which there are no significant acoustic disturbances may be used as a test site. Flat surfaces which are covered with concrete, asphalt or some other hard material and are highly reflective are suitable; surfaces consisting of earth which has been tamped down shall not be used. The test site shall be in the form of a rectangle the sides of which are at least 3 m from the outer edge of the vehicle (handlebars excluded). There shall be no significant obstacles, e.g. no persons other than the rider and the observer may stand within this rectangle. The vehicle shall be positioned within the rectangle so that the microphone used for measurement is at least 1 m from any kerb. 2.3.3.3. Miscellaneous Instrument readings caused by ambient noise and wind effects shall be at least 10.0 dB(A) lower than the sound levels to be measured. A suitable windshield may be fitted to the microphone provided that account is taken of its effect on the sensitivity of the microphone. 2.3.4. Method of measurement 2.3.4.1. Nature and number of measurements The maximum noise level expressed in 1-weighted decibels (dB(A)) shall be measured during the period of operation laid down in point 2.3.4.3. At least three measurements shall be taken at each measurement point. 2.3.4.2. Positioning of the microphone (Figure Ap3-3) The microphone shall be positioned level with the exhaust outlet or 0,2 m above the surface of the track, whichever is higher. The microphone diaphragm shall face towards the exhaust outlet at a distance of 0,5 m from it. The axis of maximum sensitivity of the microphone shall be parallel to the surface of the track at an angle of 45° ± 10° to the vertical plane of the direction of the exhaust emissions. In relation to this vertical plane, the microphone shall be located on the side on which there is the maximum possible distance between the microphone and the outline of the vehicle (handlebars excluded). If the exhaust system has more than one outlet at centres less than 0,3 m apart, the microphone shall face the outlet which is nearest the vehicle (handlebars excluded) or the outlet which is highest above the surface of the track. If the centres of the outlets are more than 0,3 m apart, separate measurements shall be taken for each of them, the highest figure recorded being taken as the test value. 2.3.4.3. Operating conditions The engine speed shall be held steady at: where S is the engine speed at which maximum power is developed. When a constant engine speed is reached, the throttle shall be returned swiftly to the idle position. The noise level shall be measured during an operating cycle consisting of a brief period of constant engine speed and throughout the deceleration period, the maximum meter reading being taken as the test value. 2.3.5. Results (test report) 2.3.5.1. The test report drawn up for the purpose of issuing the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 shall indicate all relevant data and particularly those used in measuring the noise of the stationary vehicle. 2.3.5.2. Values read off the measuring instrument shall be rounded to the nearest decibel. If the figure following the decimal point is 5, the total is rounded up. Only measurements which vary by no more than 2,0 dB(A) in three consecutive tests will be used. 2.3.5.3. The highest of the three measurements shall be taken as the test result. Figure Ap3-2 Positions for testing the vehicle in motion Figure Ap3-3 Positions for testing the stationary vehicle 2.4. Original exhaust system (silencer) 2.4.1. Requirements for silencers containing absorbent fibrous materials 2.4.1.1. Absorbent fibrous material shall be asbestos-free and may be used in the construction of silencers only if it is held securely in place throughout the service life of the silencer and it meets the requirements of point 2.4.1.2 to 2.4.1.4. 2.4.1.2. After removal of the fibrous material, the sound level shall comply with the requirements of point 2.2.1. 2.4.1.3. The absorbent fibrous material may not be placed in those parts of the silencer through which the exhaust gases pass and shall comply with the following requirements: 2.4.1.3.1. The material shall be heated at a temperature of 650 °C ± 5 °C for four hours in a furnace without reduction in the average length, diameter or bulk density of the fibre. 2.4.1.3.2. After being heated at 923,2 ± 5 K (650 ± 5 °C) for one hour in a furnace, at least 98 % of the material shall be retained in a sieve of nominal mesh size 250 μm complying with technical standard ISO 3310-1:2000 when tested in accordance with ISO standard 2559:2011. 2.4.1.3.3. The material shall lose no more than 10,5 % of its weight after being soaked for 24 hours at 362,2 ± 5 K (90 ± 5 °C) in a synthetic condensate of the following composition: Note: The material shall be washed in distilled water and dried for one hour at 105 °C before weighing. 2.4.1.4. Before the system is tested it shall be put in normal working order by one of the following methods: 2.4.1.4.1. Conditioning by continuous road operation 2.4.1.4.2. Conditioning by pulsation 2.4.1.4.3. Conditioning on a test bench 2.4.2. Diagram and markings 2.4.2.1. A diagram and a cross-sectional drawing indicating the dimensions of the exhaust system shall be attached to the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 2.4.2.2. All original silencers shall bear at least the following: This reference shall be legible, indelible and visible in the position at which it is to be fitted. 2.4.2.3. Any packing of original replacement silencer systems shall be marked legibly with the words ‘original part’ and the make and type 2.4.3. Intake silencer If the engine intake has to be fitted with an air filter or intake silencer in order to comply with the permissible noise level, the filter or silencer shall be regarded as part of the silencer and the requirements of point 2.4 will also apply to them. 3. Component type-approval in respect of a non-original exhaust system or components thereof, as separate technical units, for three-wheel mopeds and tricycles This section applies to the component type-approval, as separate technical units, of exhaust systems or components thereof intended to be fitted to one or more particular types of three-wheel mopeds and tricycles as non-original replacement parts. 3.1. Definition 3.1.1. ‘Non-original replacement exhaust system or components thereof’ means any exhaust system component as defined in point 1.2 intended to be fitted to a three- moped, tricycle or quadricycle to replace that of the type fitted to the three-wheel moped, tricycle or quadricycle when the information document according to the template referred to in Article 27(4) Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 was issued. 3.2. Application for component type-approval 3.2.1. Applications for component type-approval for replacement exhaust systems or components thereof as separate technical units shall be submitted by the manufacturer of the system or by his authorised representative. 3.2.2. For each type of replacement exhaust system or components thereof for which approval is requested, the application for component type-approval shall be accompanied by the following documents in triplicate, and by the following particulars: 3.2.3. At the request of the technical service, the applicant shall submit: 3.3. Markings and inscriptions 3.3.1. Non-original exhaust systems or components thereof shall be marked in accordance with the requirements of Article 39 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.4. Component type-approval 3.4.1. Upon completion of the tests laid down in this Appendix, the approval authority shall issue a certificate corresponding to the model referred to in Article 30(2) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. The component type-approval number shall be preceded by a rectangle surrounding the letter ‘e’ followed by the distinguishing number or letters of the Member State which issued or refused the component type-approval. 3.5. Specifications 3.5.1. General specifications The design, construction and mounting of the silencer shall be such that: 3.5.2. Specifications for noise levels 3.5.3. Testing of vehicle performance 3.5.4. Additional provisions relating to silencers as separate technical units containing fibrous material Fibrous material may not be used in the construction of such silencers unless the requirements set out in point 2.4.1 are met. 3.5.5. Evaluation of the pollutant emissions of vehicles equipped with a replacement silencer system. The vehicle referred to in point 3.2.3.3, equipped with a silencer of the type for which approval is requested, shall undergo a type I, II and V test under the conditions described in the corresponding Annexes to this Regulation according to the type-approval of the vehicle. The requirements regarding emissions shall be deemed to be fulfilled if the results are within the limit values according to the type-approval of the vehicle Appendix 4 Test track specification 0. Introduction This Appendix lays down specifications relating to the physical characteristics and the layout of the test track paving. 1. Required characteristics of surface A surface is considered to conform to this Regulation if its texture and void content or noise absorption coefficient have been measured and found to fulfil the requirements of points 1.1 to 1.4 and the design requirements (point 2.2) have been met. 1.1. Residual void content The residual void content, V c , of the test track paving mixture shall not exceed 8 %. The measurement procedure is set out in point 3.1. 1.2. Noise absorption coefficient If the surface fails to comply with the residual void content requirement, it is acceptable only if its noise absorption coefficient, α ≤ 0,10. The measurement procedure is set out in point 3.2. The requirement of points 1.1 and 1.2 is also met if only noise absorption has been measured and found to be: α ≤ 0,10. 1.3. Texture depth The texture depth (TD) measured according to the volumetric method (see point 3.3) shall be: TD ≥ 0,4 mm. 1.4. Homogeneity of the surface Every practical effort shall be made to ensure that the surface is as homogenous as possible within the test area. This includes the texture and void content, but it shall be noted that if the rolling process results in more effective rolling in some places than others, the texture may be different and unevenness causing bumps may occur. 1.5. Period of testing In order to check whether the surface continues to conform to the texture and void content or noise absorption requirements of this specification, periodic testing of the surface shall be performed at the following intervals: 2. Test surface design 2.1. Area When designing the test track layout, it is important to ensure that, as a minimum requirement, the area traversed by the vehicles running through the test strip is covered with the specified test material with suitable margins for safe and practical driving. This will require that the width of the track is at least 3 m and the length of the track extends beyond lines AA and BB by at least 10 m at either end. Figure Ap4-1 shows a plan of a suitable test site and indicates the minimum area which shall be machine-laid and machine-compacted with the specified test surface material. Figure Ap4-1 Minimum requirements for test surface area The shaded part is called ‘test area’ No large acoustically reflective objects within this radus Min. area covered with test road surface Microphone (h = 1,2 m) 2.2. Design requirements for the surface The test surface shall meet four design requirements: As a guide to the test surface constructor, an aggregate grading curve which will give the desired characteristics is shown in Figure Ap4-2. In addition, Table Ap4-1 gives guidelines for obtaining the desired texture and durability. The grading curve fits the following formula: Equation Ap4-1: where: In addition: Figure Ap4-2 Grading curve of the aggregate in the asphaltic mix, with tolerances Grading curve of the aggregate in the asphaltic mix, with tolerances Table Ap4-1 Design guidelines 3. Test methods 3.1 Measurement of the residual void content For the purpose of this measurement, cores are taken from at least four different points of the track which are equally distributed in the test area between lines AA and BB (see Figure Ap4-1). In order to avoid creating a lack of homogeneity and unevenness in the wheel tracks, cores shall not be taken in the tracks themselves, but close to them. At least two cores shall be taken close to the wheel tracks and at least one approximately midway between the tracks and each microphone location. If there is a suspicion that the homogeneity requirement is not met (see point 1.4), cores shall be taken from more points in the test area. The residual void content must be determined for each core. The average value for all cores is calculated and compared with the requirement of point 1.1. In addition, no single core shall have a void value of over 10 %. The test surface constructor is reminded that problems may arise where the test area is heated by pipes or electrical wires. Cores shall be taken from this area and such installations shall be carefully planned with respect to future core drilling locations. It is recommended that a few areas of approximately 200 × 300 mm be left where there are no wires or pipes, or where the latter are located deep enough not to be damaged by cores taken from the surface layer. 3.2. Noise absorption coefficient The noise absorption coefficient (normal incidence) is measured by the impedance tube method using the procedure specified in ISO 10534-1:1996: ‘Determination of sound absorption coefficient and impedance in impedance tubes – Part 1: Method using standing wave ratio’. The same requirements apply to test specimens as to residual void content (see point 3.1). The noise absorption is measured in the range 400 to 800 Hz and in the range 800 to 1 600 Hz (at least at the centre frequencies of third octave bands) and the maximum values shall be identified for both of these frequency ranges. The values for all test scores are averaged to constitute the final result. 3.3. Volumetric macro texture measurement Texture depth measurements are taken from at least ten points evenly spaced along the wheel tracks of the test strip and the average value is compared with the specified minimum texture depth. See Annex F to ISO 10844:2011 for a description of the procedure. 4. Stability in time and maintenance 4.1. Age influence It is expected that the tyre/road noise levels measured on the test surface may increase slightly in the first 6 to 12 months after construction. The surface will achieve its required characteristics at least four weeks after construction. Stability over time is determined mainly by the polishing and compaction caused by vehicles driving on the surface. It shall be periodically checked as stated in point 1.5. 4.2. Maintenance of the surface. Loose debris or dust which could significantly reduce the effective texture depth shall be removed from the surface. Salt may alter the surface temporarily or even permanently in such a way as to increase noise and it is therefore not recommended that it be used for de-icing. 4.3. Repaving the test area It is not necessary to repave more than the test strip (3 m wide in Figure Ap4-1) where vehicles are driving provided the area outside the strip met the residual void content or noise absorption requirements when it was measured. 5. Documentation of the surface and of tests performed on it 5.1. Documentation of the test surface The following data shall be given in a document describing the test surface: 5.2. Documentation of vehicle noise tests In the document describing the vehicle noise test(s), it shall be stated whether all the requirements were fulfilled or not. Reference shall be made to a document in accordance with point 5.1. ANNEX X Testing procedures and technical requirements as regards propulsion unit performance 1. Introduction 2. Test procedures The test procedures set out in appendices 1 to 4 shall be used for the type-approval of L-category vehicles. Appendix 1 Requirements concerning the method for measuring the maximum design vehicle speed 1. Scope Measurement of the maximum design vehicle speed is obligatory for L-category vehicles that are limited in maximum design vehicle speed in accordance with Annex I to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, which concerns (sub-)categories L1e, L2e, L6e and L7e-B1 and L7e-C. 2. Test vehicle 2.1. The test vehicles used for propulsion unit performance tests shall be representative of the vehicle type with regard to the propulsion unit performance produced in series and placed on the market. 2.2. Preparation of the test vehicle 3. Driver 3.1. Uncabbed vehicle 3.2. Cabbed vehicle 4. Characteristics of the test track 5. Atmospheric conditions 6. Test procedures 6.1. L1e vehicles equipped with power-controlled pedal assistance shall be tested according to the test procedure set out in point 4.2.6 of EN 15194:2009, on the maximum speed of a vehicle assisted by an electric motor. If the L1e vehicle is tested according to that test procedure, points 6.2 to 6.9. may be omitted. 6.2. The gear ratio used during the test shall enable the vehicle to reach its maximum vehicle speed on level ground. The throttle control shall be kept fully open and any user-selectable propulsion operation mode shall be activated so as to deploy maximum propulsion unit performance. 6.3. Drivers of uncabbed vehicles shall maintain their driving position as defined in point 3.1.3. 6.4. The vehicle shall arrive at the measuring base at a constant vehicle speed. Type 1 and type 2 bases shall be travelled along in both directions in succession. 6.4.1. Testing in a single direction may be accepted on a type 2 measuring base if, owing to the characteristics of the circuit, it is not possible to reach the maximum speed of the vehicle in both directions. In this case: 6.5. Both bases L on a type 3 measuring base shall be travelled along consecutively in a single direction, without interruption. 6.5.1. If the measuring base coincides with the total length of the circuit, it shall be travelled along in a single direction at least twice. The difference between the extremes of the time measurements shall not exceed 3 %. 6.6. The fuel and lubricant shall be those recommended by the manufacturer. 6.7. The total time t needed to travel along the measuring base in both directions shall be determined to an accuracy of 0,7 %. 6.8. Determination of average speed Average speed V (km/h) for the test is determined as follows: 6.8.1. Type 1 and type 2 measuring base Equation Ap1-1: where: 6.8.2. Type 2 measuring base, travelled along in a single direction 6.8.3. Type 3 measuring base 6.8.3.1. Measuring base consisting of two parts L (see point 4.2.3.1.) Equation Ap1-4: where: 6.8.3.2. Measuring base coinciding with the total length of the annular test track (see point 3.1.4.2.3.3) 6.9. The average speed shall be measured at least twice in succession. 7. Maximum vehicle speed The maximum vehicle speed of the test vehicle shall be expressed in kilometres per hour by the figure corresponding to the closest whole number to the arithmetical mean of the values for the vehicle speeds measured during the two consecutive tests, which shall not diverge by more than 3 %. If this arithmetical mean lies exactly between two whole numbers, it shall be rounded up to the next highest number. 8. Maximum vehicle speed measurement tolerances Appendix 1.1 Procedure for defining the correction coefficient for the annular vehicle speed-test track Appendix 2 Requirements concerning the methods for measuring the maximum torque and maximum net power of a propulsion containing a combustion engine or a hybrid propulsion type 1. General requirements 2. Torque verification requirement for L7e-B heavy all-terrain quads In order to prove that a L7e-B all-terrain quad is designed for and capable of driving in off-road conditions and can therefore develop sufficient torque, the representative test vehicle shall be capable of climbing a gradient ≥ 25 % calculated for a solo vehicle. Before start of the verification test, the vehicle shall be parked on the slope (vehicle speed = 0 km/h). Appendix 2.1 Determination of the maximum torque and maximum net power of spark-ignition engines for vehicle categories L1e, L2e and L6e 1. Accuracy of maximum torque and maximum net power measurements under full load 2. Test for the measurements of maximum torque and maximum net engine power 2.1. Accessories 2.1.1. Accessories to be fitted During the test, the accessories needed for operation of the engine in the application in question (as set out in Table Ap2.1-1) shall be located on the test bench as far as possible in the position they would occupy for that application. Table Ap2.1-1 Accessories to be fitted during the propulsion unit performance test in order to determine torque and net engine power 2.1.3. Accessories not to be fitted Certain vehicle accessories which are needed only for use of the vehicle itself, but which are likely to be mounted on the engine, shall be removed for the tests. The power absorbed by fixed equipment under no load may be determined and added to the power measured. 2.1.4. The radiator, fan, fan nozzle, water pump and thermostat shall, on the test bench, occupy as far as possible the same position relative to each other as if they were on the vehicle. If the radiator, fan, fan nozzle, water pump or thermostat have a position on the test bench which is different from that on the vehicle, the position on the test bench shall be described and noted in the test report. 2.2. Setting conditions The conditions applying to settings during the tests to determine maximum torque and maximum net power are set out in Table Ap2.1-2. Table Ap2.1-2 Setting conditions 2.3. Test conditions 2.3.1. The tests to determine maximum torque and maximum net power shall be carried out at full throttle, with the engine equipped as specified in Table Ap2.1-1. 2.3.2. The measurements shall be carried out under normal, stable operating conditions and the air supply to the engine shall be adequate. The engine shall have been run in under the conditions recommended by the manufacturer. The combustion chambers may contain deposits, but in limited quantities. 2.3.3. The test conditions selected, such as the temperature of the induction air, shall resemble the reference conditions (see point 3.2.) as closely as possible in order to reduce the correction factor. 2.3.4. The temperature of the engine induction air (ambient air) shall be measured at the most 0,15 m upstream of the air filter inlet or, if there is no filter, 0,15 m from the inlet air trumpet. The thermometer or thermocouple shall be protected against heat radiation and be placed directly in the airstream. It shall also be protected against vaporised fuel. An adequate number of positions shall be used in order to yield a representative average inlet temperature. 2.3.5. No measurement shall be taken until the torque, rate of rotation and temperatures have remained substantially constant for at least 30 seconds. 2.3.6. Once a rate of rotation has been selected for the measurements, its value shall not vary by more than ± 2 %. 2.3.7. Observed brake load and inlet-air temperature data shall be taken simultaneously and shall be the average of two stabilised consecutive values. In the case of the brake load, these values shall not vary by more than 2 %. 2.3.8. Where an automatically triggered device is used to measure rotational speed and consumption, the measurement shall last for at least ten seconds; if the measuring device is manually controlled, that period shall be at least 20 seconds. 2.3.9. The temperature of the liquid coolant recorded at the engine outlet shall be maintained at ± 5 K of the upper thermostat setting temperature specified by the manufacturer. If the manufacturer does not indicate any values, the temperature shall be 353,2 K ± 5 K. In the case of air-cooled engines, the temperature at a point specified by the manufacturer shall be maintained at + 0/– 20 K of the maximum temperature intended by the manufacturer under the reference conditions. 2.3.10. The fuel temperature shall be measured at the carburettor or injection system inlet and kept within the limits laid down by the manufacturer. 2.3.11. The temperature of the lubricating oil measured in the oil sump or at the outlet from the oil cooler, if fitted, shall be maintained within the limits established by the engine manufacturer. 2.3.12. The outlet temperature of the exhaust gases shall be measured at right angles to the exhaust flange(s) or manifold(s) or orifices. 2.3.13. Test fuel The test fuel to be used shall be the reference fuel referred to in Appendix 2 of Annex II. 2.4. Test procedure Measurements shall be taken at a sufficient number of engine speeds to define correctly the complete power curve between the lowest and the highest governed engine speeds recommended by the manufacturer. This range of speeds shall include the speeds of revolution at which the engine produces its maximum torque and at which it produces its maximum power. For each speed, the average of at least two stabilised measurements is to be determined. 2.5. The data to be recorded shall be those set out in the template of the test report referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 3. Power and torque correction factors 3.1. Definition of factors α 1 and α 2 3.1.1. α 1 and α 2 shall be factors by which the torque and power measured are to be multiplied in order to determine the torque and power of an engine, taking account of the efficiency of the transmission (factor α 2 ) used during the tests and in order to bring them within the reference atmospheric conditions specified in 3.2.1 (factor α 1 ). The power correction formula is as follows: Equation Ap2.1-1: where: 3.2. Reference atmospheric conditions 3.2.1. Temperature: 298,2 K (25 °C) 3.2.2. Dry reference pressure (p so ): 99 kPa (990 mbar) Note: the dry reference pressure is based on a total pressure of 100 kPa and a water vapour pressure of 1 kPa. 3.2.3. Atmospheric test conditions 3.2.3.1. During the test, the atmospheric conditions shall lie within the following range: 283,2 K < T < 318,2 K where T is the test temperature (K). 3.3. Determination of the correction factor α 1 ( 8 ) Equation Ap2.1-2 : where: 3.3.1. Equation Ap2.1-2 applies only if: 0,93 ≤ α 1 ≤ 1,07 If the limit values are exceeded, the corrected value obtained and the test conditions (temperature and pressure) shall be stated exactly in the test report. 3.4. Determination of the correction factor for mechanical efficiency of the transmission α 2 Where: Equation Ap2.1-2 : where n t is the efficiency of the transmission located between the crankshaft and the measuring point. This transmission efficiency n t is determined from the product (multiplication) of efficiency n j of each of the components of the transmission: Equation Ap2.1-3 : Table Ap2.1-3 Efficiency n j of each of the components of the transmission 4. Maximum torque and maximum net power measurement tolerances The maximum torque and the maximum net power of the engine as determined by the technical service to the satisfaction of the approval authority shall have a maximum acceptable tolerance of: Table Ap2.1-4 Acceptable measurement tolerances Engine speed tolerance when performing maximum torque and net power measurements: ≤ 3 % ( 1 ) If it is difficult to use the standard exhaust system, an exhaust system causing an equivalent pressure drop may be fitted for the test with the agreement of the manufacturer. In the test laboratory when the engine is in operation, the exhaust gas extraction system shall not cause in the extraction flue at the point where it is connected to the vehicle’s exhaust system a pressure differing from atmospheric pressure by ± 740 Pa (7,40 mbar), unless, before the test, the manufacturer accepts a higher back pressure. ( 2 ) The air inlet flap shall be that which controls the pneumatic inject pump regulator. ( 3 ) Where a fan or blower may be disengaged, the net engine power shall first of all be stated with the fan (or blower) disengaged, followed by the net engine power with the fan (or blower) engaged. Where a fixed electrically or mechanically-operated fan cannot be fitted on the test bench, the power absorbed by that fan shall be determined at the same rotational speeds as those used when the engine power is measured. That power is deducted from the corrected power in order to obtain the net power. ( 4 ) The thermostat may be locked in the fully open position. ( 5 ) The radiator, fan, fan nozzle, water pump and thermostat shall, on the test bench, occupy as far as possible the same position relative to each other as if they were on the vehicle. If the radiator, fan, fan nozzle, water pump or thermostat have a position on the test bench which is different from that on the vehicle, this shall be described and noted in the test report. The liquid coolant shall be circulated solely by the water pump for the engine. It may be cooled either by the engine radiator or by an outside circuit, provided that the pressure drops within that circuit remain substantially the same as those in the engine cooling system. If fitted, the engine blind shall be open. ( 6 ) Minimum generator output: the generator supplies the current that is strictly needed to supply the accessories that are essential to the operation of the engine. The battery shall not receive any charge during the test. ( 7 ) Anti-pollution provisions may include, for example, exhaust-gas recirculation (EGR) system, catalytic converter, thermal reactor, secondary air-supply system and fuel-evaporation protecting system. ( 8 ) The test may be carried out in temperature-controlled test chambers where the atmospheric conditions can be controlled. ( 9 ) The test may be carried out in temperature-controlled test chambers where the atmospheric conditions can be controlled. ( 10 ) If not locked up. Appendix 2.2 Determination of the maximum torque and maximum net power of spark-ignition engines for vehicle categories L3e, L4e, L5e and L7e 1. Accuracy of the measurements of maximum net power and maximum torque at full load 2. Tests to measure the maximum torque and maximum net engine power 2.1. Accessories 2.1.1. Accessories to be fitted During the test, it shall be possible to locate the accessories needed for operation of the engine in the application in question (as referred to in Table Ap2.2-1 on the test bench as far as possible in the positions that they would occupy for that application. Table Ap2.2-1 Accessories to be fitted during the propulsion unit performance test in order to determine torque and net engine power 2.1.3. Accessories to be removed Certain accessories which are necessary only for the operation of the vehicle itself, and which may be mounted on the engine, shall be removed for the test. Where accessories cannot be removed, the power absorbed by them under no load may be determined and added to the engine power measured. 2.2. Setting conditions The conditions applying to settings during the tests to determine maximum torque and maximum net power are set out in Table Ap2.1-2. Table Ap2.2-2 Setting conditions 2.3. Test conditions 2.3.1. The maximum-torque and net-power tests shall be conducted at full throttle, the engine being equipped as specified in Table Ap2.2-1. 2.3.2. The measurements shall be carried out under normal, stabilised operating conditions with an adequate fresh-air supply to the engine. The engine shall have been run in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Combustion chambers may contain deposits, but in limited quantities. 2.3.3. The test conditions selected, such as air inlet temperature, shall resemble reference conditions (see point 3.2.) as closely as possible in order to minimise the magnitude of the correction factor. 2.3.4. Where the cooling system on the test bench meets the minimum conditions for proper installation but nevertheless does not enable adequate cooling conditions to be reproduced and thus the measurements to be carried out in normal, stable operating conditions, the method described in Appendix 1 may be used. 2.3.5. The minimum conditions which shall be fulfilled by the test installation and the scope for conducting the tests in accordance with Appendix 1 are laid down as follows: 2.3.6. The temperature of the (ambient) inlet air to the engine shall be measured at no more than 0,15 m upstream from the point of entry into the air cleaner or, if no air cleaner is used, within 0,15 m of the air-inlet trumpet. The thermometer or thermocouple shall be shielded from radiant heat and be placed directly in the airstream. It shall also be shielded from fuel spray-back. A sufficient number of locations shall be used to give a representative average inlet temperature. 2.3.7. No data shall be taken until torque, speed and temperature have remained substantially constant for at least 30 seconds. 2.3.8. The engine speed during a run or reading shall not deviate from the selected speed by more than ± 1 % or ± 10 min – 1 , whichever is greater. 2.3.9. Observed brake load and inlet-air temperature data shall be taken simultaneously and shall be the average of two stabilised consecutive values. In the case of the brake load, these values shall not vary by more than 2 %. 2.3.10. The temperature of the coolant at the outlet from the engine shall be kept within ± 5 K of the upper thermostatically controlled temperature specified by the manufacturer. If no temperature is specified by the manufacturer, the temperature shall be 353,2 ± 5 K. For air-cooled engines, the temperature at a point indicated by the manufacturer shall be kept between + 0/ – 20 K of the maximum temperature specified by the manufacturer under the reference conditions. 2.3.11. The fuel temperature shall be measured at the inlet of the carburettor or injection system and be maintained within the limits set by the manufacturer. 2.3.12. The temperature of the lubricating oil measured in the oil sump or at the outlet from the oil cooler, if fitted, shall be maintained within the limits stipulated by the engine manufacturer. 2.3.13. The outlet temperature of the exhaust gases shall be measured at right angles to the exhaust flange(s), manifold(s) or orifices. 2.3.14. Where an automatically triggered device is used to measure engine speed and consumption, the measurement shall last at least ten seconds; if the measuring device is manually controlled, it shall measure for at least 20 seconds. 2.3.15. Test fuel The test fuel to be used shall be the reference fuel referred to in Appendix 2 of Annex II. 2.3.16. If it is not possible to use the standard exhaust silencer, a device shall be used for the test that is compatible with the engine’s normal operating conditions, and specified by the manufacturer. During the laboratory tests in particular, when the engine is running, the exhaust gas extractor shall not, at the point where the exhaust system is connected to the test bench, give rise in the exhaust-gas extraction duct to a pressure differing from the atmospheric pressure by more than ± 740 Pa (7,4 mbar) unless the manufacturer has deliberately specified the back pressure existing before the test; in this case, the lower of the two pressures shall be used. 2.4. Test procedure Measurements shall be taken at a sufficient number of engine speeds to define correctly the complete power curve between the lowest and the highest engine speeds recommended by the manufacturer. This range of speeds shall include the speeds of revolution at which the engine produces its maximum torque and at which it produces its maximum power. For each speed, the average of at least two stabilised measurements is to be determined. 2.5. Data to be recorded The data to be recorded shall be those set out in the template of the test report referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3. Power and torque correction factors 3.1. Definition of factors α 1 and α 2 3.1.1. α 1 and α 2 shall be factors by which the torque and power measured are to be multiplied in order to determine the torque and power of an engine, taking account of the efficiency of the transmission (factor α 2 ) used during the tests and in order to bring them within the reference atmospheric conditions specified in point 3.2.1 (factor α 1 ). The power correction formula is as follows: Equation Ap2.2-1: where: 3.2. Reference atmospheric conditions 3.2.1. Temperature: 298,2 K (25 °C) 3.2.2. Dry reference pressure (p so ): 99 kPa (990 mbar) Note: the dry reference pressure is based on a total pressure of 100 kPa and a water vapour pressure of 1 kPa. 3.2.3. Atmospheric test conditions 3.3. Determination of the correction factor α 1 8 Equation Ap2.2-2: where: 3.3.1. Equation Ap2.2-2 applies only if: If the limit values are exceeded, the corrected value obtained shall be stated and the test conditions (temperature and pressure) stated exactly in the test report. 3.4. Determination of the correction factor for mechanical efficiency of the transmission α 2 Where: Equation Ap2.2-2: where n t is the efficiency of the transmission located between the crankshaft and the measuring point. This transmission efficiency n t is determined from the product (multiplication) of efficiency n j of each of the components of the transmission: Equation Ap2.2-3: Table Ap2.1-3 Efficiency nj of each of the components of the transmission 4. Maximum torque and maximum net power measurement tolerances The maximum torque and the maximum net power of the engine as determined by the technical service to the satisfaction of the approval authority shall have a maximum acceptable tolerance of: Table Ap2.2-4 Acceptable measurement tolerances Engine speed tolerance when performing maximum torque and net power measurements: ≤ 1,5 % ( 1 ) The torque measuring device shall be calibrated in order to take account of frictional losses. This accuracy may be ± 2 % for the measurements carried out at power levels less than 50 % of the maximum value. It will in all cases be ± 1 % for the measurement maximum torque. ( 2 ) Charge air-cooled engines shall be tested with charge air cooling, whether liquid or air-cooled, but if the manufacturer prefers, a test bench may replace the air-cooled cooler. In either case, the measurement of power at each speed shall be made with the same pressure drop of the engine air across the charge air cooler on the test-bench system as those specified by the manufacturer for the system on the complete vehicle. Appendix 2.2.1 Measurement of maximum torque and maximum net engine power by means of the engine-temperature method 1. Test conditions Appendix 2.3 Determination of the maximum torque and maximum net power of L-category vehicles equipped with a compression ignition engine 1. Accuracy of the measurement of full load torque and power 1.1. Torque: ± 1 % of measured torque 1.2. Engine speed The measurement shall be accurate to within ± 1 % of the full-scale reading. Engine speed shall be measured preferably with an automatically synchronised revolution counter and chronometer (or counter-timer). 1.3. Fuel consumption: ± 1 % of measured consumption. 1.4. Fuel temperature: ± 2 K. 1.5. Engine inlet air temperature: ± 2 K. 1.6. Barometric pressure: ± 100 Pa. 1.7. Pressure in inlet manifold ( 1 ) : ± 50 Pa. 1.8. Pressure in vehicle exhaust pipe: 200 Pa. 2. Tests to measure the maximum torque and maximum net engine power 2.1. Accessories 2.1.1. Accessories to be fitted During the test it is possible to locate the accessories needed for operation of the engine in the application in question (as referred to in Table Ap2.3-1 on the test bench as far as possible in the positions that they would occupy for that application. Table Ap2.3-1 Accessories to be fitted during the propulsion unit performance test in order to determine torque and net engine power 2.1.3. Accessories to be removed Certain vehicle accessories necessary only for the operation of the vehicle and which may be mounted on the engine shall be removed for the test. The following non-exhaustive list is given as an example: Where accessories cannot be removed, the power absorbed by them in the unloaded condition may be determined and added to the measured engine power. 2.1.4. Compression-ignition engine starting accessories For the accessories used in starting compression-ignition engines, the two following cases shall be considered: In either case, the system for producing and accumulating the energy necessary for starting is fitted and operated in the unloaded condition. 2.2. Setting conditions The conditions applying to settings during the tests to determine maximum torque and maximum net power are set out in Table Ap2.3-2. Table Ap2.3-2 Setting conditions 2.3. Test conditions 2.3.1. The maximum-torque and net-power tests shall be conducted at full load fuel-injection pump setting, the engine being equipped as specified in Table Ap2.3-1. 2.3.2. The measurements shall be carried out under normal, stabilised operating conditions with an adequate fresh-air supply to the engine. The engine shall have been run in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Combustion chambers may contain deposits, but in limited quantities. 2.3.3. The test conditions selected, such as air inlet temperature, shall resemble reference conditions (see point 3.2.) as closely as possible in order to minimise the magnitude of the correction factor. 2.3.4. The temperature of the (ambient) inlet air to the engine shall be measured at no more than 0,15 m upstream from the point of entry into the air cleaner or, if no air cleaner is used, within 0,15 m of the air-inlet trumpet. The thermometer or thermocouple shall be shielded from radiant heat and be placed directly in the airstream. It shall also be shielded from fuel spray-back. A sufficient number of locations shall be used to give a representative average inlet temperature. 2.3.7. No data shall be taken until torque, speed and temperature have remained substantially constant for at least 30 seconds. 2.3.8. The engine speed during a run or reading shall not deviate from the selected speed by more than ± 1 % or ± 10 min –1 , whichever is greater. 2.3.9. Observed brake-load and inlet-air temperature data shall be taken simultaneously and shall be the average of two stabilised consecutive values. In the case of the brake load, these values shall not vary more than 2 %. 2.3.10. The temperature of the coolant at the outlet from the engine shall be kept within ± 5 K of the upper thermostatically controlled temperature specified by the manufacturer. If no temperature is specified by the manufacturer, the temperature shall be 353,2 ± 5 K. For air-cooled engines, the temperature at a point indicated by the manufacturer shall be kept between + 0 / – 20 K of the maximum temperature specified by the manufacturer under the reference conditions. 2.3.11. The fuel temperature shall be measured at the inlet of the injection system and maintained within the limits set by the manufacturer. 2.3.12. The temperature of the lubricating oil measured in the oil sump or at the outlet from the oil cooler, if fitted, shall be maintained within the limits established by the engine manufacturer. 2.3.13. The outlet temperature of the exhaust gases shall be measured at right angles to the exhaust flange(s), manifold(s) or orifices. 2.3.14. An auxiliary regulating system may be used if necessary to maintain the temperature within the limits specified in points 2.3.10., 2.3.11 and 2.3.12. 2.3.15. Where an automatically triggered device is used to measure engine speed and consumption, the measurement shall last at least ten seconds; if the measuring device is manually controlled, it shall measure for at least 20 seconds. 2.3.16. Test fuel The test fuel to be used shall be the reference fuel referred to in Appendix 2 of Annex II. 2.3.17. If it is not possible to use the standard exhaust silencer for the test, a device shall be used that is compatible with the engine’s normal operating conditions, and specified by the manufacturer. During the laboratory tests in particular, when the engine is running, the exhaust gas extractor shall not, at the point where the exhaust system is connected to the test bench, give rise in the exhaust-gas extraction duct to a pressure differing from the atmospheric pressure by more than ± 740 Pa (7,4 mbar) unless the manufacturer has deliberately specified the back pressure existing before the test; in this case, the lower of the two pressures shall be used. 2.4. Test procedure Measurements shall be taken at a sufficient number of engine speeds to define correctly the complete power curve between the lowest and the highest engine speeds recommended by the manufacturer. This range of speeds shall include the speeds of revolution at which the engine produces its maximum torque and at which it produces its maximum power. For each speed, the average of at least two stabilised measurements is to be determined. 2.5. Measurement of smoke index In the case of compression-ignition engines, the exhaust gases shall be examined during the test for compliance with the requirements for test type II. 2.6. Data to be recorded The data to be recorded are those set out in the template of the test report referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3. Power and torque correction factors 3.1. Definition of factors α d and α 2 3.1.1. α d and α 2 shall be factors by which the torque and power measured are to be multiplied in order to determine the torque and power of an engine, taking account of the efficiency of the transmission (factor α2) used during the tests and in order to bring them within the reference atmospheric conditions specified in point 3.2.1 (factor α d ). The power correction formula is as follows: Equation Ap2.3-1: where: 3.2. Reference atmospheric conditions 3.2.1. Temperature: 298,2 K (25 °C) 3.2.2. Dry reference pressure (p so ): 99 kPa (990 mbar) Note : the dry reference pressure is based on a total pressure of 100 kPa and a water vapour pressure of 1 kPa. 3.2.3. Atmospheric test conditions 3.2.3.1. During the test, the atmospheric conditions shall lie within the following range: where: 3.3. Determination of the correction factor α d ( 10 ) Equation Ap2.3-2: The power correction factor (α d ) for compression-ignition engines at constant fuel rate is obtained by applying the formula: where: 3.3.1. Atmospheric factor f a This factor indicates the effects of environmental conditions (pressure, temperature and humidity) on the air drawn in by the engine. The atmospheric factor formula differs according to type of engine. 3.3.1.1. Naturally aspirated and mechanically supercharged engines Equation Ap2.3-3: where: 3.3.1.2. Turbocharger engines or without cooling of inlet air Equation Ap2.3-4: 3.3.2. Engine factor f m f m is a function of q c (fuel flow corrected) as follows: Equation Ap2.3-5: where: Equation Ap2.3-6: where: 3.3.2.1. This formula is valid for a value interval of q c included between 40 mg/(litre · cycle) and 65 mg/(litre · cycle). For q c values lower than 40 mg/(litre · cycle), a constant value of f m equal to 0.3 (f m = 0.3) will be taken. For q c values higher than 65 mg/(litre · cycle), a constant value of fm equal to 1.2 = (f m = 1.2) will be taken (see the figure). Figure Ap2.3-1 Characteristic parameter f m for each type of engine and adjustment as function of corrected fuel flow 3.3.3. Conditions to be complied with in the laboratory For a test to be valid, the correction factor αd shall be such that: 0,9 α d ≤ 1.1 If these limits are exceeded, the corrected value obtained shall be given and the test conditions (temperature and pressure) stated precisely in the test report. 4. Measuring maximum torque and maximum net power tolerances The tolerances set out in point 4 of Appendix 2.2 shall apply. ( 1 ) The complete air intake system shall be fitted as provided for the intended application: ( 2 ) The complete air intake system shall be fitted as provided for the intended application: ( 3 ) The complete exhaust system shall be fitted as provided for the intended application: ( 4 ) If an exhaust brake is incorporated in the engine, the throttle valve shall be held in the fully open position. ( 5 ) The fuel-feed pressure may be adjusted, if necessary, to reproduce the pressures existing in the particular engine application (particularly when a ‘fuel-return’ system is used). ( 6 ) The air-intake valve is the control valve for the pneumatic governor of the injection pump. The governor or the fuel-injection equipment may contain devices which can affect the amount of injected fuel. ( 7 ) The radiator, fan, fan nozzle, water pump and thermostat shall, on the test bench, occupy as far as possible the same position relative to each other as if they were on the vehicle. If any of them have a position on the test bench which is different from that on the vehicle, this shall be described and noted in the test report. The cooling-liquid circulation shall be operated by the engine water pump only. Cooling of the liquid may be produced either by the engine radiator or by an external circuit, provided that the pressure loss of this circuit and the pressure at the pump inlet remain substantially the same as those of the engine cooling system. The radiator shutter, if incorporated, shall be in the open position. Where the fan, radiator and cowl system cannot conveniently be fitted to the engine, the power absorbed by the fan when separately mounted in its correct position in relation to the radiator and cowl (if used) shall be determined at the speeds corresponding to the engine speeds used for measurement of the engine power either by calculation from standard characteristics or by practical tests. This power, corrected to the standard atmospheric conditions defined in point 4.2, shall be deducted from the corrected power. ( 8 ) Where a disconnectable or progressive fan or blower is incorporated, the test shall be carried out with the disconnectable fan (or blower) disconnected or with the progressive fan or blower running at maximum slip. ( 9 ) Minimum power of the generator: the power of the generator shall be no more than that required to operate accessories which are indispensable for the operation of the engine. If the connection of a battery is necessary, a fully-charged battery in good order shall be used. ( 10 ) Minimum power of the generator: the power of the generator shall be no more than that required to operate accessories which are indispensable for the operation of the engine. If the connection of a battery is necessary, a fully-charged battery in good order shall be used. Appendix 2.4 Determination of the maximum torque and maximum power of L-category vehicles equipped with a hybrid propulsion 1. Requirements 1.1. Hybrid propulsion including a positive ignition combustion engine The maximum total torque and maximum total power of the hybrid propulsion assembly of combustion engine and electric motor shall be measured according to the requirements of Appendix 2.2. 1.2. Hybrid propulsion including a compression ignition combustion engine The maximum total torque and maximum total power of the hybrid propulsion assembly of combustion engine and electric motor shall be measured according to the requirements of Appendix 2.3. 1.3. Hybrid propulsion including an electric motor Paragraph 1.1. or 1.2. shall apply and, in addition, the maximum torque and maximum continuous rated power of the electric motor shall be measured according to the requirements of Appendix 3. 1.4. If the hybrid technology used on the vehicle allows multi-mode hybrid running conditions, the same procedure shall be repeated for each mode and the highest measured propulsion unit performance value shall be taken as the final test result of the propulsion unit performance test procedure. 2. Manufacturer’s obligation The vehicle manufacturer shall ensure that the test set-up of the test vehicle equipped with a hybrid propulsion shall result in the maximum attainable total torque and power being measured. Any series-mounted feature resulting in a higher propulsion unit performance in terms of maximum design vehicle speed, maximum total torque or maximum total power shall be regarded as a defeat device. Appendix 3 Requirements concerning the methods for measuring the maximum torque and maximum continuous rated power of a pure electric propulsion type 1. Requirements Appendix 4 Requirements concerning the method for measuring the maximum continuous rated power, switch-off distance and maximum assistance factor of an L1e category vehicle designed to pedal referred to in Article 3(94b) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 1. Scope 2. Exemption L1e vehicles within the scope of this Appendix shall be exempted from the requirements of Appendix 1. 3. Test procedures and requirements 3.1. Test procedure to measure the maximum design vehicle speed up to which the auxiliary motor provides pedal assist. The test procedure and measurements shall be performed in conformity with appendix 1 or alternatively with point 4.2.6.2. of EN 15194:2009. 3.2. Test procedure to measure the maximum continuous rated power The maximum continuous rated power shall be measured according to the test procedure set out in appendix 3. 3.3. Test procedure to measure the maximum peak power 3.3.1. Acceptable range maximum peak power as compared with maximum continuous rated power The maximum peak power shall be ≤ 1,6 × maximum continuous rated power, measured as mechanical output power at the shaft of the motor unit. 3.3.2. Tolerances The maximum continuous rated and peak power values may deviate by +/– 5 % from the result of the measurements set out in appendix 3. 3.3.3. Power correction factors 3.3.3.1. Definition of factor α 1 and α 2 3.3.4. Atmospheric test conditions 3.3.4.1. During the test, the atmospheric conditions shall lie within the following range: 278,2 K < T < 318,2 K where: T = test temperature (K) 3.3.5. Test preparations 3.3.5.1. The test vehicle shall be mounted on a test bench. 3.3.5.2. The test vehicle shall be powered by its corresponding battery. If several types of batteries are released for the vehicle, the battery with maximum capacity shall be used. 3.3.5.3. The propulsion batter(y)/(ies) shall be fully charged. 3.3.5.4. One motor of the test bench shall be attached to the crank or crank axis of the test vehicle (test-bench crank motor). This motor shall be variable as regards rotation speed and torque to simulate the driving actions of the driver. The test-bench crank motor shall reach a rotation frequency of 90 min –1 and a maximum torque of 50 Nm to cover the typical performance ranges of drivers. 3.3.5.5. A brake or a motor shall be attached to a drum below the rear wheel of the test vehicle to simulate the losses and inertia of the vehicle. 3.3.5.6. For vehicles equipped with a motor driving the front wheel, an additional brake or an additional motor shall be attached to a drum below the front wheel, simulating the losses and inertia of the vehicle. 3.3.5.7. If the assistance level of the vehicle is variable, it shall be set to maximum assistance. 3.3.5.8. Peripheral devices powered by the power supply of the vehicle shall be dismounted or switched off. If such devices are necessary for motor assistance, they may remain powered on if the manufacturer has sufficiently justified this to the technical service and to the satisfaction of the approval authority. 3.3.5.9. Prior to start of the measurement, the cadence of the test-bench crank motor shall be swept from low to high cadence until a maximum mechanical output power is reached. For this preconditioning, a medium vehicle gear shall be used at an average test-bench crank motor torque of 25 Nm. 3.3.5.10. Subsequently, the test-bench crank motor torque shall be varied to reach the maximum mechanical output of the motor. After adjustment of the test-bench crank motor torque, the gear of the vehicle shall be adjusted for maximum output power. The test-bench crank motor conditions with maximum vehicle output power shall be reported and used for measuring the maximum power. They shall be monitored during the measurement. For this point of operation, the brakes/motors of the test bench for the front and the rear wheel shall be adjusted so that the rotation frequencies remain constant. 3.4. Test procedure to measure and calculate the maximum motor power 3.4.1. The maximum power shall be measured for five minutes (maximum five minute power). If the power is not constant, the average power during the five minute measurement shall be taken as the maximum five minute power. 3.4.2. The maximum motor power of the vehicle shall be calculated from the sum of the mechanical brake motor powers minus the mechanical input power of the test-bench crank motor. 3.4.3. Data to be recorded The data to be recorded are those set out in the template of the test report referred to in Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 3.5. Test procedure to measure the switch-off distance After stopping with pedalling, the assistance of the motor shall switch off in a driving distance ≤ 3 m. The testing vehicle speed is 90 % of the maximum assistance speed. The measurements shall be taken in accordance with EN 15194:2009. 3.5. Test procedure to measure the maximum assistance factor 3.5.1. The ambient temperature shall be between 278,2 K and 318,2 K. 3.5.2. The test vehicle shall be powered by its corresponding propulsion battery. The propulsion battery with maximum capacity shall be used for this test procedure. 3.5.3. The battery shall be fully charged using the charger to be specified by the vehicle manufacturer. 3.5.4. One motor of the test bench shall be attached to the crank or crank axis of the test vehicle. This test bench crank motor shall simulate the driving action of the rider and shall be capable of running variable rotation speeds and torques. It shall reach a rotation frequency of 90 rpm and a maximum continuous rated torque of 50 Nm. 3.5.5. A brake or a motor simulating the losses and inertia of the vehicle shall be attached to a drum below the rear wheel of the test vehicle. 3.5.6. For vehicles equipped with a motor driving the front wheel, an additional brake or an additional motor shall be attached to a drum below the front wheel, simulating the losses and inertia of the vehicle. 3.5.7. If the assistance level of the vehicle is variable, it has to be set to maximum assistance. 3.5.8. The following points of operation shall be tested: Table Ap4-1 Operation points to test the maximum assistance factor 3.5.9. The maximum assistance factor shall be calculated according to the following formula: Equation Ap4-1: where: The mechanical motor power of the test vehicle shall be calculated from the sum of the mechanical brake motor power minus the mechanical input power of the test bench crank motor (in W). ( 1 ) If the target vehicle speed cannot be reached, the measurement shall be performed at the maximum vehicle speed reached ( 2 ) select gear closest to required rpm rate for the point of operation ANNEX XI Vehicle propulsion family with regard to environmental performance demonstration tests 1. Introduction 1.1. In order to alleviate the test burden on manufacturers when demonstrating the environmental performance of vehicles these may be grouped as a vehicle propulsion family. One or more parent vehicles shall be selected from this group of vehicles by the manufacturer to the satisfaction of the approval authority that shall be used to demonstrate environmental performance test types I to VIII. Parent vehicles to demonstrate test type IX on sound level shall follow the requirements set out in the UNECE regulations referred to in point 2 of Annex IX. 1.2. An L-category vehicle may continue to be regarded as belonging to the same vehicle propulsion family provided that the vehicle variant, version, propulsion, pollution-control system and OBD parameters listed in Table 11-1 are identical or remain within the prescribed and declared tolerances. 1.3. Vehicle and propulsion family attribution with regard to environmental tests For the environmental test types I to XIII a representative parent vehicle shall be selected within the boundaries set by the classification criteria laid down in point 3. 2. Definitions 3. Classification criteria 3.1. Test types I, II, V, VII and VIII (‘ X ’ in Table 11-1 means ‘applicable’) Table 11-1 Classification criteria propulsion family with regard to test types I, II, V, VII and VIII 3.2. Test types III and IV (‘ X ’ in Table 11-2 means ‘applicable’) Table 11-2 Classification criteria propulsion family with regard to test types III 5. Extension of type-approval regarding test type IV 5.1. The type-approval shall be extended to vehicles equipped with a control system for evaporative emissions which meet the evaporative emission control family classification criteria listed in point 5.3. The worst-case vehicle with regard to the cross-section and approximate hose length shall be tested as a parent vehicle. 5.2. The manufacturer may request to use one of the following approaches based on a ‘certification by design’ strategy to extend the approval for evaporative emissions: 5.2.1. Carry-across approach 5.2.2. Worst-case configuration approach If the vehicle manufacturer has successfully carried out permeability or permeation testing on a worst-case fuel tank configuration, these test data may be used to certify by design other fuel tanks which are otherwise similar in terms of material (including additives), fuel pump plate and filler cap/neck. The worst-case configuration shall be the fuel tank design with the thinnest walls or the smallest interior surface area. ( 1 ) maximum 30 % acceptable for test type VIII ( 2 ) Only for vehicles equipped with storage for gaseous fuel ANNEX XII Amendment of part A of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013