Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2021 (2021/C 18 I/01) In the wake of an unprecedented pandemic, the Union and its citizens have proven themselves resilient. However, the recent resurgence of the coronavirus across Europe shows the overwhelming need for the Member States and the EU institutions to continue acting with care, solidarity, caution and coordination in managing and overcoming the crisis. Where urgent legislative changes were needed to protect lives and livelihoods, Europe showed the resolution and competence to quickly act in the spirit of real European solidarity. The EU has also taken massive action to counter the socio-economic effects of the pandemic, with the adoption of a Multiannual Financial Framework amounting for EUR 1.074 trillion and a recovery fund ‘NextGenerationEU’ of EUR 750 billion. The Commission will pursue its efforts to ensure widespread availability of COVID-19 vaccines to all in need. The strategic priorities that were set out by the EU institutions at the beginning of this mandate – a healthier, greener, more digital, fairer and social Europe, which does not leave anyone behind – will continue to guide our decisions and actions and make our societies and economies even more resilient. We remain committed to implementing these priorities, strengthening the European identity and using the full potential that the Treaties offer. This Joint Declaration for 2021, which draws on the Commission work programme for the year ahead, demonstrates our common determination to deliver the practical changes desired by European citizens. It is now time to move from strategy to implementation. The Joint Declaration draws political attention to key legislative proposals ( 1 ) that either have already been presented by the European Commission or will be by the autumn of 2021. The three Institutions will use their best endeavours to ensure as much progress can be made by the end of the year. They recall the positive contribution of impact assessments in improving the quality of Union legislation and that initiatives with significant economic, environmental and social impacts included in the Joint Declaration will, as a general rule, be accompanied by an impact assessment. The three Institutions agree to give the utmost priority to the following initiatives, in order to achieve as much as possible by the end of 2021 and to set the building blocks for Europe’s transformation, recovery and future resilience: Further, we recall our commitment: The three Institutions will work together on all pending proposals, guided by the principles of European added-value, subsidiarity and proportionality. We will continue moving forward with resolution and competence so that Europe can deliver for its citizens when and where it matters most. We are committed to the proper implementation and enforcement of existing legislation. We, as Presidents of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission, will regularly monitor the timely and efficient implementation of this Joint Declaration. Съставено в Брюксел на десети декември две хиляди и двадесета година. Hecho en Bruselas, el diez de diciembre de dos mil veinte. V Bruselu dne desátého prosince dva tisíce dvacet. Udfærdiget i Bruxelles den tiende december to tusind og tyve. Geschehen zu Brüssel am zehnten Dezember zweitausendzwanzig. Kahe tuhande kahekümnenda aasta detsembrikuu kümnendal päeval Brüsselis. Έγινε στις Βρυξέλλες, στις δέκα Δεκεμβρίου δύο χιλιάδες είκοσι. Done at Brussels on the tenth day of December in the year two thousand and twenty. Fait à Bruxelles, le dix décembre deux mille vingt. Arna dhéanamh sa Bhruiséil, an deichiú lá de mhí na Nollag an bhliain dhá mhíle fiche. Sastavljeno u Bruxellesu desetog prosinca godine dvije tisuće dvadesete. Fatto a Bruxelles, addì dieci dicembre duemilaventi. Briselē, divi tūkstoši divdesmitā gada desmitajā decembrī. Priimta du tūkstančiai dvidešimtų metų gruodžio dešimtą dieną Briuselyje. Kelt Brüsszelben, a kétezer-huszadik év december havának tizedik napján. Magħmul fi Brussell, fl-għaxar jum ta’ Diċembru fis-sena elfejn u għoxrin. Gedaan te Brussel, tien december tweeduizend twintig. Sporządzono w Brukseli dnia dziesiątego grudnia roku dwa tysiące dwudziestego. Feito em Bruxelas, em dez de dezembro de dois mil e vinte. Întocmit la Bruxelles la zece decembrie două mii douăzeci. V Bruseli desiateho decembra dvetisícdvadsať. V Bruslju, dne desetega decembra leta dva tisoč dvajset. Tehty Brysselissä kymmenentenä päivänä joulukuuta vuonna kaksituhattakaksikymmentä. Som skedde i Bryssel den tionde december år tjugohundratjugo. ( 1 ) Under the Ordinary Legislative Procedure.