COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2021/2178 of 6 July 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council by specifying the content and presentation of information to be disclosed by undertakings subject to Articles 19a or 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU concerning environmentally sustainable economic activities, and specifying the methodology to comply with that disclosure obligation (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 8(4), thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 2 Disclosures by non-financial undertakings 1. Non-financial undertakings shall disclose the information referred to in Article 8, paragraphs 1 and 2, of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 as specified in Annex Ito this Regulation. 2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be presented in tabular form by using the templates set out in Annex II to this Regulation. Article 3 Disclosures by asset managers 1. Asset managers shall disclose the information referred to in Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 as specified in Annexes III and XI to this Regulation. 2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be presented in tabular form by using the template set out in Annex IV to this Regulation. Article 4 Disclosures by credit institutions 1. Credit institutions shall disclose the information referred to in Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 as specified in Annexes V and XI to this Regulation. 2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be presented in tabular form by using the template set out in Annex VI to this Regulation. Article 5 Disclosures by investment firms 1. Investment firms shall disclose the information referred to in Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 as specified in Annexes VII and XI to this Regulation. 2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be presented in tabular form by using the template set out in Annex VIII to this Regulation. Article 6 Disclosures by insurance and reinsurance undertakings 1. Insurance and reinsurance shall disclose the information referred to in Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 as specified in Annexes IX and XI to this Regulation. 2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be presented in tabular form by using the templates set out in Annex X to this Regulation. Article 7 Disclosure rules common to all financial undertakings 1. The exposures to central governments, central banks and supranational issuers shall be excluded from the calculation of the numerator and denominator of key performance indicators of financial undertakings. 2. Derivatives shall be excluded from the numerator of key performance indicators of financial undertakings. 3. Exposures to undertakings that are not obliged to publish non-financial information pursuant to Article 19a or 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU shall be excluded from the numerator of key performance indicators of financial undertakings. 4. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, environmentally sustainable bonds or debt securities with the purpose of financing specific identified activities that are issued by an investee undertaking shall be included in the numerator of key performance indicators up to the full value of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities that the proceeds of those bonds and debt securities finance, on the basis of information provided by the investee undertaking. Exposures whose purpose is not to finance specific identified activities shall be included in the numerator weighted by the turnover KPI and CapEx KPI of the issuer in accordance with the methodology laid down in Annexes III, V, VII, and IX. Where an investee undertaking has issued the environmentally sustainable bonds or debt securities with the purpose of financing specific identified activities, financial undertakings shall discount the KPI of the investee undertaking accordingly to avoid double counting. 5. Where the technical screening criteria laid down in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Articles 10(3), 11(3), 12(2), 13(2), 14(2) or 15(2) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 are amended, special purpose loans and the instruments referred to paragraph 4 held by financial undertakings that finance Taxonomy aligned economic activities or assets shall in the absence of alignment of the financed economic activities or assets with the amended technical screening criteria be reported as such under this Regulation until five years after the date of application of the delegated acts that amend those technical screening criteria. 6. Financial undertakings shall provide for a breakdown in the numerator where applicable and denominator of the key performance indicators for: 7. Financial undertakings may use estimates for assessing the Taxonomy-alignment of their exposures to undertakings referred to in paragraph (6), points (e) and (f), where those financial undertakings are able to demonstrate compliance with all criteria of Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, except with the criteria laid down in Article 3, point (b) of that Regulation. Financial undertakings shall formalise, document and make public the methodology upon which such estimations are based, including the approach and research methodology, the main assumptions and precautionary principles used. Financial undertakings shall disclose: Article 8 Disclosure rules common to all financial undertakings and non-financial undertakings 1. Financial undertakings and non-financial undertakings shall include all additional disclosures accompanying the key performance indicators laid down in Annexes I, III, V, VII, XI in the same parts of the non-financial statement that contains those indicators, or shall provide cross- 2. Information disclosed in accordance with this Regulation shall cover the annual reporting period from the previous calendar year of the date of disclosure. 3. Financial undertakings and non-financial undertakings shall provide in the non-financial statement the key performance indicators covering the previous annual reporting period. For the purposes of this paragraph, the first annual reporting period shall cover the year 2023. 4. Financial undertakings and non-financial undertakings shall in their disclosures, use the same currency as in their financial statements. Financial undertakings shall use the most recently available data and key performance indicators of their counterparties to calculate their own key performance indicators. 5. The key performance indicators shall cover only the objectives of climate change mitigation and climate change adaptation until 12 months after the date of application of the delegated regulations that contain the technical screening criteria for the other environmental objectives and that have been adopted pursuant to Article 12(2), Article 13(2), Article 14(2) and Article 15(2) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852. Article 9 Review 1. By 30 June 2024, the Commission shall review the application of this Regulation. The Commission shall assess in particular the need for any further amendments with regard to the inclusion of: 2. The review for SME exposures will be accompanied by an impact assessment assessing the administrative burden, access to finance and the potential impacts on SMEs of a possible extension to cover SMEs exposures that are not covered by this Delegated Regulation or provide such information voluntarily. 3. The exposures to and investments in undertakings that do not publish non-financial information pursuant to Articles 19a and 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU and Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, but that provide such equivalent information voluntarily, may be included in the numerators of key performance indicators of financial undertakings from 1 January 2025 subject to a positive assessment referred to in paragraph (2). Article 10 Entry into force and application 1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . 2. From 1 January 2022 until 31 December 2022, non-financial undertakings shall only disclose the proportion of Taxonomy-eligible and Taxonomy non-eligible economic activities in their total turnover, capital and operational expenditure and the qualitative information referred to in Section 1.2 of Annex I relevant for this disclosure. 3. From 1 January 2022 until 31 December 2023, financial undertakings shall only disclose: Credit institutions shall also disclose the proportion of their trading portfolio and on demand inter-bank loans in their total assets. Insurance and reinsurance undertakings shall also disclose the proportion of Taxonomy-eligible and Taxonomy non-eligible non-life insurance economic activities. 4. The key performance indicators of non-financial undertakings, including any accompanying information to be disclosed pursuant to Annexes I and II to this Regulation, shall be disclosed from 1 January 2023. 5. The key performance indicators of financial undertakings, including any accompanying information to be disclosed pursuant to Annexes III, V, VII, IX, XI to this Regulation, shall be disclosed from 1 January 2024. Sections 1.2.3 and 1.2.4 of Annex V shall apply from 1 January 2026. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 6 July 2021. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-related disclosures in the financial services sector ( OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC ( OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19 ). ( 3 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139 of 4 June 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing the technical screening criteria for determining the conditions under which an economic activity qualifies as contributing substantially to climate change mitigation or climate change adaptation and for determining whether that economic activity causes no significant harm to any of the other environmental objectives ( OJ L 442, 9.12.2021, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative Investment Fund Managers and amending Directives 2003/41/EC and 2009/65/EC and Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No 1095/2010 ( OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) ( OJ L 302, 17.11.2009, p. 32 ). ( 6 ) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 ( OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Directive 2009/138/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance (Solvency II) ( OJ L 335, 17.12.2009, p. 1 ). ANNEX I KPIs OF NON-FINANCIAL UNDERTAKINGS 1. Content of KPIs to be disclosed by non-financial undertakings 1.1. Specification of key performance indicators (KPI) 1.1.1. KPI related to turnover (turnover KPI) The proportion of turnover referred to in Article 8(2), point (a), of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 shall be calculated as the part of the net turnover derived from products or services, including intangibles, associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities (numerator), divided by the net turnover (denominator) as defined in Article 2, point (5), of Directive 2013/34/EU. The turnover shall cover the revenue recognised pursuant to International Accounting Standard (IAS) 1, paragraph 82(a), as adopted by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1126/2008 ( 1 ) . The KPI referred to in the first subparagraph shall exclude from its numerator the part of the net turnover derived from products and services associated with economic activities that have been adapted to climate change in line with Article 11(1), point (a) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 and in accordance with Annex II to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139, unless those activities: 1.1.2. KPI related to capital expenditure (CapEx) (CapEx KPI) The proportion of CapEx referred to in Article 8(2), point (b), of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 shall be calculated as the numerator divided by the denominator as specified in points 1.1.2.1 and 1.1.2.2 of this Annex. 1.1.2.1. Denominator The denominator shall cover additions to tangible and intangible assets during the financial year considered before depreciation, amortisation and any re-measurements, including those resulting from revaluations and impairments, for the relevant financial year and excluding fair value changes. The denominator shall also cover additions to tangible and intangible assets resulting from business combinations. For non-financial undertakings applying international financial reporting standards (IFRS) as adopted by Regulation (EC) No 1126/2008, CapEx shall cover costs that are accounted based on: For non-financial undertakings applying national generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), CapEx shall cover the costs accounted under the applicable GAAP that correspond to the costs included in the capital expenditure by non-financial undertakings applying IFRS. Leases that do not lead to the recognition of a right-of-use over the asset shall not be counted as CapEx. 1.1.2.2. Numerator The numerator equals to the part of the capital expenditure included in the denominator that is any of the following: The CapEx plan referred to in the first paragraph of this point 1.1.2.2 shall meet the following conditions: Where the relevant technical screening criteria are amended before the completion of the CapEx plan, non-financial undertakings shall either update the plan within two years to ensure the economic activities referred to in point (a) are aligned with the amended technical screening criteria upon the completion of the plan or restate the numerator of the CapEx KPI. The updating of plan shall restart the period referred to in point (a). The period referred to point (a) of the second paragraph of this point 1.1.2.2 can exceed five years only where a longer period is objectively justified by specific features of the economic activity and the upgrade concerned, with a maximum of 10 years. That justification shall feature in the CapEx plan itself and in the contextual information detailed under point 1.2.3 of this Annex. Where the CapEx plan fails to meet the conditions referred to in the second paragraph of this point 1.1.2.2, previously published KPI related to capital expenditure shall be restated. The numerator shall also contain the part of the CapEx for adaptation of economic activities to climate change in accordance with Annex II to this Climate Delegated Act. The numerator shall provide for a breakdown for the part of CapEx allocated to substantial contribution to climate change adaptation. 1.1.3. KPI related to operating expenditure (OpEx) (OpEx KPI) The proportion of OpExreferred to in Article 8(2), point (b), of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 shall be calculated as the numerator divided by the denominator as specified in points 1.1.3.1 and 1.1.3.2 of this Annex. 1.1.3.1. Denominator The denominator shall cover direct non-capitalised costs that relate to research and development, building renovation measures, short-term lease, maintenance and repair, and any other direct expenditures relating to the day-to-day servicing of assets of property, plant and equipment by the undertaking or third party to whom activities are outsourced that are necessary to ensure the continued and effective functioning of such assets. Non-financial undertakings that apply national GAAP and are not capitalising right-of-use assets shall include lease costs in the OpEx in addition to the costs listed in the first subparagraph of point 1.1.3.1 of this Annex. 1.1.3.2. Numerator The numerator equals to the part of the operating expenditure included in the denominator that is any of the following: The CapEx planreferred to in the first paragraph of this point 1.1.3.2 shall meet the conditions specified in point 1.1.2.2 of this Annex. Research and development costs already accounted for in the CapEx KPI shall not be counted as OpEx. The numerator shall also include the part of OpEx for the adaptation of economic activities to climate change in accordance with Annex II to Climate Delegated Act. The numerator shall provide for a breakdown for the part of the OpEx allocated to substantial contribution to climate change adaptation. Where the operational expenditure is not material for the business model of non-financial undertakings, those undertakings shall: 1.2. Specification of disclosures accompanying the KPIs of non-financial undertakings Non-financial undertakings shall disclose the following information accompanying the relevant KPIs. 1.2.1. Accounting policy Non-financial undertakings shall explain: For turnover and capital expenditure, non-financial undertakings shall include Where the application of any calculations has changed since the previous reporting period, non-financial undertakings shall explain why those changes result in more reliable and relevant information and provide for restated comparative figures. Non-financial undertakings shall disclose any material changes that have occurred during the reporting period in relation to the implementation of the CapEx plans as disclosed in accordance with point and 1.1.2 of this Annex. Non-financial undertakings shall disclose all of the following: 1.2.2. Assessment of compliance with Regulation (EU) 2020/852 1.2.2.1. Information on assessment of compliance with Regulation (EU) 2020/852: Non-financial undertakings shall: 1.2.2.2. Contribution to multiple objectives Where an economic activity contributes to several environmental objectives, non-financial undertakings shall: 1.2.2.3. Disaggregation of KPIs Where the KPIs for an economic activity are to be disaggregated, in particular where production facilities are used in an integrated manner, non-financial undertakings shall ensure that: 1.2.3. Contextual information Non-financial undertakings shall explain the figures of each KPI and the reasons for any changes in those figures in the reporting period. Non-financial undertakings may disclose additional KPIs based on turnover, Capex, Opex) that include investments in equity accounted in joint ventures, pursuant to IFRS 11 or IAS28, on a pro rata basis corresponding to their share in the equity of the joint venture. 1.2.3.1. Contextual information about turnover KPI Non-financial undertakings shall provide all of the following: Non-financial undertakings that have issued environmentally sustainable bonds or debt securities with the purpose of financing specific identified Taxonomy-aligned activities shall also disclose the turnover KPI adjusted to avoid double counting. 1.2.3.2. Contextual information about CapEx KPI Non-financial undertakings shall provide a quantitative breakdown at the economic activity aggregated level of the amounts included in the numerator and qualitative explanation of the key elements of change in CapEx KPI during the reporting period. Such breakdown shall disclose all of the following: Non-financial undertakings shall disclose the key information about each of their CapEx plans referred to in point 1.1.2 of this Annex, including all of the following: Non-financial undertaking that have issued environmentally sustainable bonds or debt securities with the purpose of financing specific identified Taxonomy-aligned activities shall also disclose the CapEx KPI adjusted for the Taxonomy-aligned capital expenditure financed by such bonds or debt securities. 1.2.3.3. Contextual information about the OpEx KPI Non-financial undertakings shall provide all of the following: Where OpEx is part of a CapEx plan as referred to in points 1.1.2.2 and 1.1.3.2 of this Annex, non-financial undertakings shall disclose the key information about each of their CapEx plans in line with the requirements of point 1.2.3.2 of this Annex. 2. Methodology for reporting of KPIs to be disclosed by non-financial undertakings The following requirements shall apply for the disclosures under Article 8(2) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852: ( 1 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 1126/2008 of 3 November 2008 adopting certain international accounting standards in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 320, 29.11.2008, p. 1 ). ANNEX II TEMPLATES FOR THE KPIs OF NON-FINANCIAL UNDERTAKINGS Template: Proportion of turnover from products or services associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities – disclosure covering year N Column 21 should be filled in for transitional activities contributing to the climate change mitigation. For activities listed under A2, columns 5 to 17 may be filled in on a voluntary basis by non-financial undertakings Template: Proportion of CapEx from products or services associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities – disclosure covering year N For activities listed under A2, columns 5 to 17 may be filled in on a voluntary basis by non-financial undertakings Template: Proportion of OpEx from products or services associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities – disclosure covering year N For activities listed under A2, columns 5 to 17 may be filled in on a voluntary basis by non-financial undertakings ANNEX III KPI OF ASSET MANAGERS 1. Content of KPI to be disclosed by asset managers The KPI shall be calculated as the numerator divided by the denominator as specified in points 1.1 and 1.2 of this Annex. 1.1. Numerator The numerator shall consist of a weighted average of the value of investments in Taxonomy-aligned economic activities of investee companies. The weighted average of the value of investments shall be based on the proportion of taxonomy-aligned economic activities of investee companies measured by the following: The calculation shall allow netting for the purposes of reporting the proportion of investments in taxonomy-aligned economic activities by applying the methodology used to calculate net short positions laid down in Article 3, paragraphs 4 and 5 of Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) . By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this point 1.1, debt securities with the purpose of financing specific identified activities or projects or environmentally sustainable bonds issued by an investee undertaking shall be included in the numerator up to the value of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities that the proceeds of those bonds and debt securities finance, on the basis of information provided by the investee undertaking. 1.2. Denominator The denominator shall consist of the value of all Asset under Management (AuM) without exposures referred to in Article 7(1) of this Regulation resulting from both collective and individual portfolio management activities of asset managers. Asset managers shall disclose a KPI based on turnover KPIs of the investee companies and a KPI based on the CapEx KPI of investee companies. 2. Methodology for preparing and reporting the KPI to be disclosed by asset managers For the purposes of disclosures under Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, asset managers shall: ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2012 on short selling and certain aspects of credit default swaps ( OJ L 86, 24.3.2012, p. 1 ). ANNEX IV TEMPLATE FOR THE KPI OF ASSET MANAGERS Standard template for the disclosure required under Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 (asset managers) ANNEX V KPIs OF CREDIT INSTITUTIONS 1. Content of KPIs to be disclosed by credit institutions 1.1. Scope of the KPIs 1.1.1. Consolidation Credit institutions shall disclose relevant KPIs on the basis of the scope of their prudential consolidation determined in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, Title II, Chapter 2, Section 2. 1.1.2. Total covered Assets The calculation of the green asset ratio (GAR) for on-balance sheet exposures shall cover the following accounting categories of financial assets, including loans and advances, debt securities, equity holdings and repossessed collaterals: The exposures referred to in Article 7(1) of this Regulation shall be excluded from the coverage of the GAR. The following assets shall be excluded from the numerator of the GAR: The calculation of KPIs for off-balance sheet exposures shall consider financial guarantees granted by the credit institution and assets under management for guarantee and investee non-financial undertakings. Other off-balance sheet exposures such as commitments shall be excluded from that calculation. 1.2. Content of the KPIs and methodology 1.2.1. Green asset ratio (GAR) The GAR shall show the proportion of the of credit institution’s assets financing and invested in taxonomy-aligned economic activities as a proportion of total covered assets in accordance with point 1.1.2 of this Annex. The GAR shall be based on the exposures and balance sheet according to the scope of prudential consolidation in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, Title II, Chapter 2, Section 2 for the types of assets and accounting portfolios specified in point 1.1.2 of this Annex, including information on stock and flows, on transitional and enabling activities, and on specialised and general purpose lending. Credit institutions shall disclose all of the following: The definition of the KPIs shall be based on the following components: In addition to GAR, credit institutions shall disclose the percentage of their total assets that are excluded from the numerator of the GAR in accordance with Article 7(2) of this Regulation and point1.1.2 of this Annex. 1.2.1.1. GAR applying to exposures to non-financial undertakings Credit institutions shall disclose the GAR for the stock of loans, debt securities and equity holdings and the flow for new lending. Credit institutions shall follow the following steps to calculate the GAR for each environmental objective. (i) GAR for lending activities to equity holdings of non-financial undertakings for loans and advances (GAR L&A) Credit institutions shall use and disclose the following items for the calculation of the GAR for this type of exposures: The amount for the purpose of (1)(c) shall be calculated by using the following formula 1(c) = (1)(c)(1) + (1)(c)(2) where: For the purposes of point (1)(c)(1), credit institutions shall consider the gross carrying amount of the project finance exposures to the non-financial undertaking to the extent and proportion that the project funded finances a taxonomy-aligned economic activity. The assessment of whether that requirement has been complied with shall be based on information provided by the counterparty on the project or activities to which the proceeds will be applied. Credit institutions shall provide information on the type of economic activity that is funded. Double counting shall not be allowed. Where the same specialised lending exposure is relevant for two environmental objectives, credit institutions shall allocate it to the most relevant objective. For the purposes of point (1)(c)(2), credit institutions shall rely on the CapEx and turnover KPI that the counterparty shall disclose for each environmental objective in accordance with this Regulation. The amount of loans and advances to non-financial undertakings shall be the sum of the gross carrying amount of the total loans and advances with unknown use of proceeds to non-financial undertakings weighted by the proportion of taxonomy-aligned economic activities with a breakdown for transition and enabling activities for each counterparty. Credit institutions shall calculate the KPIs for those type of exposures as follows: GAR L&A (for each environmental objective) = (1)(c)/(1)(a). Credit institutions shall disclose the GAR based on turnover KPI and separately the part of the KPI that refers to enabling and transitional activities, where relevant. The following aspects of the KPIs shall be disclosed: (ii) GAR for debt securities to non-financial undertakings (‘GAR DS’) Credit institutions shall calculate and disclose the following items for the calculation of the GAR for this type of exposures: The amount for the purposes of (2)(c) shall be calculated by using the following formula: For the purposes of point 2(c)(1), credit institutions shall consider the following: For the purposes of point (2)(c)(2), credit institutions shall rely on the turnover KPI and CapEx KPI that the counterparty shall disclose in accordance with Article 2 of this Regulation. The amount of debt securities to non-financial undertakings shall be the sum of the gross carrying amount of the total debt securities with unknown use of proceeds weighted by the proportion of taxonomy-aligned economic activities with a breakdown for transition and enabling activities for each counterparty. Credit institutions shall calculate the KPIs proposed according to the following formula for this type of exposures: GAR DS = (2)(c)/(2)(a) based on turnover KPI; (2)(c)/(2)(a) based on CapEx KPI. The following aspects of KPIs shall be disclosed: (iii) Green asset ratio for equity holdings of credit institutions in non-financial undertakings (‘GAR EH’) Credit institutions shall calculate and disclose: The followings aspects of ratios shall be disclosed: (iv) GAR on total financing in non-financial undertakings (lending plus equity holdings) The three ratios for each environmental objective shall be disclosed based on turnover KPI and, for debt securities and equity holdings, based on turnover KPI and CapEx KPI of underlying assets at an aggregate level for all financing on-balance sheet instruments, including equity holdings, in non-financial undertakings. The numerator and denominator of the ratios shall contain the gross carrying amount of loans and advances, debt securities and equity holdings relevant in each case. 1.2.1.2. Green asset ratio for lending activities to and equity holdings of financial undertakings GAR for lending activities to equity holdings of financial undertakings shall be calculated as a proportion of loans and advances, debt securities and equity holdings of relevant accounting portfolios financing taxonomy-aligned economic activities for each environmental objective, compared to total loans and advances, debt securities and equity holdings of financial undertakings. This GAR shall contain disclosures for climate change mitigation and climate change adaptation, with a breakdown for enabling activities. For the climate change mitigation, the GAR shall also contain disclosures of transitional activities and adaptation activities. For those activities contributing to the climate change mitigation and adaptation and other environmental objectives, credit institutions shall also provide disclosures of stock and flow. The numerator of the GAR for financial undertakings shall be calculated based on the counterparties’ KPIs calculated under this Regulation. The amount of loans and advances, debt securities and equity holdings of relevant accounting portfolios to financial undertakings to be considered in the numerator of the ratio shall be the sum of their gross carrying amount, weighted by the proportion of taxonomy-aligned economic activities with breakdown for transition, adaptation and enabling activities for each counterparty. Where the counterparty is another credit institution, the turnover-based and CapEx based KPIs used shall be the gross carrying amount of debt securities, loans and advances and equity holdings of relevant accounting portfolios weighted by the ‘Total GAR of the counterparty as defined in section’, that is gross carrying amount multiplied by ‘Total GAR’ of the counterparty. Where the counterparty is an investment firm, the following calculation of the KPI shall apply based on the proportion of the services in the income of the investment firm: Where the counterparty is asset manager, the turnover based and CapEx based KPIs shall be the gross carrying amount of debt securities, loans and advances and equity holdings weighted by the ratio of the counterparty’s investments that are in taxonomy-aligned economic activities, as specified in Annex III and IV to this Regulation, that is the gross carrying amount is multiplied by the asset manager’s ratio of total investments. In the case of investees that are insurance or reinsurance undertakings, the benchmark shall be investments, gross premiums written or, as applicable, total insurance revenue, as resulting from the calculation either of the turnover-based and CapEx based investment KPI or of the underwriting KPI of the investee in accordance with Annexes XI and X to this Regulation. The denominator shall be the total gross carrying amount of loans and advances, debt securities and equity holdings of relevant accounting portfolios in financial undertakings. 1.2.1.3. Green asset ratio for retail exposures GAR for retail exposures to residential real estate or house renovation loans shall be calculated as a proportion of loans to households collateralised by residential immovable property or granted for house renovation purposes that is taxonomy-aligned in accordance with the technical screening criteria for buildings, namely renovation and acquisition and ownership in accordance with points 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, and 7.7 respectively, of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act, compared to total loans to households collateralised by residential immovable property or granted for house renovation purposes. This GAR shall include disclosures of transitional activities, and disclosures of stock and flow. This GAR shall apply only to investments relevant for climate change mitigation. GAR for retail exposures to credit consumption loans for car loans shall be calculated as the proportion of loans financing cars complying with the technical screening criteria as laid down in Section 6.5 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act. This GAR shall include disclosures of transitional activities, and disclosures of stock of loans only for loans granted after [the date of application of this Regulation] and flow of loans. This GAR shall apply only to investments relevant for climate change mitigation. KPIs on retail exposures financing taxonomy-aligned economic activities shall only apply for the objective of climate change mitigation. (i) Residential real estate lending Credit institutions’ KPI disclosure shall cover the retail lending portfolio, in particular the mortgage lending portfolio. This KPI shall be disclosed by taking into account compliance with the technical screening criteria for buildings as laid down in Sections 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6 and 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act. Credit institutions shall disclose the KPI for their residential real estate lending portfolio as a proportion of loans to households collateralised by residential immovable property contributing to the environmental objective of climate change mitigation as laid down Sections 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6 and 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act, compared to total loans to households collateralised by residential immovable property. Credit institutions shall disclose information for the stock of loans as of the disclosure reference date, and information on the flows of new lending during the disclosure period. The numerator of the ratio shall include the gross carrying amount of residential real estate loans compliant with the technical screening criteria in Section 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act. In the numerator of the ratio credit institutions shall also consider those loans granted for the renovation of a building or of a house in accordance with the technical screening criteria for buildings in accordance with Section 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5 and 7.6 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act. The denominator shall include the total gross carrying amount of loans to households collateralised by residential property plus the total gross carrying amount of house renovation loans to households, avoiding double counting of loans in case that the latter are collateralised loans. (ii) Retail – Credits consumptions loans for cars Credit institutions shall disclose a KPI for loans granted to households for the acquisition of a motor vehicle (car loans). A KPI shall be the proportion of loans associated with cars complying with the technical screening criteria in accordance with Section 6.5 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act. Credit institutions shall consider those car loans granted from the date of application of the disclosure requirements, both for the KPI on stock and on new loans. Update on the stock of loans granted before the application date shall not be considered. 1.2.1.4. GAR for loans and advances financing public housing and other specialised lending to public authorities Where credit institutions have a business model based to a great extent on financing public housing, they shall disclose a KPI concerning the proportion of compliance with the technical screening criteria in accordance with Section 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act of buildings whose purchase the credit institution is financing. This GAR shall be estimated and disclosed by the credit institution as a proportion of loans to municipalities financing public housing compliant with the technical screening criteria in accordance with Section 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act compared to total loans to municipalities financing public housing. The credit institution shall include disclosures of stock and flow. The methodology for the computation of the numerator and denominator shall be the same as the methodology for residential real estate lending. For the financing of other activities and assets than public housing, credit institutions shall consider the gross carrying amount of the project finance exposures to the public authority to the extent and proportion that the project funded finances a Taxonomy-aligned economic activity. The assessment of whether that requirement has been complied with shall be based on information provided by the public authority on the project or activities to which the proceeds will be applied. Credit institutions shall provide information on the type of economic activity that is funded. Double counting shall not be allowed. Where the same specialised lending exposure is relevant for two environmental objectives, credit institutions shall allocate it to the most relevant objective. 1.2.1.5. Other on-balance sheet exposures – Repossessed real estate collaterals Credit institutions shall disclose the KPI for the proportion of compliance with the technical screening criteria in Section 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act of their commercial and residential repossessed real estate collateral held-for-sale portfolio for the environmental objective of climate change mitigation as a proportion of commercial and residential repossessed real estate collateral complying with the technical screening criteria in Section 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act, compared to total commercial and residential repossessed real estate collateral. Credit institutions shall disclose information for the stock of loans as of the disclosure reference date, and information on the flows of new assets during the disclosure period. The numerator of the ratio shall include the gross carrying amount of commercial and residential repossessed real estate collaterals compliant with the technical screening criteria for buildings in Section 7.7 of Annex I to Climate Delegated Act. The denominator shall include the total gross carrying amount of held-for-sale commercial and residential real estate collaterals repossessed by the credit institution. Credit institutions shall disclose information for the stock of loans as of the disclosure reference date, and information on the flows of new lending during the disclosure period. 1.2.1.6. Total GAR Credit institutions shall disclose information on the Total GAR. This shall reflect the cumulative value of the exposure-based KPIs, by including in the denominator the total on-balance assets without exposures referred to in Article 7(1) and by adding in the total numerator the numerators of environmentally sustainable exposures of the exposure-based KPIs: Together with the total GAR, credit institutions shall disclose the percentage of assets that are excluded from the numerator of the GAR in accordance with Article 7(2) and (3) and Section 1.1.2 of this Annex. 1.2.2. KPIs for off-balance sheet exposures Credit institutions shall disclose a complementary ratio on the level of association with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities of off-balance sheet exposures that credit institutions manage and channel or contribute to channel capital flows towards economic activities whose environmental sustainability can be assessed in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2020/852: 1.2.2.1. Green ratio for financial guarantees to financial and non-financial undertakings (FinGuar KPI) The green ratio for financial guarantees to undertakings shall be defined as a proportion of financial guarantees supporting debt instruments financing Taxonomy-aligned economic activities compared to all financial guarantees supporting debt securities to undertakings. This shall include disclosures of stock and flow. For climate change mitigation, this shall also include disclosures of which are enabling and transitional activities. For climate change adaptation, this shall include disclosures of which are enabling and adaptation activities. The methodology for the computation of the KPI on financial guarantees shall be the same as the methodology specified for the KPIs on loans and advances and/or debt securities towards undertakings, but applied to the underlying loans and advances/debt securities that the credit institution supports. 1.2.2.2. Green ratio for assets under management (AuM KPI) The green ratio for assets under management shall be the proportion of assets under management (equity and debt instruments) from undertakings financing Taxonomy-aligned economic activities, compared to total assets under management (equity and debt instruments). This shall include disclosures of stock and flow. For climate change mitigation, this shall also include disclosures of which are enabling and transitional activities. For climate change adaptation, this shall include disclosures of which are enabling and adaptation activities. The methodology for the computation of the AuM KPI shall be the same as the methodology for asset managers in accordance with Annex III of this Regulation. 1.2.3. KPIs on services other than lending – Fees and Commissions (F&C KPI) The KPI for fees and commission income linked to services associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities of undertakings, shall be defined as a proportion of the credit institution’s fees and commission income from undertakings, derived from products or services other than lending associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities, compared to the total fees and commission income from undertakings from products or services other than lending. Credit institutions shall disclose the fees and commission income linked to services provided other than lending and asset management, including the following services (as reported by institutions in accordance with template 22.1 ‘Fee and commission income and expenses by activity’ set out in Implementing Regulation (EU) No 680/2014): The numerator of the KPI shall include the fees and commissions income as specified in Implementing Regulation (EU) No 680/2014, Annex V, paragraph 284 from services other than lending and asset management provided to undertakings, associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities. This shall be estimated by weighting the fees and commission income from each counterparty with the proportion of turnover and CapEx associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities of the undertaking contributing to the relevant environmental objective as disclosed by the undertaking in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852. For financial undertakings, the ratio for the counterparty to be applied shall be the same as for the KPIs for these undertakings. The denominator shall be the total amount of fees and commission income from undertakings from products or services other than lending and asset management. 1.2.4. Other disclosures in the GAR: GAR for the trading portfolio The trading portfolio shall be excluded from the denominator and coverage of the total GAR. Credit institutions shall provide explanations on the investment policy regarding their trading portfolio, overall composition, and on any trend in terms of predominant sectors and their association with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities. They shall also explain potential limits in terms of climate and environmental risks in terms of the level of association with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities and how they manage the environmental risks that may impact the value of the portfolio. Where a trading portfolio plays an important role in the business model of the credit institution, in particular where credit institutions do not meet the conditions set out in Article 94(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 or the conditions set out in Article 325a(1) of that Regulation, credit institutions shall disclose quantitative information and KPIs that show to what extent the institution is trading with environmentally sustainable assets and to what extent it is contributing to promoting the trading of this type of assets. Credit institutions shall disclose the following information: Absolute purchases plus absolute sales of environmentally sustainable securities shall be included in the numerator of the specific GAR for the trading Portfolio of the credit institution. Total absolute purchases plus total absolute sales of securities shall be included in the denominator of the GAR for the trading Portfolio. The part of the GAR numerator for trading portfolio shall be estimated by weighting the gross carrying amount of debt securities and equity instruments purchased and/or sold from each counterparty with the proportion of turnover and CapEx associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities of the undertaking contributing to the relevant environmental objective as disclosed by that undertaking in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 and this Regulation. For financial undertakings, the ratio for the counterparty to be applied shall be the same as for the relevant KPIs for these counterparties. ( 1 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 680/2014 of 16 April 2014 laying down implementing technical standards with regard to supervisory reporting of institutions according to Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 191, 28.6.2014, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments and amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU ( OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 349 ). ANNEX VI TEMPLATE FOR THE KPIS OF CREDIT INSTITUTIONS 0. Summary of KPIs to be disclosed by credit institutions under Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation 1. Assets for the calculation of GAR 2. GAR sector information 3. GAR KPI stock 4. GAR KPI flow 5. KPI off-balance sheet exposures 6. KPI on fees and commissions inclome from services other than lending and asset management 7. KPI Trading book portfolio ANNEX VII KPIs OF INVESTMENT FIRMS Content of KPIs to be disclosed by investment firms 1. Scope of KPIs Disclosure of KPIs and the methodology shall cover and be designed separately for all of the following services listed in Annex I, Section A, to Directive 2014/65/EU: Ancillary services listed in Section B of Annex I to Directive 2014/65/EU shall be excluded from the scope of the disclosures. The investment services and activities that shall be covered in the disclosure requirements under Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 and this Regulation shall include the following: 2. Investment firms dealing on own account Investment firms dealing on their own account shall disclose the following KPIs: 2.1. KPIs related to their assets as: For the calculation of KPIs, the following shall be considered: 2.2. Investee undertakings considered Investee undertakings considered shall include non-financial undertakings, non-financial undertakings not subject to Article 19a and 29a of Directive 2014/95/EU, financial undertakings and financial undertakings not subject to Articles 19a and 29a Directive 2014/95/EU. For investee companies that are subject to Article 19a and 29a of Directive 2014/95/EU, investment firms shall use the KPIs that investee companies shall disclose under this Regulation. For investee companies that are not subject to Directive 2014/95/EU, Article 8(3) of this Regulation shall apply. 2.3. Investment instruments considered – assets For investment instruments, the calculation of KPIs shall cover debt securities, equity instruments, cash equivalents towards investee companies and all other assets. 2.4. Calculation methodology With regard to the computation of the GAR for investment firms’ services and activities dealing on own account, investment firms shall rely on the turnover KPI and CapEx KPI of investee undertakings for each environmental objective. The numerator shall be designed as the value of investments weighted by the proportion of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities with a breakdown for transition and enabling activities of the investee undertaking, that is by the proportion of turnover and CapEx of the investee undertaking associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities. The weighted average of the value of investments shall be based on the proportion of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities of investee companies measured by the following: For debt securities issued by an investee undertaking with the purpose to fund specific activities or projects, or where the investee undertaking issued environmentally sustainable bonds, investment firms shall assess those debt securities based on whether they fund Taxonomy-aligned economic activities or projects, on the basis of information provided by investee undertaking. By way of derogation from the second and third subparagraph of this point 2.4, debt securities with the purpose of financing specific identified activities or projects or environmentally sustainable bonds issued by an investee undertaking shall be included in the numerator up to the value of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities that the proceeds of those bonds and debt securities finance, on the basis of information provided by the investee undertaking. For the denominator, total assets shall include all assets invested by investment firms on own account. 3. Investment firms not dealing on own account Investment firms not dealing on their own account shall disclose the following KPIs: 3.1. KPIs related to revenue, including fees, commissions and other monetary benefits as: For the calculation of KPIs, the following shall be considered: 3.2. Clients considered Investment firms shall consider clients receiving investment services other than dealing on own account services and ancillary services that are non-financial undertakings and other non-financial undertakings not subject to Article 19a and 29a of Directive 2014/95/EU, financial undertakings and other financial undertakings not subject to Article 19a and 29a of Directive 2014/95/EU. For investee undertakings that are subject to Directive 2014/95/EU, investment firms shall use the KPIs that investee undertakings shall disclose under this Regulation. For investee companies that are not subject to Directive 2014/95/EU, Article 8(3) of this Regulation shall apply. 3.3. Calculation methodology For activities of investment firms other than dealing on own account, the numerator shall be designed as the weighted average of the revenue (fees, commissions and other monetary benefits) generated by the investment firm in relation to the aggregate value of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities within the activities of their clients. The methodology laid down in point 2.4. of this Annex shall apply. 3.4. Further consideration Investment firms shall indicate in the templates the environmental objectives as well as the nature of the activities, whether enabling or transition. Disclosures shall take place after netting potential hedges and offsets, regardless of the instrument used in accordance with Article 3, paragraphs 4 and 5 of Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) . ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) No 236/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2012 on short selling and certain aspects of credit default swaps ( OJ L 86, 24.3.2012, p. 1 ). ANNEX VIII TEMPLATE FOR KPIS OF INVESTMENT FIRMS 0. Summary of KPIs to be disclosed by investment firms under Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation 1. KPI IF - Dealing on own account services 2. KPI IF Other services ANNEX IX KPIs OF INSURANCE AND REINSURANCE UNDERTAKINGS 1. KPI related to investments The KPI related to investments by insurance or reinsurance undertakings shall present the weighted average of those investments that are directed at funding, or are associated with Taxonomy-aligned economic activities. The KPI shall be shown both in percentage terms relative to ‘total investments’ and in absolute monetary units. Investments shall mean all direct and indirect investments, including investments in collective investment undertakings and participations, loans and mortgages, property, plant and equipment, as well as, where relevant, intangibles. In additional disclosures, insurance or reinsurance undertakings shall distinguish the proportion of the investments held in respect of life insurance contracts where the investment risk is borne by the policy holders and the proportion of remaining investments. The coverage of the ratio with reference of the balance sheet total shall be disclosed with the exclusion of exposures referred to in Article 7(1) of this Regulation. The disclosures shall be broken down by environmental objective in percentage terms and monetary units, where available. The weighted average of the value of the investments shall be based on the proportion of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities of investee companies measured by the following: By way of derogation from the first and fourth paragraph of this point 1, debt securities with the purpose of financing specific identified activities or projects or environmentally sustainable bonds issued by an investee undertaking shall be included in the numerator up to the value of Taxonomy-aligned economic activities that the proceeds of those bonds and debt securities finance, on the basis of information provided by the investee undertaking. 2. KPI related to underwriting activities Insurance and reinsurance undertakings other than life insurance undertakings shall calculate the KPI related to underwriting activities and present the ‘gross premiums written’ non-life insurance revenue or, as applicable, reinsurance revenue corresponding to Taxonomy-aligned insurance or reinsurance activities in accordance with points 10.1. and 10.2. of Annex II to Climate Delegated Act. The KPI shall be depicted in percentage terms relative to, as applicable, one of the following: The disclosures shall be broken down by environmental objective in percentage terms and monetary units, where available. Supplementing disclosures shall explain the extent to which environmentally sustainable underwriting activities are ceded to a reinsurance undertaking and to which extent sustainable underwriting activities represent reinsurance activities are accepted from other insurance or reinsurance undertakings. ANNEX X TEMPLATE FOR KPIs OF INSURANCE AND REINSURANCE UNDERTAKINGS Template: The underwriting KPI for non-life insurance and reinsurance undertakings “Premiums” in columns (3) and (4) shall be reported as gross premiums written or, as applicable, turnover relating to non-life insurance or reinsurance activity. The information in column (5) shall be reported in disclosures in the year 2024 and thereafter. Non-life insurance and reinsurance can only be aligned with Regulation (EU) 2020/852 as activity that enables climate change adaptation. The information reported in column (5) is therefore the same for all insurance and reinsurance undertakings with non-life and/or reinsurance activities. Where a reinsurance activities of an undertaking comprises products applying at the level of a portfolio of underlying direct insurance products and the undertaking assesses the compliance of the activity with the technical screening criteria and the do no significant harm criteria for a proportion of the reinsurance activity’s underlying products pursuant to Climate Delegated Act, Annex II, point 10.2, paragraph 2.3 (“pro-rata approach”), the pro-rata approach should be applied consistently for the information reported in all columns of row A.1.2. Template: The proportion of the insurance or reinsurance undertaking’s investments that are directed at funding, or are associated with, Taxonomy-aligned in relation to total investments ANNEX XI QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES FOR ASSET MANAGERS, CREDIT INSTITUTIONS, INVESTMENT FIRMS AND INSURANCE AND REINSURANCE UNDERTAKINGS The disclosure of quantitative KPIs shall be accompanied by the following qualitative information to support the financial undertakings’ explanations and markets’ understanding of these KPIs: