COMMISSION REGULATION (EC) No 641/2009 of 22 July 2009 implementing Directive 2005/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ecodesign requirements for glandless standalone circulators and glandless circulators integrated in products (Text with EEA relevance) THE COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, Having regard to Directive 2005/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2005 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-using products and amending Council Directive 92/42/EEC and Directives 96/57/EC and 2000/55/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 15(1) thereof, After consulting the Ecodesign Consultation Forum, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THE FOLLOWING REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation establishes ecodesign requirements for the placing on the market of glandless standalone circulators and glandless circulators integrated in products. 2. This Regulation shall not apply to: Article 2 Definitions In addition to the definitions set out in Article 2 of Directive 2005/32/EC, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 Ecodesign requirements The ecodesign requirements for circulators are set out in Annex I. Compliance with ecodesign requirements shall be measured in accordance with requirements set out in Annex II, point 1. The calculation method for the energy efficiency index of circulators is set out in Annex II, point 2. Article 4 Conformity assessment The procedure for assessing conformity referred to in Article 8 of Directive 2005/32/EC shall be the internal design control system set out in Annex IV to that Directive or the management system for assessing conformity set out in Annex V to that Directive. Article 5 Verification procedure for market surveillance purposes When performing the market surveillance checks referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive 2005/32/EC, for the requirements set out in Annex I to this Regulation, the authorities of the Member States shall apply the verification procedure described in Annex III to this Regulation. Article 6 Benchmarks The indicative benchmarks for best-performing circulators available on the market at the time of entry into force of this Regulation are set out in Annex IV. Article 7 Revision The Commission shall review the methodology for calculating the energy efficiency index, set out in Annex II, point 2 to this Regulation, for glandless circulators integrated in products before 1 January 2012. It shall review this Regulation before 1 January 2017, in the light of technological progress. The review will include the assessment of design options that can facilitate re-use and recycling. The results of the reviews shall be presented to the Ecodesign Consultation Forum. Article 8 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply in accordance with the following timetable: This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 22 July 2009. For the Commission Andris PIEBALGS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 191, 22.7.2005, p. 29 . ( 2 ) OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37 . ( 3 ) OJ L 330, 5.12.1998, p. 32 . ANNEX I ECODESIGN REQUIREMENTS 1. ENERGY EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS 2. PRODUCT INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS From 1 January 2013: Manufacturers shall provide information on how to install, use and maintain the circulator in order to minimise its impact on the environment. The information listed above shall be visibly displayed on freely accessible websites of the circulator manufacturers. ANNEX II MEASUREMENT METHODS AND METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATING THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY INDEX 1. MEASUREMENT METHODS For the purposes of compliance and verification of compliance with the requirements of this Regulation, measurements shall be made using a reliable, accurate and reproducible measurement procedure that takes into account the generally recognised state of the art measurement methods, including methods set out in documents the reference numbers of which have been published for that purpose in the Official Journal of the European Union. 2. METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATING THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY INDEX The methodology for calculating the energy efficiency index (EEI) for circulators is as follows: ( 1 ) C XX % means a scaling factor that ensures that at the time of defining the scaling factor only XX % of circulators of a certain type have an EEI ≤ 0,20. ANNEX III VERIFICATION PROCEDURE For the purposes of checking conformity with the requirements laid down in Annex I, the authorities of the Member States shall use the measurement and calculation procedure set out in Annex II. Member States authorities shall test a single circulator. If the energy efficiency index exceeds the values declared by the manufacturer by more than 7 %, the measurements shall be made on three more circulators. The model shall be considered to comply if the arithmetical mean of the measured values for the latter three circulators do not exceed the values declared by the manufacturer by more than 7 %. Otherwise, the model shall be considered not to comply with the requirements of this Regulation. In addition to the procedure set out in this Annex, Member States authorities shall use reliable, accurate and reproducible measurement methods, which take into account the generally recognised state of the art, including methods set out in documents the reference numbers of which have been published for that purpose in the Official Journal of the European Union . ANNEX IV INDICATIVE BENCHMARKS At the time of the adoption of this Regulation, the benchmark for the best available technology on the market for circulators is EEI ≤ 0,20.