Only the original UN/ECE texts have legal effect under international public law. The status and date of entry into force of this Regulation should be checked in the latest version of the UN/ECE status document TRANS/WP.29/343, available at: UN Regulation No 59 – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of replacement silencing systems [2025/844] Incorporating all valid text up to: 03 series of amendments – Date of entry into force: 25 September 2020 This document is meant purely as documentation tool. The authentic and legally binding texts are: ECE/TRANS/WP.29/2015/63 ECE/TRANS/WP.29/2020/7 Contents Regulation Annexes Appendix - Information document No. … relating to type approval of exhaust replacement silencing systems or exhaust silencing components for motor vehicles (UN Regulation No. 59) 1. Scope This Regulation covers exhaust replacement silencing systems for vehicles of categories M 1 and N 1. ( 1 ) 2. Definitions For the purpose of this Regulation: 3. Application for approval 4. Markings 5. Approval 6. Specifications 7. Extension of approval The exhaust silencing system manufacturer or his duly accredited representative may ask the Type Approval Authority which has granted the approval of the exhaust silencing system for one or several types of vehicles, for an extension of the approval to other types of vehicles. The procedure is that described in paragraph 3. above. Notice of the extension of approval (or refusal of extension) shall be communicated to the Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation in accordance with the procedure specified in paragraph 5.3. above. 8. Modification of the type of exhaust silencing system 9. Conformity of production The conformity of production procedures shall comply with those set out in the Agreement, Schedule 1 (E/ECE/TRANS/505/Rev.1), with the following requirements: 10. Information intended for users and technical inspection Each replacement silencing system shall be accompanied by a paper document issued by the manufacturer of the replacement silencing system or their representative. That paper document shall at least bear the information according to Annex 6 of this Regulation. 11. Penalties for non-conformity of production 12. Production definitively discontinued If the holder of the approval completely ceases to manufacture a type of exhaust replacement silencing system or components of the said system in accordance with this Regulation, he shall so inform the Type Approval Authority which granted the approval. Upon receiving the relevant communication, that authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the approval form bearing at the end, in large letters, the signed and dated annotation: "production discontinued". 13. Names and addresses of Technical Services responsible for conducting approval tests, and of Type Approval Authorities The Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement applying this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the Technical Services responsible for conducting approval tests and of the Type Approval Authorities which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval, issued in other countries, are to be sent. 14. Transitional provisions ( 1 ) As defined in the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3.), document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.6, para. 2 - . ( 2 ) The distinguishing numbers of the Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement are reproduced in Annex 3 to the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3) document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.6, Annex 3 - . ANNEX 1 Communication (Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm)) of a type of exhaust replacement silencing system or components of the said system pursuant to UN Regulation No. 59 Approval No. … Extension No. . … ( 1 ) Distinguishing number of the country which has granted/extended/refused/withdrawn approval (see approval provisions in the Regulation). ( 2 ) Strike out what does not apply. Annex 1 - Appendix Information document No. … relating to type approval of exhaust replacement silencing systems or exhaust silencing components for motor vehicles (UN Regulation No. 59) The following information, if applicable, shall be supplied in triplicate and include a list of contents. Any drawings shall be supplied in appropriate scale and in sufficient detail on size A4 or on a folder of A4 format. Photographs, if any, shall show sufficient detail. If the exhaust silencing systems or exhaust silencing components have electronic controls, information concerning their performance shall be supplied. General Make (trade name of manufacturer): Type and general commercial description(s): Means of identification of type, if marked on the exhaust silencing systems or exhaust silencing components: ( 1 ) 0.3.1. Location of that marking and method of affixing Company name and address of manufacturer: Address(es) of assembly plant(s): Name and address of the manufacturer's representative (if any): Description of the vehicle(s) for which the device is intended (if the device is intended to be fitted to more than one vehicle type the information requested under this point shall be supplied for each type concerned) Make (trade name of manufacturer): Type and general commercial description(s): Means of identification of type(s), if marked on the vehicle: Category of vehicle(s): Vehicle type approval number(s): Power plant(s): 1.6.1. Manufacturer of the engine: 1.6.2. Manufacturer's engine code: 1.6.3. Rated maximum net power (g): … kW at … min –1 or maximum continuous rated power (electric motor): … kW 1.6.4. Pressure charger(s): original part or make and marking: ( 2 ) 1.6.5. Air filter: original part or make and marking: 4 1.6.6. Intake silencer(s): original part or make and marking: 4 1.6.7. Exhaust silencer(s): original part or make and marking: 4 1.6.8. Catalyst: original part or make and marking: 4 1.6.9. Particulate Trap(s): original part or make and marking: 4 Transmission 1.7.1. Type (mechanical, hydraulic, electric, etc.): Non-engine devices designed to reduce noise: original part or description: 4 Value of the back pressure: … Pa Any restrictions in respect of use and mounting requirements: Remarks Description of the device A description of the replacement silencing system indicating the relative position of each system component, together with mounting instructions Detailed drawings of each component, so that they can be easily located and identified, and reference to the materials used. These drawings shall indicate the place provided for the compulsory affixing of the type approval mark Signed: Position in company: ( 1 ) If the means of identification of type contains characters not relevant to describing the separate technical unit types covered by this information document, such characters shall be represented in the documentation by the symbol '?' (e.g. ABC??123??). ( 2 ) Delete where not applicable. ANNEX 2 Arrangements of approval marks (See paragraph 5.4. of this Regulation) a = 8 mm min The above approval mark affixed to a component of exhaust silencing system shows that the exhaust replacement silencing system type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E 4) pursuant to UN Regulation No. 59 under approval number 032439. The character C symbolizes that the approval was granted for the limit values according to phase 3 as given in paragraph 6.2.2. of the 03 series of amendments of the UN Regulation No. 51, followed by two digits of the approval number that indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of UN Regulation No. 59 as amended by the 03 series of amendments. ANNEX 3 Test apparatus ANNEX 4 Measuring points – Back pressure Examples of possible measuring points for loss-of-pressure tests. The exact measuring point shall be specified in the test report. It shall be in an area where gas flow is regular. Figure 1 Single pipe Figure 2 Partly twin pipe ( 1 ) Figure 3 Twin pipe ( 1 ) If not possible, refer to Figure 3. ( 2 )Two measuring points, one reading. ANNEX 5 Checks on conformity of production 1. General These requirements are consistent with tests to be held to check conformity of production (COP), according to paragraphs 9.3.5. and 9.4.3. of this Regulation. 2. Testing and procedures The methods of testing, measuring instruments and interpretation of results shall be those described in paragraph 6. of this Regulation. The exhaust system or exhaust silencing component under test shall be subjected to the test as described in paragraphs 6.2., 6.3. and 6.4. of this Regulation. 3. Sampling and evaluation of the results One exhaust silencing system or exhaust silencing component has to be chosen and subjected to the tests of paragraph 2. above. If the test results fulfil the conformity of production requirements of paragraph 9.1. of this Regulation, the type of exhaust silencing system or exhaust silencing component is considered to be in compliance with COP. If one of the test results does not fulfil the conformity of production requirements of paragraph 9.1. of this Regulation, two more exhaust silencing systems or exhaust silencing components of the same type shall be tested pursuant to paragraph 2. above. If the test results for the second and the third exhaust silencing system or component fulfil the conformity of production requirements of paragraph 9.1. of this Regulation, the type of exhaust silencing system or exhaust silencing component is considered in compliance with the conformity of production. If one of the test results of the second or third exhaust silencing system or exhaust silencing component does not fulfil the conformity of production requirements of paragraph 9.1. of this Regulation, the type of exhaust silencing system or exhaust silencing component shall be considered not to conform to the requirements of this Regulation and the manufacturer shall take the necessary measures to re-establish the conformity. ANNEX 6 Information intended for users and technical inspection ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)