COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/1194 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Clavibacter sepedonicus (Spieckermann & Kotthoff 1914) Nouioui et al. 2018 THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 28(1), points (a) to (h) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes measures for the purpose of eradicating Clavibacter sepedonicus (Spieckermann & Kotthoff 1914) Nouioui et al. 2018, the cause of potato ring rot, and prevent its spread within the Union territory. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Annual surveys 1. The competent authorities shall carry out annual surveys for the presence of the specified pest on the specified plants in their territory in accordance with the following requirements: 2. The number, origin and timing of the collection of samples shall be based on sound scientific and statistical principles and the biology of the specified pest, taking into account the particular potato production systems of the Member States concerned. 3. Member States shall report to the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, the results of the annual surveys carried out during the preceding calendar year. They shall report the results of those surveys in accordance with the template set out in Annex II. Article 4 Measures in case of suspicion of the presence of the specified pest 1. The competent authority shall ensure that samples taken for the purposes of the annual surveys are subject to the detection tests referred to in point 2.1 of Annex I. 2. Pending the results of the detection tests, the competent authority shall: 3. Pending the results of the detection tests, the competent authority shall ensure that all of the following elements are retained and appropriately conserved: 4. Where the suspicion of the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in accordance with point 1.1 of Annex I, the competent authority shall ensure that tests referred to in Annex I are carried out on the samples taken for the purpose of the surveys to confirm or refute the presence of the specified pest. Article 5 Measures in case of confirmation of the presence of the specified pest 1. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in accordance with points 1.2 or 1.3 of Annex I, paragraphs 2 to 9 shall apply. 2. The competent authority shall establish, without delay, a demarcated area, taking into account the elements listed in point 1 of Annex III, for determining the possible spread of the specified pest. 3. The demarcated area shall contain an infested zone and, where necessary to address the phytosanitary risk, a buffer zone around the infested zone. 4. The infested zone shall contain all of the following items: 5. The competent authority shall designate: 6. Tubers originating in a demarcated area shall not be moved out of that demarcated area, unless it is proven that they are free from the specified pest on the basis of the tests referred to in Annex I. 7. By way of derogation from Article 32 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/1715, Member States are not required to submit an outbreak notification in EUROPHYT where the specified pest is situated in a highly infected area listed in Annex ΙV. 8. Where a Member State has submitted an outbreak notification in EUROPHYT, the neighbouring Member States which are referred to in the notification shall determine the extent of probable infection and establish a demarcated area in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 4. 9. The competent authority shall ensure that all of the following elements are retained and properly conserved: Article 6 Measures for eradicating the specified pest 1. Specified plants, designated as infected by the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(5), point (a), shall not be planted. The competent authority shall ensure that the infected specified plants are destroyed or are otherwise disposed of in another way, in accordance with point 1 of Annex V, provided that it is established that there is no identifiable risk of the specified pest spreading. Where specified plants have been planted before they are designated as infected, the planted material shall be immediately destroyed or disposed of in accordance with point 1 of Annex V. The production site(s) where the infected specified plants have been planted shall be designated as infected. 2. Specified plants designated as probably infected pursuant to Article 5(5), point (b), shall not be planted and, without prejudice to the outcome of the tests referred to in Article 7 for clonally related stocks, shall, under official supervision, be put to appropriate use or disposal as specified in point 2 of Annex V, in such a way that it is established that there is no identifiable risk of the specified pest spreading. Where specified plants have been planted before they are designated as probably infected, the planted material shall be immediately destroyed or be put to appropriate use or disposal as specified in point 2 of Annex V. The production site(s) where the probably infected specified plants have been planted, shall be designated as probably infected. 3. Any machinery, vehicle, vessel, store, or units thereof, and any other objects including packaging material, designated as infected or as probably infected pursuant to Article 5(5) shall either be destroyed or cleaned and disinfected using the methods specified in point 3 of Annex V. 4. In addition to the measures provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, the measures specified in point 4 of Annex V shall be applied in the demarcated areas. Article 7 Specific testing measures for tubers for planting 1. Where the presence of the specified pest has been confirmed in a production site of tubers for planting, the competent authority shall ensure that the tests referred to in Annex I are carried out on the clonally related lines of the infected lots of tubers or, where the absence of clonally related lines is established, on the tubers or lots of tubers which have been in direct or indirect contact with the infected lots of tubers. 2. Where the presence of the specified pest has been confirmed in production sites of tubers for planting in a certification scheme, the tests referred to in Annex I shall be carried out either on each plant of the initial clonal selection or on representative samples of the basic seed potatoes. Article 8 Temporary measures concerning movements of tubers of specified plants originating in a highly infected area 1. Tubers of the specified plants, other than those for planting, originating in a highly infected area listed in Annex IV, may only be moved out of that area into other areas of the Union territory, if they fulfil the two following conditions: 2. Every five years, Member States shall submit reports to the Commission and the other Member States, as regards the evolution of their respective highly infected areas. Article 9 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 July 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4 . ( 2 ) Council Directive 93/85/EEC of 4 October 1993 on the control of potato ring rot ( OJ L 259, 18.10.1993, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/1715 of 30 September 2019 laying down rules for the functioning of the information management system for official controls and its system components (‘the IMSOC Regulation’) ( OJ L 261, 14.10.2019, p. 37 ). ANNEX I Scheme for the tests to be performed pursuant Articles 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 1. GENERAL PRINCIPLES ON THE PRESENCE OF THE SPECIFIED PEST 2. TESTS 2.1. Detection tests The detection tests shall be such as to consistently detect at least 10 4 cells/ml resuspended pellet. The second detection test shall be based on different biological principles or different nucleotide regions than the first detection test. The detection tests are the following: 2.2. Identification tests The identification tests are the following: 3. FLOW CHARTS OF PROCEDURES Flow chart No 1: Diagnostic procedure for the presence of the specified pest in symptomatic samples of the specified plant. Flow chart No 2: Diagnostic procedure for the specified pest in asymptomatic samples of the specified plant. 4. SAMPLE PREPARATION 4.1. Samples from asymptomatic tubers The standard sample shall contain 200 tubers per test. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process the heel end cores to obtain the extract for detection of the specified pest is described in international diagnostic standards. 4.2. Samples from asymptomatic plant material other than tubers Detection of latent infections shall be carried out on composite samples of stem segments. The procedure may be applied for up to 200 stem parts from different plants in one sample. The appropriate laboratory procedure to disinfect and process the stem segments to obtain the extract for the detection of the specified pest is described in international diagnostic standards. 4.3. Samples from symptomatic specified plant Sections of tissue shall be aseptically removed from the vascular ring in a tuber or from the vascular strands in stems of specified plants showing wilting symptoms. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process these tissues to obtain the extract for the detection of the specified pest is described in full detail in international diagnostic standards. ( 1 ) van Beuningen, A.R., Derks, H., Janse, J.D. (1995). Detection and identification of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus with special attention to fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) using a 16S rRNA targeted oligonucleotide probe. Züchtungs Forschung 1, pp. 266–269. ( 2 ) Pastrik, K.H. (2000). Detection of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers by multiplex PCR with coamplification of host DNA. European Journal of Plant Pathology , 106, pp. 155–165. ( 3 ) Schaad, W., Berthier-Schaad, Y., Sechler, A., Knorr, D (1999). Detection of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers by BIOPCR and an automated real-time fluorescence detection system. Plant Disease 83, pp. 1095–1100. ( 4 ) Vreeburg, R., Zendman, A., Pol A., Verheij, E., Nas, M., Kooman-Gersmann, M. (2018). Validation of four real-time TaqMan PCRs for the detection of Ralstonia solanacearum and/or Ralstonia pseudosolanacearum and/or Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers using a statistical regression approach. EPPO Bulletin 48, pp. 86–96. ( 5 ) Massart, S., Nagy, C., Jijakli, M.H. (2014). Development of the simultaneous detection of Ralstonia solanacearum race 3 and Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers by a multiplex real-time PCR assay. European Journal of Plant Pathology 138, pp. 29–37. ( 6 ) Zaluga, J., Heylen, K., Van Hoorde, K., Hoste, B., Vaerenbergh, J., Maes, M., De Vos, P. (2011). GyrB sequence analysis and MALDI-TOF MS as identification tools for plant pathogenic Clavibacter . Systematic and applied microbiology 34, 400-7. 10.1016/j.syapm.2011.05.001. ANNEX II Survey template referred to in Article 3(3) Template for presenting ring rot survey results for potato harvests of the preceding calendar year. This table shall only be used for the survey results for the potatoes harvested in your country. ( 1 ) Shall be understood as macroscopic examination of tubers or crops. ( 2 ) Symptoms were found, a sample was taken and the laboratory testing confirmed the presence of the specified pest. ANNEX III Elements for the determination of the possible spread of the specified pest and for the designation of items as probably infected by the specified pest, as referred to in Article 5(2) and in Article 5(4), point (b) ANNEX IV List of highly infected areas as referred to in Article 8 ANNEX V Eradication measures as referred to in Article 6 ANNEX VI Requirements for officially approved waste disposal as referred to in point (1) of Annex V The officially approved waste disposal methods referred to in point 1 of Annex V shall comply with the following requirements: