COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2021/552 of 30 March 2021 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘DEC-AHOL® Product Family’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular the first subparagraph of Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0024324-0000 is granted to Veltek Associates Inc. Europe for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘DEC-AHOL® Product Family’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 20 April 2021 until 31 March 2031. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 30 March 2021. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 17 June 2020 on the Union authorisation of ‘DEC-AHOL® Product Family’ (ECHA/BPC/261/2020), Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family DEC-AHOL® Product Family Product type 2 – Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0024324-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0024324-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL – META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1 – Disinfection of hard non-porous surfaces; Wipes (individual wipes and multi-pack wipes) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Use product only in cleanrooms which are classified according to ISO 14644-1 in class 1 to 9 or according to Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) EU classification in grade A to D. Clean and dry surfaces prior to disinfection. Only use wet wipes. Remove one or two wipes at a time for individual wipes and one wipe at a time for multipack wipes. Make sure to wet surfaces completely. Allow to take effect for at least 2 minutes. Discard wipe after use in a closed container and for multipack wipes close the package after opening. Individual wipes: Multi pack wipes: 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Use adequate ventilation with an air change rate of 8 per hour or more. Apply away from eyes and face. Hand protection: Wear chemically resistant protective gloves. Eye protection: Wear eye protection. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not breathe vapours. Do not eat, drink or smoke when using the product. Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Symptoms/injuries after inhalation: May cause drowsiness or dizziness. Symptoms/injuries after skin contact: Repeated and/or prolonged skin contact may cause irritation, dryness or cracking. Symptoms/injuries after eye contact: Causes serious eye irritation. Symptoms/injuries after ingestion: Symptoms reported in humans are nausea and vomiting due to local irritation and systemic effects like drunkenness, drowsiness, sometimes unconsciousness and low blood sugar (especially in children). Because of the type of formulations (wipes, aerosol and spray) the systemic effects are however less likely. First-aid measures general: Never give anything orally to an unconscious person. If you feel unwell, seek medical advice (show the label if possible). IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position that is comfortable for breathing. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Rinse skin with water/or shower. Remove all contaminated clothing immediately. Gently wash with plenty of soap and water. If symptoms develop, seek medical attention. IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for 5 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF SWALLOWED: Rinse mouth. Give something to drink if conscious. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Empty containers must be discharged as normal waste or recycled where possible. Additional information: Handle empty containers with care because residual vapours are flammable. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep container tightly closed. Keep in a cool, well-ventilated place. Keep away from open flames, hot surfaces and sources of ignition. Store at temperatures below 30 °C. Shelf-life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No.: 67-63-0), for which a European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 2. Use # 1 – Disinfection of hard non-porous surfaces; Aerosols (propellant) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Clean and dry surfaces prior to disinfection. Spray the surface to be disinfected from a distance of 15-20 cm. Thoroughly wet surface with product for 20 seconds/m 2 , make sure to wet surfaces completely. Allow to take effect for at least 2 minutes. After the required contact time has been achieved, allow surface to air dry or wipe dry with sterilised cloth or wipe. Cloths or wipes treated with the product must be discarded in a closed container. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Emergency eye wash fountains and safety showers should be available in the immediate vicinity of any potential exposure. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Use adequate ventilation with an air change rate of 8 per hour or more. Apply away from eyes and face. Hand protection: Wear chemically resistant protective gloves. Eye protection: Wear eye protection. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not breathe vapours. Do not eat, drink or smoke when using the product. Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Symptoms/injuries after inhalation: May cause drowsiness or dizziness. Symptoms/injuries after skin contact: Repeated and/or prolonged skin contact may cause irritation, dryness or cracking. Symptoms/injuries after eye contact: Causes serious eye irritation. Symptoms/injuries after ingestion: Symptoms reported in humans are nausea and vomiting due to local irritation and systemic effects like drunkenness, drowsiness, sometimes unconsciousness and low blood sugar (especially in children). Because of the type of formulations (wipes, aerosol and spray) the systemic effects are however less likely. First-aid measures general: Never give anything orally to an unconscious person. If you feel unwell, seek medical advice (show the label if possible). IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position that is comfortable for breathing. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Rinse skin with water/or shower. Remove all contaminated clothing immediately. Gently wash with plenty of soap and water. If symptoms develop, seek medical attention. IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for 5 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF SWALLOWED: Rinse mouth. Give something to drink if conscious. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Empty containers must be discharged as normal waste or recycled where possible. Additional information: Handle empty containers with care because residual vapours are flammable. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep away from open flames, hot surfaces and sources of ignition. Keep container tightly closed. Keep in a cool, well-ventilated place. Store at temperatures below 40 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf-life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No.: 67-63-0), for which a European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 3. Use # 1 – Disinfection of hard non-porous surfaces; Trigger Spray, Liquid 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Clean and dry surfaces prior to disinfection. Direct the spray onto the surface from a distance of 15-20cm. Make sure to wet the surface completely (40 squeezes/m 2 ). Allow to take effect for at least 2 minutes. After the required contact time has been achieved, allow surface to air dry or wipe dry with sterilised cloth or wipe, if necessary. Only small surfaces may be disinfected. Cloths or wipes treated with the product must be discarded in a closed container. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Emergency eye wash fountains and safety showers should be available in the immediate vicinity of any potential exposure. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 4. Use # 2 – Disinfection of hard non-porous surfaces (including floors); Wiping 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Clean and dry surfaces prior to disinfection. Thoroughly wet a sterile wipe/cloth with the product, make sure to wet the surfaces completely. Allow to take effect for at least 2 minutes. After the required contact time has been achieved, allow surface to air dry or wipe dry with sterilised cloth or wipe, if necessary. Only small surfaces may be disinfected. Cloths or wipes treated with the product must be discarded in a closed container. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Emergency eye wash fountains and safety showers should be available in the immediate vicinity of any potential exposure. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 5. Use # 3 – Disinfection of cleanroom gloves 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Use product only in cleanrooms which are classified according to ISO 14644-1 in class 1 to 9 or according to GMP EU classification in grade A to D. Hold gloved hands under spout sensor to catch liquid. Thoroughly rub to distribute liquid evenly and wet clean glove surfaces with product. Do not wipe off and allow to remain wet for a minimum of 1 minute. After the required contact time has been achieved, allow surface to air dry or wipe dry with sterilised cloth or wipe, if necessary. Cloths or wipes treated with the product must be discarded in a closed container. Do not use on bare hands. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Emergency eye wash fountains and safety showers should be available in the immediate vicinity of any potential exposure. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Use adequate ventilation with an air change rate of 8 per hour or more. Apply away from eyes and face. Hand protection: Wear chemically resistant protective gloves. Eye protection: Wear eye protection. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not breathe vapours. Do not eat, drink or smoke when using the product. Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Symptoms/injuries after inhalation: May cause drowsiness or dizziness. Symptoms/injuries after skin contact: Repeated and/or prolonged skin contact may cause irritation, dryness or cracking. Symptoms/injuries after eye contact: Causes serious eye irritation. Symptoms/injuries after ingestion: Symptoms reported in humans are nausea and vomiting due to local irritation and systemic effects like drunkenness, drowsiness, sometimes unconsciousness and low blood sugar (especially in children). Because of the type of formulations (wipes, aerosol and spray) the systemic effects are however less likely. First-aid measures general: Never give anything orally to an unconscious person. If you feel unwell, seek medical advice (show the label if possible). IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position that is comfortable for breathing. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Rinse skin with water/shower. Remove all contaminated clothing immediately. Gently wash with plenty of soap and water. If symptoms develop, seek medical attention. IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for 5 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF SWALLOWED: Rinse mouth. Give something to drink if conscious. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Empty containers must be discharged as normal waste or recycled where possible. Additional information: Handle empty containers with care because residual vapours are flammable. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep container tightly closed. Keep in a cool, well-ventilated place. Keep away from open flames, hot surfaces and sources of ignition. Store at temperatures below 40 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf-life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No.: 67-63-0), for which a European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 4 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4 4.1. Use description Table 6. Use # 1 – Disinfection of hard non-porous surfaces; Aerosols 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Clean and dry surfaces prior to disinfection. Spray the surface to be disinfected from a distance of 15-20 cm. Thoroughly wet surface with product for 20 seconds/m 2 , make sure to wet surfaces completely. Allow to take effect for at least 2 minutes. After the required contact time has been achieved, allow surface to air dry or wipe dry with sterilised cloth or wipe. Cloths or wipes treated with the product must be discarded in a closed container. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Emergency eye wash fountains and safety showers should be available in the immediate vicinity of any potential exposure. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 4 ) OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Use adequate ventilation with an air change rate of 8 per hour or more. Apply away from eyes and face. Hand protection: Wear chemically resistant protective gloves. Eye protection: Wear eye protection. Avoid contact with eyes. Do not breathe vapours. Do not eat, drink or smoke when using the product. Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Symptoms/injuries after inhalation: May cause drowsiness or dizziness. Symptoms/injuries after skin contact: Repeated and/or prolonged skin contact may cause irritation, dryness or cracking. Symptoms/injuries after eye contact: Causes serious eye irritation Symptoms/injuries after ingestion: Symptoms reported in humans are nausea and vomiting due to local irritation and systemic effects like drunkenness, drowsiness, sometimes unconsciousness and low blood sugar (especially in children). Because of the type of formulations (wipes, aerosol and spray) the systemic effects are however less likely. First-aid measures general: Never give anything orally to an unconscious person. If you feel unwell, seek medical advice (show the label if possible). IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position that is comfortable for breathing. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Rinse skin with water/or shower. Remove all contaminated clothing immediately. Gently wash with plenty of soap and water. If symptoms develop, seek medical attention. IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for 5 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF SWALLOWED: Rinse mouth. Give something to drink if conscious. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Empty containers must be discharged as normal waste or recycled where possible. Additional information: Handle empty containers with care because residual vapours are flammable. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep away from open flames, hot surfaces and sources of ignition. Keep container tightly closed. Keep in a cool, well-ventilated place. Store at temperatures below 40 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf-life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No.: 67-63-0), for which a European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3. ( 4 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 4.