COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2024/2027 of 26 July 2024 on verification activities pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2023 on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular 13(5) and 22(6) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation lays down provisions concerning the following verification activities and requirements: Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Presumption of conformity A verifier that demonstrates conformity with the criteria laid down in the relevant harmonised standards or parts thereof, the CHAPTER II VERIFICATION ACTIVITIES SECTION 1 Assessment of monitoring plans Article 4 Information to be provided by companies 1. Companies shall provide the verifier with their ship’s monitoring plan in accordance with the template set out in the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2031 ( 4 ) . Where the monitoring plan is in a language other than English, they shall provide an English translation. 2. Companies shall complement the control system and the data gaps procedure to include the additional data to be monitored and reported pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 3. Before the start of the assessment of the monitoring plan, the company shall also provide the verifier with at least the following information: 4. The company shall, upon request, provide any other information deemed relevant to assess its monitoring plan. Article 5 Assessment of monitoring plans 1. When assessing the monitoring plan, the verifier shall address the assertions of completeness, accuracy, relevance and conformity of the information provided in the monitoring plan with Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 2. The verifier shall at least: 3. For the purposes of assessing the monitoring plan, the verifier may resort to inquiry, document inspection, observation and any other audit technique deemed appropriate. Article 6 Site visits 1. The verifier shall carry out site visits in order to gain sufficient understanding of the procedures described in the monitoring plan and validate that the information therein is accurate. 2. The verifier shall determine the location or locations of the site visit, taking into consideration the place where the critical mass of relevant data is stored, including electronic or hard copies of documents, and the place where data-flow activities and control activities are carried out. 3. The verifier shall also determine the activities to be performed and the time needed for the site visit. 4. The company shall provide the verifier with access to its sites, including to its relevant onshore locations and the relevant ship. 5. The verifier may carry out a virtual site visit provided that one of the following conditions is fulfilled: The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the monitoring plan is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. The decision to carry out a virtual site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. The verifier shall inform without undue delay the company of the decision to carry out a virtual site visit and that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. 6. The verifier may waive a site visit or a virtual site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 5 respectively, provided that the conditions laid down in paragraph 5, points (a), (b) and (c), are cumulatively fulfilled. The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the monitoring plan is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. The decision to waive a site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for waiving site visits are met. The verifier shall inform the company thereof without undue delay. 7. A site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 5 shall not be waived in either of the following situations: 8. Where the verifier carries out a virtual site visit pursuant to paragraph 5, or waives a site visit or a virtual site visit pursuant to paragraph 6, it shall provide due justification in the internal verification documentation. Article 7 Addressing non-conformities in the monitoring plan 1. Where the verifier identifies non-conformities in the course of the assessment of the monitoring plan, it shall inform the company thereof without undue delay and request relevant corrections within a proposed timeframe. 2. The company shall correct all non-conformities communicated by the verifier and submit a revised monitoring plan to the verifier for reassessment in accordance with the timeframe referred to in paragraph 1. 3. The verifier shall document in the internal verification documentation, marking them as resolved, all non-conformities that have been corrected in the course of the assessment of the monitoring plan. Article 8 Independent review of the assessment of the monitoring plan 1. The verification team shall submit the internal verification documentation and draft conclusions from the assessment of the monitoring plan to an appointed independent reviewer without delay and prior to communicating them to the company. 2. The independent reviewer shall perform a review to ensure that the monitoring plan has been assessed in accordance with this Regulation and that due professional care and judgment have been exercised. 3. The scope of the independent review shall encompass the complete assessment process described in this section and recorded in the internal verification documentation. 4. The verifier shall include the results of the independent review in the internal verification documentation. Article 9 Verifier’s conclusions on the assessment of the monitoring plan On the basis of the information collected during the assessment of the monitoring plan, the verifier shall without delay provide the company in writing with the conclusions reached. The conclusions shall include the following elements: SECTION 2 Verification of FuelEU reports and partial FuelEU reports Article 10 FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report template 1. Companies shall use an electronic template of the FuelEU report based on the template included in Annex II, and submit the information in FuelEU Database. 2. Verifiers shall record a version of the FuelEU report in FuelEU Database after the verification, based on the information submitted by the company. Article 11 Information to be provided by companies 1. Before the start of the verification of the FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report, companies shall provide the verifier with at least the following supporting information: 2. Once the verifier has identified the specific documents or sections of documents deemed relevant for the purpose of its verification, companies shall also provide the following supporting information: 3. Additionally, and if applicable on the basis of the monitoring method applied, verifiers may ask the company to provide: 4. In the event of a change of company, the companies involved shall exercise due diligence to provide the verifier, upon its request, with the supporting documents or information relating to the voyages performed under their respective responsibilities. 5. Companies shall retain the information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article for at least 5 years pursuant to Article 7(4) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. Article 12 Strategic analysis 1. At the beginning of the verification, the verifier shall assess the likely nature, scale and complexity of the verification tasks by carrying out a strategic analysis of all activities relevant to the ship. 2. For the purposes of understanding the activities carried out by the company, the verifier shall collect and review the information needed to assess that the verification team is sufficiently competent to: (i) carry out the verification; (ii) determine that the time allocation indicated in the contract has been set correctly; and (iii) ensure that it is able to conduct the necessary risk assessment. The information shall include at least: 3. When reviewing the information referred to in paragraph 2, the verifier shall at least assess the following aspects: 4. When carrying out the strategic analysis, the verifier shall verify the following: Article 13 Risk analyses to be carried out by verifiers 1. In addition to the elements referred to in Article 13(1), (2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, the verifier shall identify and analyse all of the following risks: 2. When identifying and analysing the elements referred to paragraph 1, the verifier shall consider the findings of the strategic analysis referred to in Article 12. 3. When performing the risk analysis, the verifier shall consider areas of higher verification risk and at least the following areas: 4. When identifying and analysing the elements referred to in paragraph 3, the verifier shall consider the existence, completeness, accuracy, consistency, transparency and relevance of the information reported. 5. Where appropriate in the light of the information obtained in the course of the verification, the verifier shall revise the risk analyses and modify or repeat the verification activities to be performed. Article 14 Verification plan The verifier shall draft a verification plan reflecting the information obtained and the risks identified during the risk assessment. The verification plan shall include at least: Article 15 Verification activities concerning the FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report 1. The verifier shall implement the verification plan and, on the basis of the risk assessment, verify whether the monitoring and reporting systems, as described in the monitoring plan that has been assessed as satisfactory, exist in practice and are properly implemented. 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the verifier shall consider carrying out at least the following types of procedure: 3. The verifier shall verify the following: 4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, point (a), the verifier shall track the data-flow following the sequence and interaction of the data-flow activities from primary source data to the compilation of the FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report. 5. For the purposes of paragraph 3, points (b) and (c), the verifier may use sampling methods specific to a ship provided that, based on the risk assessment, sampling is justified. Article 16 Verification of reported data 1. The verifier shall verify the data reported in the FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report by the following means: 2. As part of the data verification referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall verify: Article 17 Verification of methods applied for missing data 1. Where methods laid down in the monitoring plan as assessed by the verifier have been used to supplement missing data, the verifier shall verify whether the methods used were appropriate for the specific situation and whether they have been applied correctly. 2. Where the methods referred to in paragraph 1 were not assessed beforehand, the verifier shall verify whether the approach used by the company to supplement the missing data ensures that the emissions are not underestimated and that that approach does not lead to material misstatements. Article 18 Materiality level For the purposes of verifying fuel and electricity consumption, and other relevant information on distance travelled and time spent at sea and at berth in the FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report, the materiality level shall be 5 % of the respective total reported for each item in the reporting period. Article 19 Site visits 1. The verifier shall carry out site visits in order to gain sufficient understanding of the company and the ship’s monitoring and reporting system as described in the monitoring plan. 2. The verifier shall determine the location or locations for the site visit on the basis of the results of the risk assessment and after taking into consideration the place where the critical mass of relevant data is stored, including electronic or hard copies of documents, and the place where data-flow activities and control activities are carried out. 3. On the basis of the outcome of a site visit to an onshore location, where it concludes that an onboard verification is needed to reduce the risk of material misstatements in the FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report, the verifier may decide to visit the ship. 4. The verifier shall also determine and communicate to the company the activities to be performed and the time needed for the site visit. 5. The company shall provide the verifier access to its sites, including to its relevant onshore locations and relevant ships. 6. The verifier may carry out a virtual site visit provided that, on the basis of the outcome of the risk assessment, one of the following conditions is fulfilled: The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. The decision to carry out a virtual site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. The verifier shall inform without undue delay the company of the decision to carry out a virtual site visit and that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. 7. With the exception of paragraph 6, point (d), the verifier shall not carry out a virtual site visit where no physical site visit has been carried out in the three reporting periods immediately preceding the current reporting period. The 3-year period shall only cover verifications of FuelEU reports performed for the company after the date of entry into force of this Regulation. 8. The decision to carry out a virtual site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. The verifier shall inform the company thereof without undue delay. 9. The verifier may decide to waive a site visit or a virtual site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 6 respectively provided that all conditions set out in paragraph 6, points (a), (b) and (c), are fulfilled. 10. A site visit and a virtual site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 6 respectively shall not be waived in either of the following situations: 11. The decision to waive a site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for waiving site visits are met. The verifier shall inform the company thereof without undue delay. 12. Where the verifier carries out a virtual site visit pursuant to paragraph 6 or waives a site visit pursuant to paragraph 9, it shall provide justification for doing so in the internal verification documentation. Article 20 Addressing misstatements and non-conformities in the FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report 1. Where the verifier identifies misstatements or non-conformities in the course of the verification of the FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report, it shall inform the company thereof without undue delay and request relevant corrections within a reasonable deadline. 2. The company shall correct any communicated misstatements or non-conformities. 3. The verifier shall document in the internal verification documentation, marking them as resolved, all misstatements or non-conformities that have been corrected in the course of the verification. 4. Where the company does not correct the misstatements or non-conformities referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall, before issuing the verification report, ask the company to explain the main causes of the misstatements or non-conformities. 5. The verifier shall assess whether the uncorrected misstatements, individually or together with other misstatements, have an impact on the total reported emissions or other relevant information and whether that impact leads to material misstatements. 6. The verifier shall assess whether the uncorrected non-conformity, individually or together with other non-conformities, have an impact on the total reported emissions or other relevant information and whether that impact leads to material misstatements. 7. The verifier shall consider misstatements or non-conformities which, individually or together with other misstatements, are below the materiality level set in Article 18 as material misstatements where that is justified by their scale and nature or by the particular circumstances of their occurrence. Article 21 Conclusion of the verification of the FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report To complete the verification of the FuelEU report and the partial FuelEU report, the verifier shall: Article 22 Recommendations for improvement 1. The verifier shall communicate to the company recommendations for improvement in relation to uncorrected misstatements and non-conformities not leading to material misstatements. 2. The verifier may communicate other recommendations for improvement that it finds relevant, in the light of the outcome of the verification activities. 3. When communicating recommendations to the company, the verifier shall remain impartial vis-à-vis the company, the ship and the monitoring and reporting system. It shall not jeopardise its impartiality by giving advice or elaborating on parts of the monitoring and reporting process pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 4. During a verification made following a year in which recommendations for improvement were made in a verification report pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2, the verifier shall verify whether and how the company has implemented those recommendations for improvement. Where the company has not implemented those recommendations, the verifier shall assess whether that increases or may increase the risk of misstatements. Article 23 Verification report 1. On the basis of the information collected, the verifier shall issue a verification report to the company on each FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report subject to verification and record it in the FuelEU database. For that purpose, verifiers shall use the template for the verification set out in Annex II. 2. The verification report shall be accessible to the administering State in the FuelEU database. 3. The verification report shall state whether the FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report have been verified as satisfactory or not satisfactory. The FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report shall be verified as satisfactory only where they are free of material misstatements. The FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report shall not be verified as satisfactory if they contain material misstatements that were not corrected before the report was issued. 4. The verifier shall describe the misstatements and non-conformities in sufficient detail in the verification report, including the following aspects: Article 24 Independent review of the FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report 1. The independent reviewer shall review the internal verification documentation and the draft verification report to verify that the verification process has been conducted in accordance with this Regulation and that due professional care and judgment have been exercised. 2. The scope of the independent review shall encompass the complete verification process laid down in this Section and recorded in the internal verification documentation. 3. After the FuelEU report or the partial FuelEU report has been authenticated in accordance with Article 21, point (e), the verifier shall include the results of the independent review in the internal verification documentation. Article 25 Verification of partial FuelEU reports in the event of the transfer of a ship 1. In the event of the transfer of a ship from one company to another, the transferring company shall send to the verifier a partial FuelEU report for the time during which it had assumed the responsibility for the operation of the ship in accordance with Article 15(4) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 2. The partial FuelEU report referred to in paragraph 1 shall be verified and recorded in the FuelEU database in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 and the rules set out in this Section, by the verifier that performed verification activities for the ship under the transferring company. CHAPTER III ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE REPORTED BY THE VERIFIER SECTION 1 Compliance balance Article 26 Calculation of greenhouse gas intensity of the energy used on board, ship’s compliance balance, and non-compliant port calls 1. On the basis of the FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report verified as satisfactory, the verifier shall: 2. In addition to the requirements of Article 16(4) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, when determining the non-compliant port calls, the verifier shall verify that the reported hours of non-compliance with the requirements set out in Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 are in fact related to ships that are securely moored at quayside in ports referred to in Article 6(1) and (2) of that Regulation, or at an anchorage referred to in Article 6(11) of that Regulation. 3. By 31 March of the reporting year and no later than 1 month thereafter, the verifier shall record it in the FuelEU database the information referred to in Article 16(4) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. For that purpose, the verifier shall make use of the template set out in Annex III. That information should be accompanied by the following elements: Article 27 Verified compliance balance report 1. After the application of the flexibility mechanisms in accordance with Articles 20 and 21 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, and Articles 28 and 29 of this Regulation, the verifier that verified the FuelEU report shall: 2. The FuelEU document of compliance referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), shall contain the information set out in Annex IV. SECTION 2 Flexibility mechanisms Article 28 Banking and borrowing 1. Where a ship has a compliance surplus for the reporting period, following a request from the company to bank the compliance surplus, the verifier shall assess the information on the compliance surplus and verify if it is in accordance with Articles 19, 20 and 21 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, and the calculations referred in Article 26 of this Regulation. Following an assessment of a request as compliant, the verifier shall approve the request for banking the compliance surplus. 2. Where a compliance surplus results from the total pool compliance balance, the verifier shall assess the calculations and the information related to the pooling of compliance, before approving the banking of the compliance surplus. 3. Where the ship has, for the reporting period, a compliance deficit, following a request from the company to borrow an advance compliance surplus of the corresponding amount from the following reporting period, the verifier shall assess the information on the compliance deficit and verifythat the advance compliance surplus multiplied by 1.1 is subtracted from the same ship’s compliance balance in the following reporting period in accordance with Article 20(2) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. Where the conditions set out in Article 20(2) points (a) and (b) are exceeded, the verifier shall not approve borrowing of the advance compliance surplus. Article 29 Pooling of compliance 1. Companies shall notify in the FuelEU database: (i) the intention of including the ship’s compliance balance in a pool; and (ii) the allocation of the total compliance balance of the pool to each individual ship. Where the ships participating in the pool are controlled by two or more companies the notification shall be accepted by all the companies concerned in the FuelEU database. The notification should include the following: (i) the allocation of the total compliance balance of the pool to its ships; (ii) the choice of the verifier selected for verifying the allocation of the total compliance balance of the pool to each individual ship; and (iii) a declaration that the ships participating in the pool are not allocated to other pools. 2. The verifier selected for verifying the allocation of the total compliance balance of the pool to each individual ship shall verify that the allocation of the pooled balance to each ship are in accordance with Article 21 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, and the calculations referred in Article 26 of this Regulation. The pool shall be valid only where it complies with Article 21(4) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 3. Where one of the conditions referred to in Article 21(4) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 are not fulfilled, the verifier selected for verifying the allocation of the total compliance balance of the pool to each individual ship shall not approve the request for pooling. The verifier shall make a statement of the non-conformities detected. CHAPTER IV REQUIREMENTS FOR VERIFIERS Article 30 Continued competence process 1. The verifier shall establish, document, implement and maintain a continued competence process to ensure that all personnel entrusted with verification activities are competent to carry out the tasks that are allocated to them. 2. For the purposes of the competence process referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall establish, document, implement and maintain the following aspects: 3. In evaluating the competence of the personnel pursuant to paragraph 2, point (c), the verifier shall assess that competence against the competence criteria referred to in paragraph 2, points (a) and (b). 4. The process referred to in paragraph 2, point (e) shall also include a process for assessing whether the verification team holds all the competence and persons required to carry out verification activities for a specific company. 5. The verifier shall develop general and specific competence criteria which are in conformity with the criteria laid down in Article 31(4) and Articles 31, 32 and 33. 6. The verifier shall monitor regularly, and at least annually, the performance of all personnel undertaking verification activities in order to confirm their continued competence. 7. The verifier shall regularly review the competence process referred to in paragraph 1 to ensure that: 8. The verifier shall have a system for recording the results of the activities carried out in the competence process referred to in paragraph 1. 9. A sufficiently competent evaluator shall assess the competence and performance of shipping FuelEU auditors and shipping FuelEU lead auditors. The evaluator shall monitor those auditors during the verification of a FuelEU report or partial FuelEU report on the site of the company as appropriate, to determine whether they meet the competence criteria. 10. Where a member of personnel fails to demonstrate that the competence criteria for a specific task allocated to that member have been fully met, the verifier shall identify and organise additional training or supervised work experience for that member of personnel. The verifier shall monitor that member until such member demonstrates to the verifier conformity with the competence criteria. Article 31 Verification teams 1. For each verification engagement, the verifier shall bring together a verification team capable of performing the verification activities referred to in Articles 4 to 29. 2. The verification team shall consist at least of one shipping FuelEU lead auditor and, where appropriate in the light of the verifier’s understanding of the complexity of the tasks to be carried out and its ability to conduct the necessary risk assessment, a suitable number of shipping FuelEU auditors and technical experts. 3. For the independent review of the verification activities related to a particular verification engagement, the verifier shall appoint an independent reviewer who shall not be part of the verification team. 4. Team members shall have a clear understanding of their specific role in the verification process and shall be able to communicate effectively in the language required to: (i) perform their verification tasks; and (ii) examine the information submitted by the company. 5. Where the verification team consists of one person, that person shall meet all the competence requirements for the shipping FuelEU auditor and the shipping FuelEU lead auditor and the requirements laid down in Article 32. Article 32 Competence requirements for shipping FuelEU auditors and shipping FuelEU lead auditors 1. Shipping FuelEU auditors shall have the competence to assess monitoring plans, and verify both FuelEU reports and partial FuelEU reports in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, shipping FuelEU auditors shall have at least the following knowledge: 3. In addition, sector-specific knowledge and experience of relevant aspects set out in Annex V shall be taken into consideration. 4. In addition to the competence requirements for a shipping FuelEU auditor set out in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, a shipping FuelEU lead auditor shall have demonstrated competence to lead a verification team and be responsible for carrying out the verification activities in accordance with this Regulation. Article 33 Competence requirements for independent reviewers 1. The independent reviewer shall have the appropriate authority to review the draft conclusions on the assessment of the monitoring plan, the draft verification report, and the internal verification documentation pursuant to Article 36. 2. The independent reviewer shall meet the competence requirements for shipping FuelEU lead auditors referred to in Article 32. 3. In order to assess whether the internal verification documentation is complete and whether enough evidence has been gathered in the course of the verification activities, the independent reviewer shall have the necessary competence to: Article 34 Use of technical experts 1. When carrying out verification activities, a verifier may use technical experts to provide detailed knowledge and expertise on a specific subject matter necessary to support the shipping FuelEU auditor and shipping FuelEU lead auditor in carrying out their verification activities. 2. Where an independent reviewer does not have the competence to assess a particular issue in the review process, the verifier shall request the support of a technical expert. 3. The technical expert shall have the competence and expertise required to effectively support the shipping FuelEU auditor and the shipping FuelEU lead auditor, or the independent reviewer, where necessary, on the subject matter for which their knowledge and expertise is requested. In addition, the technical expert shall have a sufficient understanding of the knowledge and competencies referred to in Article 32. 4. The technical expert shall undertake specified tasks under the direction and full responsibility of the independent reviewer or of the shipping FuelEU lead auditor of the verification team in which the technical expert is operating. Article 35 Procedures for verification activities 1. Verifiers shall establish, document, implement and maintain one or more procedures and processes for the verification activities referred to in Articles 4 to 29. 2. When establishing and implementing such procedures and processes, the verifier shall carry out the activities in accordance with the harmonised standard set out by Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 concerning requirements for greenhouse gas validation and verification bodies for use in accreditation or other forms of recognition. 3. Verifiers shall establish, document, implement and maintain a quality-management system to ensure consistent development, implementation, improvement and review of the procedures and processes in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in paragraph 2. 4. The quality management system referred to in paragraph 3 shall include the following elements: 5. In addition, verifiers shall establish the following procedures, processes and arrangements in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in paragraph 2: Article 36 Internal verification documentation 1. The verifier shall prepare and compile internal verification documentation containing at least: 2. The internal verification documentation shall be drafted in such a way that the independent reviewer referred to in Articles 8 and 24 and the national accreditation body can assess whether the verification has been performed in accordance with this Regulation. Article 37 Records and communication 1. Verifiers shall maintain and manage records to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation, including as regards the competence and impartiality of their personnel. 2. A verifier shall on a regular basis make information available to the company in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in Article 35(2). 3. Verifiers shall safeguard the confidentiality of information obtained in the course of the verification, in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in Article 35(2). Article 38 Independence and impartiality 1. A verifier shall be independent from a company and impartial in carrying out its verification activities. 2. To ensure independence and impartiality, the verifier and any part of the same legal entity shall not be a company, the owner of a company or owned by it, nor shall the verifier have relations with the company that could affect its independence and impartiality. 3. Verifiers shall be organised in such a way as to safeguard their objectivity, independence and impartiality. The relevant requirements laid down in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 35(2) shall apply. 4. Verifiers shall not carry out verification activities for a company that poses an unacceptable risk to their impartiality or in respect of which they have a conflict of interest. The verifier shall not use personnel or contracted persons in the assessment of a monitoring plan or in the verification of a FuelEU report and partial FuelEU report that could have an actual or potential conflict of interest. The verifier shall also ensure that the activities of personnel or organisations do not affect the confidentiality, objectivity, independence and impartiality of the verification. For that purpose, the verifier shall monitor the risks to impartiality and take appropriate action to address those risks. 5. A conflict of interest for a verifier in its relations with a company shall be deemed to have arisen in particular in either of the following cases: 6. For the purposes of paragraph 5, point (b), the verifier’s impartiality shall be deemed compromised where the relations between the verifier and the consultancy body, technical assistance body or the other organisation is based on common ownership, common governance, common management or personnel, shared resources, common finances, common contracts or common marketing and common payment of sales commission or other inducement for the referral of new clients. 7. An unacceptable risk to the impartiality or a conflict of interest shall be deemed to have arisen where a verifier, or any part of the same legal entity, provides a company with the following: 8. Verifiers shall not outsource the independent review or the issuance of the verification report. 9. Where verifiers outsource other verification activities, sub-contracted companies shall meet the relevant requirements laid down in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 35(2). 10. However, contracting individuals to carry out verification activities shall not constitute outsourcing for the purposes of paragraph 9 where the verifier, when contracting those individuals, takes full responsibility for the verification activities performed by contracted personnel. 11. When contracting individuals for carrying out verification activities the verifier shall require those individuals to sign a written agreement that they comply with the procedures of the verifier and that there is no conflict of interest in carrying out those verification activities. 12. Verifiers shall establish, document, implement and maintain a process to ensure their continuous impartiality and independence, and that of the parts of the same legal entity, of other organisations referred to in paragraph 6, and of all personnel and contracted individuals involved in the verification. That process shall include a mechanism to safeguard the impartiality and independence of the verifier and shall meet the relevant requirements laid down in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 35. 13. When verifying a company which has already verified in previous years, the verifier shall consider the risk to impartiality and take the necessary measures to reduce the risk of impartiality. Article 39 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall apply from 1 September 2024. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 26 July 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 234, 22.9.2023, p. 48, ELI: . ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 ( OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30, ELI: ). ( 3 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2917 of 20 October 2023 on the verification activities, accreditation of verifiers and approval of monitoring plans by administering authorities pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas emissions from maritime transport, and repealing Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2072 ( OJ L, 2023/2917, 29.12.2023, ELI: ). ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2031 of 26 July 2024 on the template for monitoring plans pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( OJ L, 2024/2031, 29.7.2024 ), ELI: .) ( 5 ) Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on the monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas emissions from maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 55 , ELI: ). ANNEX I TEMPLATE FOR FUELEU REPORT PART A DATA IDENTIFYING THE SHIP AND THE COMPANY PART B DATA IDENTIFYING THE VERIFIER PART C INFORMATION ON THE MONITORING METHOD USED AND THE RELATED LEVEL OF UNCERTAINTY PART D VOYAGE DATA PART E ENERGY CONSUMPTION PART F DATA FOR APPLYING ICE CLASS AND SAILING IN ICE EXEMPTIONS ( 1 ) Select one of the categories referred to in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/2449 ( OJ L, 2023/2449, 7.11.2023 , ELI: ). ( 2 ) Mandatory to exclude the additional energy used due to ship’s ice class and/or due to sailing in ice conditions. ( 3 ) On-board electrical energy storage from power generation at sea, on-board electrical energy storage from OPS, on-board electrical energy storage from battery swapping, on-board power generation from wind or on-board power generation from solar energy. ( 4 ) Mandatory to exclude the additional energy used due to ship's ice class and/or due to sailing in ice conditions. ANNEX II TEMPLATE FOR FUELEU VERIFICATION REPORT PART A DATA IDENTIFYING THE SHIP, THE COMPANY AND THE VERIFIER PART B SUMMARY OF THE PROCEDURES FOLLOWED DURING THE VERIFICATION PART C RESULT OF THE VERIFICATION OF FUELEU REPORT ( 1 ) Select one of the categories referred to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/2449. ( 2 ) Mandatory to exclude the additional energy used due to ship’s ice class and/or due to sailing in ice condition. ANNEX III TEMPLATE FOR FUELEU COMPLIANCE BALANCE PART A DATA IDENTIFYING THE SHIP, THE COMPANY AND THE VERIFIER PART B GHG INTENSITY OF THE ENERGY USED ON-BOARD THE SHIP PART C SHIPS COMPLIANCE BALANCE Ship’s compliance balance, in accordance with the formula set out in Annex IV, Part A point (a) to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. PART D NON-COMPLIANT PORT CALLS PART E AMOUNT OF ENERGY USED ( 1 ) Select one of the categories referred to in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/2449. ( 2 ) Mandatory to exclude the additional energy used due to ship’s ice class and/or due to sailing in ice conditions. ANNEX IV TEMPLATE FOR FUELEU DOCUMENT OF COMPLIANCE This is to certify that, following assessment of the FuelEU Report covering the reporting period ‘YEAR N – 1’, and relevant compliance balance calculation, the ship ‘NAME’ has been considered as satisfactory regarding the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. This document of compliance has been issued on ‘DAY/MONTH/YEAR N’ This document of compliance is linked to FuelEU Report No. ‘NUMBER’ and is valid until 30 JUNE ‘YEAR N + 1’, 18 months after the end of the reporting period, or until a new document is issued for the same period, or until it is revoked by the administering State. PART A SHIP PARTICULARS PART B SHIPOWNER DETAILS PART C DETAILS OF THE COMPANY FULFILLING THE OBLIGATIONS PURSUANT TO REGULATION (EU) 2023/1805 (VOLUNTARY FIELD) PART D VERIFIER ( 3 ) ( 1 ) Select one of the categories referred to in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/2449. ( 2 ) ‘Shipowner and ISM Company’ or ‘ISM Company distinct from Shipowner’. ( 3 ) Verifier that issued the verification report. ANNEX V MARINE-SECTOR-SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERIENCE For the purposes of Article 32(3), the following knowledge and experience shall be taken into consideration: ( 1 ) Regulation 22, Annex VI to the MARPOL Convention. ( 2 ) Revised technical Code on Control of Emission of Nitrogen Oxides from Marine Diesel Engines, (Resolution MEPC.176(58), as amended by resolution MEPC.177(58)). ( 3 ) Regulation 14, Annex VI to the MARPOL Convention. ( 4 ) Regulation 18, Annex VI to the MARPOL Convention. ( 5 ) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82 , ELI: ). ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)