COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2018/1503 of 8 October 2018 establishing measures to prevent the introduction into and the spread within the Union of Aromia bungii (Faldermann) (notified under document C(2018) 6447) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community ( 1 ) , and in particular the third sentence of Article 16(3) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 2 Prohibition of the introduction into, or spread within, the Union territory of the specified organism The introduction into, or spread within, the Union territory of the specified organism shall be prohibited. Article 3 Detection or suspected presence of the specified organism 1. Any person who suspects or becomes aware of the presence of the specified organism shall immediately inform the responsible official body and provide it with all relevant information concerning the presence, or suspected presence, of the specified organism. 2. The responsible official body shall immediately record such information. 3. Where the responsible official body has been informed of a presence, or suspected presence, of the specified organism, it shall take all necessary measures to confirm that presence, or the suspected presence. 4. Member States shall ensure that any person having under its control plants which may be infested with the specified organism, is immediately informed of the presence or the suspected presence of the specified organism, of the possible consequences and risks and of the measures to be taken. Article 4 Surveys of the specified organism in the territories of the Member States Member States shall conduct annual surveys for the presence of the specified organism in their territory. Those surveys shall be carried out by the responsible official body, or under official supervision of the responsible official body. They shall consist of visual examinations and, in the case of any suspicion of infestation by the specified organism, collection of samples for pest identification. Those surveys shall take account of the available scientific and technical evidence, the biology of the specified organism, the presence and biology of susceptible plants, and any other appropriate information concerning the presence of the specified organism. Article 5 Establishment of demarcated areas 1. Where the presence of the specified organism is confirmed, the Member State concerned shall without delay demarcate an area (‘demarcated area’) in accordance with paragraph 2. 2. The demarcated area shall consist of an infested zone and a buffer zone. The infested zone is the zone where the presence of the specified organism has been confirmed, and which contains: The buffer zone shall be of a width of at least 2 km surrounding the infested zone. The exact delimitation of the infested zone and buffer zone shall be based on sound scientific principles, the biology of the specified organism, the level of infestation and the distribution of specified plants and specified wood in the area concerned. In cases where the responsible official body concludes that eradication of the specified organism is possible in accordance with Article 6(1), taking into account the circumstances of the outbreak, the results of a specific investigation or the immediate application of eradication measures, the radius of the buffer zone may be reduced to not less than 1 km beyond the boundary of the infested zone. 3. If the presence of the specified organism is confirmed in the buffer zone, the delimitation of the infested zone and buffer zone shall immediately be reviewed and changed accordingly. 4. Where, based on the surveys referred to in Article 4 and paragraph 6(b) of this Article, the specified organism is not detected in a demarcated area for a period of four consecutive years, that demarcation may be lifted. In such cases, the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission and other Member States. 5. Member States need not establish demarcated areas, as provided for in paragraph 1, if one of the following conditions is satisfied: For the purposes of point (b), the results of a specific investigation and eradication measures shall be taken into account. Such measures may consist of precautionary felling and disposal of specified plants and plant products and of destruction and disposal of wood packaging material, after they have been examined. 6. Where one of the conditions set out in paragraph 5 is satisfied, Member States shall take the following measures: For the purposes of point (d), the examination shall include targeted destructive sampling. The measures referred to in points (a) to (f) shall be presented in the form of a report in accordance with Article 10(1)(a). Article 6 Eradication and containment measures 1. The Member State which establishes the demarcated area referred to in Article 5 shall adopt the following measures in that area: For the purposes of point (a), where the infested plants were found outside the flying period of the specified organism the felling and removal shall be carried out before the start of the next flying period. By way of derogation from point (b), where a responsible official body concludes that felling is inappropriate for individual trees, due to their particular social, cultural or environmental value, the Member State which has established the demarcated area shall ensure that those specified plants which are not to be felled are subject to an individual and regular examination for any sign of infestation and that measures equivalent to felling are taken to prevent any possible spread of the specified organism from those plants. The report referred to in Article 10 shall set out the reasons for that conclusion and a description of the measures. For the purposes of point (c), all necessary precautions shall be taken to avoid spreading of the specified organism during and after felling. For the purposes of point (e), where the examination shows that the specified plants are infested, those plants shall be felled. For the purposes of point (h), where appropriate, targeted destructive sampling shall be carried out by the responsible official body and the number of samples shall be indicated in the report referred to in Article 10(1). The measures referred to in points (a) to (k) shall be presented in the form of a report in accordance with Article 10(1). 2. Where, for a period of more than four consecutive years, the results of the surveys referred to in Article 4 have confirmed the presence of the specified organism in an area, and in case there is evidence that the specified organism can no longer be eradicated, Member States may limit the measures to the containment of the specified organism within that area. In that case, the radius of the buffer zone shall be increased to no less than 4 km. Such measures shall include at least the following: For the purposes of point (a), where the infested plants were found outside the flying period of the specified organism the felling and removal shall be carried out before the start of the next flying period. For the purposes of point (f), where appropriate, targeted destructive sampling shall be carried out by the responsible official body and the number of samples shall be indicated in the report referred to in Article 10(1). The measures referred to in points (a) to (i) shall be presented in the form of a report in accordance with Article 10(1). Article 7 Movement of specified plants within the Union 1. Specified plants originating ( 5 ) in a demarcated area may be moved within the Union only if they are accompanied by a plant passport prepared and issued in accordance with Commission Directive 92/105/EEC ( 6 ) and have been grown during a period of at least two years prior to movement or, in the case of plants which are younger than two years, have been grown throughout their life, in a place of production which fulfils the requirements set out in paragraphs 2 to 5. 2. The place of production shall be registered in accordance with Commission Directive 92/90/EEC ( 7 ) . 3. The place of production shall have been subjected annually to at least two meticulous official inspections carried out at appropriate times and shall show no sign of infestation by the specified organism. The inspection shall include targeted destructive sampling of the stems and branches of plants in case of an increased level of suspicion concerning the presence of the specified organism. 4. The place of production: 5. Rootstocks which meet the requirements of paragraphs 1 to 4 may be grafted with scions which have not been grown in accordance with those requirements, but which are no more than 1 cm in diameter at their thickest point. 6. Specified plants not originating in demarcated areas, but introduced into a place of production in such areas, may be moved within the Union on condition that this place of production complies with the requirements set out in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 and only if the plants are accompanied by a plant passport prepared and issued in accordance with Directive 92/105/EEC. 7. Specified plants imported from third countries where the specified organism is known to be present, in accordance with Article 11, may be moved within the Union only if they are accompanied by a plant passport prepared and issued in accordance with Directive 92/105/EEC. Article 8 Movement within the Union of specified wood 1. The movement within the Union of specified wood originating in a demarcated area or specified wood retaining all or part of its surface introduced into a demarcated area shall be prohibited. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, specified wood other than in the form of chips, particles, shavings, wood waste and scrap originating in a demarcated area and specified wood retaining all or part of its surface, may only be moved within the Union if it is accompanied by a plant passport prepared and issued in accordance with Directive 92/105/EEC. That plant passport shall be issued only if that wood fulfils one of the following requirements: 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, specified wood in the form of chips, particles, shavings, wood waste and scrap, originating in a demarcated area, may only be moved within the Union if it is accompanied by a plant passport prepared and issued in accordance with Directive 92/105/EEC and fulfils one of the following conditions: 4. In the case of paragraphs 2 and 3, if no treatment or processing facilities are available within the demarcated area, the specified wood may only be moved within the Union under official control, and under closed conditions, so as to ensure that the specified organism cannot spread, to the nearest facility outside the demarcated area for the purposes of immediate treatment or processing in accordance with paragraphs 2 or 3. Waste material resulting from the treatment or processing carried out under paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be disposed of in such a manner as to ensure that the specified organism cannot spread outside the demarcated area. The responsible official body shall carry out intensive surveillance at appropriate times for the presence of the specified organism through inspections on Prunus spp. species within at least 1 km of that treatment or processing facility. Article 9 Movement within the Union of specified wood packaging material 1. The movement within the Union of specified wood packaging material originating in a demarcated area shall be prohibited. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, movement of specified wood packaging material, originating in a demarcated area may only take place if the specified wood packaging material fulfils all of the following conditions: 3. If no treatment facilities are available within the demarcated area, the specified wood packaging material may only be moved under official control and closed conditions, in such a manner as to ensure that the specified organism cannot spread, to the nearest treatment facility outside the demarcated area for the purposes of immediate treatment and marking in accordance with paragraph 2. Waste material resulting from treatment in accordance with the first subparagraph shall be disposed of in such a manner as to ensure that the specified organism cannot spread outside a demarcated area. The responsible official body shall carry out intensive surveillance at appropriate times for the presence of the specified organism through inspections on Prunus spp. species, within a radius of at least 1 km of the treatment facility. Article 10 Reporting on surveys and measures 1. Member States shall, by 30 April of each year, communicate to the Commission and to the other Member States: 2. Where justified by the development of the respective phytosanitary risk, Member States shall adapt the respective surveys and measures. They shall immediately communicate that adaptation to the Commission and the other Member States. Article 11 Introduction into the Union of specified plants originating from a third country where the specified organism is known to be present Specified plants originating from third countries, where the specified organism is known to be present, shall be accompanied by the certificate referred to in Article 13(1)(ii) of Directive 2000/29/EC. That certificate shall contain one of the following statements under the entry ‘Additional Declaration’: For the purposes of point (a), the name of the area shall be mentioned under the entry ‘place of origin’. Article 12 Introduction into the Union of specified wood originating from a third country where the specified organism is known to be present 1. Specified wood, other than in the form of chips, particles, shavings, wood waste and scrap, originating from third countries, where the specified organism is known to be present, shall be accompanied by the certificate referred to in Article 13(1)(ii) of Directive 2000/29/EC. That certificate shall contain one of the following statements under the entry ‘Additional Declaration’: The name of the area referred to in point (a) shall be mentioned under the entry ‘place of origin’ For the purposes of point (b), the heat treatment shall be evidenced by a mark ‘HT’ put on the wood or on any wrapping, in accordance with current usage. 2. Specified wood in the form of chips, particles, shavings, wood waste and scrap originating from third countries, where the specified organism is known to be present, shall be accompanied by the certificate referred to in Article 13(1)(ii) of Directive 2000/29/EC. That certificate shall contain one of the following statements under the entry ‘Additional Declaration’: For the purposes of point (a), the name of the area shall be mentioned under the entry ‘place of origin’ Article 13 Official checks at introduction into the Union of specified plants and specified wood originating from a country where the specified organism is known to be present 1. All consignments of specified plants and specified wood introduced into the Union from a third country, where the specified organism is known to be present, shall be subject to a meticulous official check at the point of entry into the Union or at the place of destination established in accordance with Article 1 of Commission Directive 2004/103/EC ( 9 ) . 2. The inspection methods applied shall ensure the detection of any sign of the specified organism, in particular in stems and branches of the plants. That inspection shall include, where appropriate, targeted destructive sampling. Article 14 Compliance Member States shall repeal or amend the measures which they have adopted to protect themselves against the introduction and spread of the specified organism in order to comply with this Decision. They shall immediately inform the Commission of those measures. Article 15 Addressees This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 8 October 2018. For the Commission Vytenis ANDRIUKAITIS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1 . ( 2 ) EPPO (2014) Pest risk analysis for Aromia bungii . EPPO, Paris. Available at ( 3 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff ( OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Applied for wood waste and scrap, not agglomerated, of more than 2,5 cm thickness and width ( 5 ) Glossary of Phytosanitary Terms — Reference Standard ISPM No 5 and Phytosanitary certificates — Reference Standard ISPM No 12 by the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention, Rome, 2013. ( 6 ) Commission Directive 92/105/EEC of 3 December 1992 establishing a degree of standardization for plant passports to be used for the movement of certain plants, plant products or other objects within the Community, and establishing the detailed procedures related to the issuing of such plant passports and the conditions and detailed procedures for their replacement ( OJ L 4, 8.1.1993, p. 22 ). ( 7 ) Commission Directive 92/90/EEC of 3 November 1992 establishing obligations to which producers and importers of plants, plant products or other objects are subject and establishing details for their registration ( OJ L 344, 26.11.1992, p. 38 ). ( 8 ) Glossary of Phytosanitary Terms — Reference Standard ISPM No 15 by the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention, Rome, 2013. ( 9 ) Commission Directive 2004/103/EC of 7 October 2004 on identity and plant health checks of plants, plant products or other objects, listed in Part B of Annex V to Council Directive 2000/29/EC, which may be carried out at a place other than the point of entry into the Community or at a place close by and specifying the conditions related to these checks ( OJ L 313, 12.10.2004, p. 16 ).