Only the original UN/ECE texts have legal effect under international public law. The status and date of entry into force of this Regulation should be checked in the latest version of the UN/ECE status document TRANS/WP.29/343, available at: UN Regulation No 34 – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to the prevention of fire risks [2025/1454] Incorporating all valid text up to: 04 series of amendments – Date of entry into force: 5 June 2023 This document is meant purely as documentation tool. The authentic and legally binding texts are: ECE/TRANS/WP.29/2016/8 ECE/TRANS/WP.29/2018/121 ECE/TRANS/WP.29/2018/117 ECE/TRANS/WP.29/2022/116 Contents Regulation Part I - Approval of vehicles with regard to their fuel tanks Part II - 1 – (Vacant) Part II -2 – (Vacant) Part III - Approval of tanks for liquid fuel as separate technical units Part IV - Approval of a vehicle with regard to the installation of an approved tank Annexes Appendix 2 - Communication concerning the approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval or production definitively discontinued of a fuel tank pursuant to Regulation No. 34 Appendix 1 - Test of resistance to fire Appendix 2 - Dimensions and technical data of firebricks 1. Scope This Regulation applies: 2. Application for approval 3. Approval Part I Approval of vehicles with regard to their fuel tanks 4. Definitions For the purposes of this Part of the UN Regulation: 5. Requirements for liquid fuel tanks 6. Tests of liquid fuel tanks Part II -1 (Vacant) 7. (Vacant) 9. (Vacant) Part II -2 (Vacant) Part III Approval of tanks for liquid fuel as separate technical units 10. Definitions For the purposes of this Part of the Regulation: 11. Requirements for liquid fuel tanks Part IV Approval of vehicles with regard to the installation of approved fuel tank(s) 12. Definitions For the purposes of this Part of the Regulation: 13. Requirements for the installation of liquid fuel tanks 14. Modifications of the type of vehicle or tank 15. Conformity of production The conformity of production procedures shall comply with those set out in the Agreement, Schedule 1 (E/ECE/TRANS/505/Rev.3) with the following requirements: 16. Penalties for non-conformity of production 17. Transitional provisions 18. Names and addresses of Technical Services conducting approval tests, and of Type Approval Authorities The Contracting Parties to the Agreement which apply this UN Regulation shall communicate to the Secretariat of the United Nations the names and addresses of the Technical Services responsible for conducting approval tests and of the Type Approval Authorities which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or refusal or withdrawal of approval, issued in other countries, are to be sent. ( 1 ) As defined in the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3.), document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.6, para. 2 - . ( 2 ) The distinguishing numbers of the Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement are reproduced in Annex 3 to the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3), document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev. 6, Annex 3 - . ANNEX 1 Annex 1 – Appendix 1 Communication (Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm)) Trade name or mark of the power-driven vehicle: … Vehicle type: … Manufacturer's name and address: … If applicable, name and address of manufacturer's representative: … Kind of engine: positive-ignition/diesel 2 Site of engine: front/rear/centre 2 Brief description of fuel tank and fuel or approval number(s) of the approved fuel tank 2 … Characteristics and site of fuel tank: … For fuel tanks made of a plastic material, state material and trade name or mark: … Characteristics of fuel installation (site, connections, etc.): … Description of electrical installation (site attachment, protection, etc.): … Frontal (Type / Approval or report number): … Side (Type / Approval or report number): … Rear (Type / Approval or report number): … Vehicle submitted for approval on: … Technical Service responsible for conducting approval tests: … Date of report issued by that Service: … Number of report issued by that Service: … Approval granted / extended / refused / withdrawn 2 Position of approval mark on the vehicle: … Place: … Date: … Signature: … The index to the information package lodged with the Type Approval Authority, which may be obtained on request, is attached. Annex 1 – Appendix 2 Communication (Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm)) of a fuel tank pursuant to Regulation No. 34. Trade name or mark of the fuel tank: … Manufacturer's name for the type of fuel tank: … Manufacturer's name and address: … If applicable, name and address of manufacturer's representative: … Brief description of fuel tank and fuel of the fuel feeding installation: Characteristics of fuel tank and fuel: … For fuel tanks made of a plastic material, state material and trade name or mark: … Submitted for approval on: … Technical Service responsible for conducting approval tests: … Date of report issued by that Service: … Number of report issued by that Service: … Reason(s) for extension (if applicable): … Approval granted / extended / refused / withdrawn 2 Position of approval mark on the fuel tank: … Place: … Date: … Signature: … The index to the information package lodged with the Type Approval Authority, which may be obtained on request, is attached. ( 1 ) Distinguishing number of the country which has granted/extended/refused/withdrawn/ the approval (see approval provisions in the Regulation). ( 2 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( 3 ) Distinguishing number of the country which has granted/extended/refused/withdrawn/ the approval (see approval provisions in the Regulation). ( 4 ) Strike out what does not apply. ANNEX 2 Arrangements of approval marks Model A (See paragraph 3.1.4. of this Regulation) a = 8 mm min The above approval mark affixed to a vehicle shows that the type concerned was approved in the Netherlands (E4) pursuant to Part I of UN Regulation No. 34 under approval No. 041234. The first two digits (04) of the approval number indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of UN Regulation No. 34 as amended by the 04 series of amendments. Model B (Vacant) Model C (See paragraph 3.2.4. of this UN Regulation) a = 8 mm min The above approval mark affixed to a fuel tank shows that the type concerned was approved in the Netherlands (E4) pursuant to Part III of UN Regulation No. 34, for a universal use including its accessories, under approval No. 041234. The first two digits (04) of the approval number indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of UN Regulation No. 34 as amended by the 04 series of amendments. Model D (See paragraph 3.3.4. of this UN Regulation) a = 8 mm min The above approval mark affixed to a vehicle shows that the type concerned was approved in the Netherlands (E4) pursuant to Part IV of UN Regulation No. 34 under approval No. 041234. The first two digits (04) of the approval number indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of UN Regulation No. 34 as amended by the 04 series of amendments. Model E (See paragraph 3.3.5. of this UN Regulation) a = 8 mm min. The above approval mark affixed to a vehicle shows that the type concerned was approved in the Netherlands (E4) pursuant to UN Regulations Nos. 34 Part IV and 33. ( *1 ) The approval numbers indicated that, at the date when the respective approvals were given, UN Regulation No. 34 included the 04 series of amendments and UN Regulation No. 33 was still in its original form. ( *1 ) The second number is given merely as an example. ANNEX 3 (Vacant) ANNEX 4 (Vacant) ANNEX 5 Testing of fuel tanks made of a plastic material 1. Collision resistance 2. Mechanical strength The tank shall be tested under the conditions prescribed in paragraph 6.1. of this Regulation for leaks and for rigidity of shape. The tank and all its accessories shall be mounted onto a test fixture in a manner corresponding to the mode of installation on the vehicle for which the tank is intended or mounted in the vehicle itself or mounted in a test fixture made by a vehicle section. On request of the manufacturer and with the agreement of the Technical Service the tank may be tested without using any test fixture. Water at 326 K (53 °C) shall be used as the testing fluid and shall fill the tank to its capacity. The tank shall be subjected to a relative internal pressure equal to double the working pressure and in any case to not less than 30 kPa at a temperature of 326 K ± 2 K (53 °C ± 2 °C) for a period of five hours. During the test, the tank and its accessories shall not crack or leak; however, it may be permanently deformed. 3. Fuel permeability 4. Resistance to fuel After the test referred to in paragraph 3., the tank shall still meet the requirements set out in paragraphs 1. and 2. 5. Resistance to fire The tank shall be subjected to the following tests. 6. Resistance to high temperature 7. Markings on the fuel tank The trade name or mark shall be affixed to the tank; it shall be indelible and clearly legible on the tank when the latter is installed on the vehicle. Annex 5 – Appendix 1 Test of resistance to fire Figure 1 Phase A: Pre-heating Figure 2 Phase B: Direct exposure to flame Figure 3 Phase C: Indirect exposure to the flame Figure 4 Phase D: End of test Annex 5 – Appendix 2 Dimensions and technical data of firebricks ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)