Regulation No 24 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UN/ECE) — Uniform provisions concerning: 1. SCOPE 2. DEFINITIONS COMMON TO PARTS I, II AND III PART I — EMISSION OF VISIBLE EXHAUST POLLUTANTS FROM C.I. ENGINES 3. DEFINITIONS For the purpose of Part I of this Regulation: 4. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 4.1 Emission of visible pollutants 4.2 Engine power 5. APPROVAL 6. SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS 6.1 General The components liable to affect the emission of visible pollutants shall be so designed, constructed and assembled as to enable the engine in normal use, despite the vibration to which it may be subjected, to comply with the provisions of this Regulation. 6.2 Specifications concerning cold-start devices 6.3 Specifications concerning the emission of visible pollutants 7. MODIFICATION OF THE ENGINE TYPE AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 8. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 9. PENALITIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 10. PRODUCTION DEFINITELY DISCONTINUED If the holder of the approval completely ceases production of the engine approved in accordance with this Regulation, he shall so inform the authority which granted the approval. Upon receiving the relevant communication, that authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the approval form bearing at the end, in large letters, the signed and dated annotation ‘PRODUCTION DISCONTINUED’. 11. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING APPROVAL TESTS, AND OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS The Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the technical services responsible for conducting approval tests and or the administrative departments which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval, issued in other countries, are to be sent. PART II — THE INSTALLATION ON ROAD VEHICLES OF TYPE-APPROVED C.I. ENGINES 12. DEFINITIONS For the purpose of Part II of this Regulation: 13. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 13.1 Emission of visible pollutants 14. APPROVAL 15. SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS 15.1 General The diesel engine fitted on the vehicle shall be of a type approved under Part I of this Regulation. The components liable to affect the emission of visible pollutants shall be so designed, constructed and assembled as to enable the vehicle, in normal use, despite the vibration to which it may be subjected, to comply with the provisions of this Regulation. It shall be possible to inspect the vehicle for roadworthiness by determining its performance in relation to the data collected for type approval as reported in paragraph 11.1.2.2. of Annex 2 to this Regulation. If this inspection requires a special procedure, this shall be detailed in the service manual (or equivalent media). This special procedure shall not require the use of special equipment other than that provided with the vehicle. 15.2 Specifications concerning cold-start devices 15.3 Installation 16. MODIFICATION OF THE VEHICLE TYPE AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 17. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 18. PENALTIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 19. PRODUCTION DEFINITELY DISCONTINUED If the holder of the approval completely ceases production of the vehicle approved in accordance with this Regulation, he shall so inform the authority which granted the approval. Upon receiving the relevant communication, that authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the approval form bearing at the end, in large letters, the signed and dated annotation ‘PRODUCTION DISCONTINUED’. 20. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING APPROVAL TESTS, AND OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS The Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the technical services responsible for conducting approval tests and of the administrative departments which grant approval, and to which forms certifying approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval, issued in other countries, are to be sent. PART III — EMISSION OF VISIBLE EXHAUST POLLUTANTS FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE WHOSE ENGINE HAS NOT BEEN SEPARATELY APPROVED 21. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of Part III of this Regulation: 22. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 23. APPROVAL 24. SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS 24.1 General The components liable to affect the emission of pollutants shall be so designed, constructed and assembled as to enable the vehicle, in normal use, despite the vibration to which it may be subjected, to comply with the provisions of this Regulation. It shall be possible to inspect the vehicle for roadworthiness by determining its performance in relation to the data collected for type approval as reported in paragraph 11.1.2.2. of Annex 2 to this Regulation. If this inspection requires a special procedure, this shall be detailed in the service manual (or equivalent media). This special procedure shall not require the use of special equipment other than that provided with the vehicle. 24.2 Specifications concerning cold-start devices 24.3 Specifications concerning the emission of visible pollutants 25. MODIFICATION OF THE VEHICLE TYPE AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 26. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 27. PENALTIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 28. PRODUCTION DEFINITELY DISCONTINUED If the holder of the approval completely ceases production of a vehicle approved in accordance with this Regulation, he shall so inform the authority which granted the approval. Upon receiving the relevant communication, that authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the approval form bearing at the end, in large letters, the signed and dated annotation ‘PRODUCTION DISCONTINUED’. 29. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING APPROVAL TESTS, AND OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS The Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the technical services responsible for conducting approval tests and of the administrative departments which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval, issued in other countries, are to be sent. ( 1 ) 1 for Germany, 2 for France, 3 for Italy, 4 for the Netherlands, 5 for Sweden, 6 for Belgium, 7 for Hungary, 8 for the Czech Republic, 9 for Spain, 10 for Yugoslavia, 11 for the United Kingdom, 12 for Austria, 13 for Luxembourg, 14 for Switzerland, 15 (vacant), 16 for Norway, 17 for Finland, 18 for Denmark, 19 for Romania, 20 for Poland, 21 for Portugal, 22 for the Russian Federation, 23 for Greece, 24 for Ireland, 25 for Croatia, 26 for Slovenia, 27 for Slovakia, 28 for Belarus, 29 for Estonia, 30 (vacant), 31 for Bosnia and Herzegovina, 32 for Latvia, 33 (vacant), 34 for Bulgaria, 35 and 36 (vacant), 37 for Turkey, 38 and 39 (vacant), 40 for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 41 (vacant), 42 for the European Community (Approvals are granted by its Member States using their respective ECE symbol), 43 for Japan, 44 (vacant), 45 for Australia, 46 for Ukraine and 47 for South Africa. Subsequent numbers shall be assigned to other countries in the chronological order in which they ratify or accede to the Agreement Concerning the Adoption of Uniform Technical Prescriptions for Wheeled Vehicles, Equipment and Parts which can be Fitted and/or be Used on Wheeled Vehicles and the Conditions for Reciprocal Recognition of Approvals Granted on the Basis of these Prescriptions, and the numbers thus assigned shall be communicated by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the Contracting Parties to the Agreement. ( *1 ) See footnote 1. ( 2 ) See footnote 1. ANNEX 1 ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE VEHICLE AND THE C.I. ENGINE AND INFORMATION CONCERNING THE CONDUCT OF TESTS ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Note: The letter ‘E’ preceding figures means: information to be supplied for emission approval. When no letter precedes the figures, it means: information to be supplied in any case. For 0. DESCRIPTION OF THE VEHICLE 1. DESCRIPTION OF ENGINE 2. COOLING SYSTEM: LIQUID/AIR COOLING ( 2 ) 2.1 Characteristics of liquid-cooling system 2.2 Characteristics of air-cooling system: 3. AIR INTAKE SYSTEM AND FUEL FEED 3.1 Air intake system 3.2 Pressure charger ( 2 ) : Yes/No 3.3 Injection system 3.3.1 Low pressure section 3.3.2 High pressure section 3.3.3 Injection piping 3.3.4 Injector(s) 3.3.5 Governor E 3.4 Cold start system Description or make(s) and type(s): 4. VALVE TIMING Maximum lift of valves and angles of opening and closing in relation to dead centres (nominal values) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) : 5. EXHAUST SYSTEM ( 2 ) 6. LUBRICATION SYSTEM 7. OTHER ENGINE DRIVEN AUXILIARIES E 7.2 Additional auxiliaries in operation when test is conducted in a vehicle State characteristics, or make(s) and type(s): E 7.3 Transmission State moment of inertia of combined flywheel and transmission at condition when no gear is engaged ( 4 ) : or description, make(s) and type(s) (for torque converter): 8. ENGINE PERFORMANCE (declared by the manufacturer) Table 1 Declared speeds and powers of the engine/vehicle ( 2 ) submitted for approval (Speeds to be agreed with the test authority) ( 1 ) In the case of non-conventional engine types and systems, particulars equivalent to those referred to here shall be supplied by the manufacturer. ( 2 ) For the engine representative of the type to be approved, a complete data-set shall be supplied. For modified engines, only data which differ from this data-set need to be supplied. ( 3 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( 4 ) Specify the tolerance. ( 5 ) Specify the range if applicable. ( *1 ) Net power according to Annex 10. ( *2 ) See Annex 5(2.2). ANNEX 2 (Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm)) ( 1 ) Communication concerning: either: pursuant to Regulation No 24. Approval No: Extension No: Trade name or mark of the vehicle ( 3 ) : Trade name or mark of engine: Vehicle type ( 3 ) : Engine type: ………… Engine approval No ( 3 ) : Manufacturer's name and address: If applicable, name and address of the manufacturer's representative: Vehicle/engine submitted for approval on ( 2 ) : Technical service responsible for conducting approval tests: Date of report issued by that service: Number of report issued by that service: Test results Emissions ( 2 ) 17.1.1 For engine type approval, power absorbed by the fan during the tests ( 3 ) : ………… kW 17.1.2. Free acceleration tests 17.1.2.1. 17.1.2.2. Corrected absorption value: ………… m -1 Rpm at start: ………… rpm Stated net maximum power ( 3 ) : ………… kW at ………… rpm Make and type of opacimeter: Engine working principle: four-stroke/two-stroke ( 2 ) Number and layout of cylinders: Cylinder capacity: ………… cm 3 Fuel feed: direct injection/indirect injection ( 2 ) Supercharging equipment: YES/NO ( 2 ) Reason(s) for extension of approval: Place: Signature: A list of the documents contained in the approval file transmitted to the administrative service which has granted approval is annexed to this communication. ( 1 ) For ( 1 ) Name of the administration. ( 2 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( 3 ) Complete or enter ‘not applicable’, according to type of approval requested. ( 4 ) The lower limit may be that stated by the manufacturer in accordance with paragraph 6.3.4 of part 1 of this Regulation. ANNEX 3 ARRANGEMENTS OF APPROVAL MARKS Model A (See paragraphs 5.8, 14.8 and 23.8 of this Regulation) 24 R - 032439 a = 8 mm min b = 5 mm min The above approval mark affixed to an engine/vehicle shows that, pursuant to Regulation No 24, the engine/vehicle concerned has, with regard to the emission of visible pollutants by the engine, been approved in the Netherlands (E 4) under approval number 032439; the Regulation, at the time of approval, included already the 03 series of amendments. The corrected absorption coefficient is 1,30 m -1 (in the case of a vehicle approval). Model B (See paragraphs 5.5, 14.5 and 23.5 of this Regulation) 24.1.30 032439 001628 a = 8 mm min The above approval mark affixed to an engine/vehicle shows that the type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E 4), pursuant to Regulations No 24 and No 33 ( *1 ) . The approval numbers indicate that, at the dates when the respective approvals were given, Regulation No 24 included already the 03 series of amendments, but Regulation No 33 was in its original form. ( *1 ) The latter number is given as an example only. ANNEX 4 TEST AT STEADY SPEEDS OVER THE FULL-LOAD CURVE 1. INTRODUCTION 2. MEASUREMENT PRINCIPLE 3. TEST CONDITIONS 3.1 Vehicle or engine 3.2 Fuel The fuel shall be the reference fuel whose specifications are given in Annex 6 to this Regulation. 3.3 Test laboratory 3.4 Sampling and measuring apparatus The light-absorption coefficient of the exhaust gases shall be measured with an opacimeter satisfying the conditions laid down in Annex 8 and installed in conformity with Annex 9 to this Regulation. 4. EVALUATION OF THE ABSORPTION COEFFICIENT ( 1 ) The test may be carried out in air-conditioned test rooms where the atmospheric conditions may be controlled. ANNEX 5 TEST UNDER FREE ACCELERATION 1. TEST CONDITIONS 2. TEST METHODS 3. DETERMINATION OF THE CORRECTED VALUE OF THE ABSORPTION COEFFICIENT Applicable where steady speed absorption coefficient has been effectively established on the same engine derivative. 3.1 Notation ANNEX 6 SPECIFICATIONS OF REFERENCE FUEL PRESCRIBED FOR APPROVAL TESTS AND TO VERIFY CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION Note 1: Equivalent ISO methods will be referred to when issued for all properties listed above. Note 2: The figures quoted show the total evaporated quantities (% recovered + % loss). Note 3: This fuel may be based on straight run and cracked distillates; desulphurisation is allowed. It must not contain any metallic additives. Note 4: The values quoted in the specification are ‘true values’. In establishment of their limit values the terms of ASTM D 3244 ‘Defining a Basis for Petroleum Product Quality Disputes’ have been applied and, in fixing a maximum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; in fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = Reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for statistical reasons, the manufacturer of a fuel should nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value in the case of quotations of maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify the question as to whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specification, the terms of ASTM D 3244 should be applied. Note 5: If it is required to calculate the thermal efficiency of an engine or vehicle, the calorific value of the fuel can be calculated from: specific energy (calorific value) (net) MJ/kg = (46,423 - 8,792 d 2 +3,170 d) (1 — (x + y + s)) +9,420 s -2,499 x where: d is the density at 15 °C x is the proportion by mass of water (% divided by 100) y is the proportion by mass of ash (% divided by 100) s is the proportion by mass of sulphur (% divided by 100). ( 1 ) Initials of the American Society for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race St., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103, United States of America. ANNEX 7 LIMIT VALUES APPLICABLE FOR THE TEST AT STEADY SPEEDS Note: Although the above values are rounded to the nearest 0,01 or 0,005, this does not mean that the measurements need to be made to this degree of accuracy. ANNEX 8 CHARACTERISTICS OF OPACIMETERS 1. SCOPE This Annex defines the conditions to be met by opacimeters used in the tests described in Annexes 4 and 5 to this Regulation. 2. BASIC SPECIFICATION FOR OPACIMETERS 3. CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 3.1 General The design shall be such that under steady-speed operating conditions the smoke chamber is filled with smoke of uniform opacity. 3.2 Smoke chamber and opacimeter casing 3.3 Light source The light source shall be an incandescent lamp with a colour temperature in the range of 2 800 to 3 250 K or a green light-emitting diode (LED) with a spectral peak between 550 and 570 nm. The light source shall be protected against sooting by means that do not influence the optical path length beyond the manufacturer's specifications. 3.4 Receiver 3.5 Measuring scales 3.6 Adjustment and calibration of the measuring apparatus 3.7 Opacimeter response 3.8 Pressure of the gas to be measured and of scavenging air 3.9 Temperature of the gas to be measured 4. EFFECTIVE LENGTH ‘L’ OF THE OPACIMETER 4.1 General 4.2 Method of assessment of L ANNEX 9 INSTALLATION AND USE OF THE OPACIMETER 1. SCOPE This Annex specifies the installation and use of opacimeters for the tests described in Annexes 4 and 5 to this Regulation. 2. SAMPLING OPACIMETER 2.1 Installation for steady-speed tests 2.2 Installation for tests under free acceleration 3. FULL-FLOW OPACIMETER The only general precautions to be observed in steady-speed and free-acceleration tests are the following: ANNEX 10 ‘ECE’ METHOD OF MEASURING THE NET POWER OF C.I. ENGINES 1. PURPOSE These provisions apply to the method for representing the curve of the power at full load of an internal combustion engine as a function of engine speed. 2. SCOPE This method applies to internal combustion engines used for the propulsion of the vehicles covered by this Regulation and Regulation No 15 (E/ECE/324-E/ECE/505/Rev.l/Add.14/Rev.3). The engines belong to one of the following categories: These engines may be naturally aspirated or supercharged. 3. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these provisions, ‘Net power’ means the power obtained on a test bench at the end of the crankshaft or its equivalent ( 1 ) at the corresponding engine speed with the auxiliaries listed in Table 1; ‘Standard production equipment’ means any equipment provided by the manufacturer for a particular engine application. 4. ACCURACY OF MEASUREMENTS 4.1 Torque ± 1 % of measured torque ( 2 ) . 4.2 Engine speed ± 0,5 % of measured speed. 4.3 Fuel consumption ± 1 % of measured consumption 4.4 Fuel temperature ± 2 K 4,5 4.5 Air temperature 4.6 Barometric pressure ± 100 Pa 4.7 Pressure in intake duct (see note 1a to Table 1) ± 50 Pa 4.8 Pressure in exhaust duct (see note lb to Table 1) ± 200 Pa 5. TEST FOR MEASURING NET ENGINE POWER 5.1 Auxiliaries 5.1.1 Auxiliaries to be fitted During the test, the auxiliaries necessary for the engine operation in the intended application (as listed in Table 1) shall be installed on the test bench as far as possible in the same position as in the intended application. 5.1.2 Auxiliaries to be removed Certain vehicle accessories necessary only for the operation of the vehicle and which may be mounted on the engine shall be removed for the test. The following non-exhaustive list is given as a sample. Where accessories cannot be removed, the power they absorb in the unloaded condition may be determined and added to the measured engine power. Table 1 Auxiliaries to be fitted for the test to determine net power of engine 5.1.3 Compression ignition engine starting auxiliaries For the auxiliaries used in starting compression ignition engines, the two following cases shall be considered: In either case, the system for producing and accumulating the energy necessary for starting is fitted and operates in the unloaded condition. 5.2. Setting conditions The setting conditions for the test to determine the net power are indicated in table 2. Table 2 Setting conditions 5.3 Test conditions 5.4 Test procedure Measurements shall be taken at a sufficient number of engine speeds to define correctly the power curve between the lowest and the highest engine speeds recommended by the manufacturer. This range of speeds must include the speed of revolution at which the engine produces its maximum power. The average of at least two stabilised measurements is to be determined. 5.5 Data to be recorded Data to be recorded are those indicated in the appendix to this Annex. 6. POWER CORRECTION FACTORS 6.1 Definition The power correction factor is the coefficient α by which the measured power must be multiplied to determine the engine power under the reference atmospheric conditions specified in paragraph 6.2. P o = α P P o is the corrected power (i.e. power under reference atmospheric conditions) α is the correction factor (α a or α d ) P is the measured power (test power). 6.2 Reference atmospheric conditions 6.3 Test atmospheric conditions The atmospheric conditions during the test shall be the following: 6.3.1 Temperature (T) For positive-ignition engines 288 K ≤ T ≤ 308 K For diesel engines 283 K ≤ T ≤ 313 K 6.3.2 Pressure (P s ) 80 kPa ≤ P s ≤ 110 kPa 6.4 Determination of correction factor α a and α d ( 3 ) 6.4.1 Naturally aspirated or supercharged positive-ignition engine — Factor α a : The correction factor α a is obtained by applying the formula: where: P s is the total dry atmospheric pressure in kilopascals (kPa); that is to say, the total barometric pressure minus water vapour pressure: T is the absolute temperature in Kelvins (K) of the air drawn in by the engine. Conditions to be complied with in the laboratory For a test to be valid, the correction factor α a must be such that 0,93 ≤ α a ≤ 1,07. If these limits are exceeded, the corrected value obtained shall be given and the test conditions (temperature and pressure) precisely stated in the test report. 6.4.2 Diesel engines — Factor α d : The power correction factor (α d ) for diesel engines at constant fuel rate is obtained by applying the formula: α d = ( f a ) fm where: f a is the atmospheric factor; f m is the characteristic parameter for each type of engine and adjustment. 6.4.2.1 Atmospheric factor f a This factor indicates the effects of environmental conditions (pressure, temperature and humidity) on the air drawn in by the engine. The atmospheric factor formula differs according to the type of engines. 6.4.2.3 Conditions to be complied with in the laboratory For a test to be valid, the correction factor α d must be such that 0,9 ≤ α d ≤ 1,1. If these limits are exceeded, the corrected value obtained shall be given and the test conditions (temperature and pressure) precisely stated in the test report. 7. TEST REPORT The test report shall contain the results and all the calculations required to find the net power, as listed in the appendix to this Annex, together with the characteristics of the engine listed in Annex 1 to this Regulation 8. MODIFICATION OF ENGINE TYPE Any modification of the engine with regard to the characteristics listed in Annex 1 to this Regulation must be reported to the competent administration. That administration may then either: 9. TOLERANCES FOR MEASURING THE NET POWER ( 1 ) If power measurement can be carried out only on an engine with the gear-box mounted, the efficiency of the gear-box shall be taken into account. ( 2 ) The torque measuring system shall be calibrated to take friction losses into account. The accuracy in the lower half of the measuring range of the dynamometer bench may be ± 2 per cent of measured torque. ( 1a ) The complete intake system shall be fitted as provided for the intended application: In other cases, an equivalent system may be used and a check should be made to ascertain that the intake pressure does not differ by more than 100 Pa from the limit specified by the manufacturer for a clean air filter. ( 1b ) The complete exhaust system shall be fitted as provided for the intended application: In other cases, an equivalent system may be installed provided the pressure measured at the exit of the engine exhaust system does not differ by more than 1 000 Pa from that specified by the manufacturer. ( 2 ) The exit from the engine exhaust system is defined as a point 150 mm downstream from the termination of the part of the exhaust system mounted on the engine ( 3 ) If an exhaust brake is incorporated in the engine, the throttle valve must be fixed in a fully open positionThe fuel feed pressure may be adjusted, if necessary, to reproduce the pressures existing in the particular engine application (particularly when a ‘fuel return’ system is used). ( 4 ) The air intake valve is the control valve for the pneumatic governor of the injection pump. The governor of the fuel injection equipment may contain other devices which may affect the amount of injected fuel ( 5 ) The radiator, the fan, the fan cowl, the water pump and the thermostat shall be located on the test bench in the same relative positions as on the vehicle. The cooling liquid circulation shall be operated by the engine water pump only. Cooling of the liquid may be produced either by the engine radiator or by an external circuit, provided that the pressure loss of this circuit and the pressure at the pump inlet remain substantially the same as those of the engine cooling system. The radiator shutter, if incorporated, shall be in the open position. Where the fan, radiator and cowl system cannot conveniently be fitted to the engine, the power absorbed by the fan when separately mounted in its correct position in relation to the radiator and cowl (if used), must be determined at the speeds corresponding to the engine speeds used for measurement of the engine power either by calculation from standard characteristics or by practical tests. This power, corrected to the standard atmospheric conditions defined in paragraph 6.2, should be deducted from the corrected power. ( 6 ) Where a disconnectable or progressive fan or blower is incorporated, the test shall be made with the disconnectable Fan (or blower) disconnected or with the progressive fan or blower running at maximum slip. ( 7 ) The thermostat may be fixed in the fully open position. ( 8 ) Minimum power of the generators the power of the generator shall be limited to that necessary for the operation of accessories which are indispensable for the operation of the engine. If the connection of a battery is necessary, a fully charged battery in good order must be used ( 9 ) Charge air-cooled engines shall be tested with charge air cooling, whether liquid- or air-cooled, but if the engine manufacturer prefers, a test bench system may replace the air-cooled cooler. In either case, the measurement of power at each speed shall be made with the same pressure drop and temperature drop of the engine air across the charge air cooler on the test bench system as those specified by the manufacturer for the system on the complete vehicle ( 10 ) They may include, for example, EGR (exhaust gas recirculation) system, catalytic convertor, thermal reactor, secondary air supply system and fuel evaporation protecting system. ( *1 ) European Coordinating Council for the Development of Performance Tests for Lubricants and Engine Fuels. ( 3 ) The tests may be carried out in air-conditioned test rooms where the atmospheric conditions may be controlled. ( 4 ) In the case of engines fitted with automatic air temperature control, if the device is such that at full load at 25 °C no heated air is added, the test shall be carried out with the device fully closed. If the device is still operating at 25 °C then the test is made with the device-operating normally and the exponent of the temperature term in the correction factor shall be taken as zero (no temperature correction). ANNEX 10 Appendix STATEMENT OF THE RESULTS OF TESTS FOR MEASURING NET ENGINE POWER This information is to be supplied by the manufacturer simultaneously with the identification sheet constituting Annex 1 to the Regulation. If the test under this Regulation is a bench test of the engine, this form shall be completed by the laboratory performing the test. 1. Test conditions 1.1 Pressures measured at maximum power 1.2 Temperatures measured at maximum power 1.3 Characteristics of the dynamometer 2. Fuel 2.1 For positive-ignition engines operating on liquid fuel 2.2 For positive-ignition engines operating on gaseous fuel 2.3 For compression-ignition engines operating on gaseous fuels 2.4 For compression-ignition engines operating on liquid fuel 3. Lubricant 4. Detailed results of measurements 4.1 Statements of results of net power measurement test ( *1 ) 4.2 Maximum net powers ………… kW at ………… min -1 4.3 Maximum net torques ………… Nm at ………… min -1 5. Engine submitted for testing on 6. Technical service conducting tests ( 1 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( *1 ) The characteristic curves of the net power and the net torque shall be drawn as a function of the engine speed. ( 2 ) Only for diesel engines. ( 3 ) Strike out what does not apply ( 4 ) Calculated with the net power for compression-ignition and positive ignition engines, in the latter case multiplied by the power correction factor. ( 5 ) If applicable.