COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION of 26 September 2012 on emergency measures to prevent the spread within the Union of Bursaphelenchus xylophilus (Steiner et Buhrer) Nickle et al. (the pine wood nematode) (notified under document C(2012) 6543) (2012/535/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 16(3) fourth sentence thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 2 Surveys in areas in which PWN is not known to occur 1. Member States shall annually conduct surveys for Bursaphelenchus xylophilus (Steiner et Buhrer) Nickle et al. (the pine wood nematode), hereinafter ‘PWN’, on susceptible plants, susceptible wood and bark and on the vector, and determine whether there is any evidence of the presence of PWN in their territory in areas in which PWN was previously not known to occur. Those surveys shall consist of the collection and laboratory testing of samples of susceptible plants, susceptible wood and bark and vectors. The number of samples shall be determined in accordance with sound scientific and technical principles. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission a description of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1 setting out the number of survey sites, the areas to be surveyed and the number of samples to be subjected to laboratory testing each year. That description shall indicate the scientific and technical principles on which those surveys are based. That description shall be communicated to the Commission by 1 March of the year in which the surveys are to be conducted. 3. Each Member State shall communicate the results of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1 to the Commission and to the other Member States by 1 March of the year following the year in which the surveys were conducted. Article 3 Laboratory testing Laboratory testing for the presence of PWN in susceptible plants, susceptible wood and bark and vectors shall be carried out according to the diagnostic protocol for Bursaphelenchus xylophilus provided in EPPO Standard PM7/4(2) ( 5 ) . The methods in that standard may be supplemented or replaced with scientifically validated molecular diagnostic methods shown to have at least a sensitivity and reliability equal to those in the EPPO standard. Article 4 Contingency plans 1. By 31 December 2013 each Member State shall establish a plan setting out the actions to be taken in its territory in accordance with Articles 5 to 16, in case of a confirmed presence or a suspicion of the presence of PWN, hereinafter ‘the contingency plan’. 2. The contingency plan shall set out the following: 3. Member States shall provide for the evaluation and review of their contingency plans. 4. Member States shall communicate their contingency plans to the Commission at its request. Article 5 Demarcated areas 1. Where the results of an annual survey, as provided for in Article 2(1), show the presence of PWN in a susceptible plant in a part of the territory of a Member State in which it was previously not known to occur, or where there is evidence of such a presence by other means, that Member State shall without delay demarcate an area in accordance with paragraph 2, hereinafter ‘the demarcated area’. Where the presence of PWN is found in the vector or in a consignment of susceptible wood, susceptible bark or in wood packaging material, the Member State concerned shall conduct an investigation in the proximity of where the vector was caught or where the susceptible wood, the susceptible bark or the wood packaging material were at the time of the finding. Where the results of that investigation show the presence of PWN in a susceptible plant, subparagraph 1 shall also apply. 2. The demarcated area shall consist of a zone in which PWN was found to be present, hereinafter ‘the infested zone’, and of a zone surrounding the infested zone, hereinafter ‘the buffer zone’. The buffer zone shall be of a width of at least 20 km. Where eradication measures in accordance with Article 6 are applied, the Member State concerned may decide to reduce the width of the buffer zone to no less than 6 km provided that that reduction does not jeopardise eradication. 3. Where PWN is found to be present in a buffer zone, a new demarcated area shall, without delay, be established in accordance with paragraph 1 to take into account that finding. The existing demarcated area may, instead, be amended to take into account that finding where that area is subject to eradication measures in accordance with Article 6. Any evidence of presence of PWN in a buffer zone shall be notified immediately to the Commission and the other Member States. 4. Where PWN is found to be present in the territory of a Member State and the demarcated area would extend into the territory of one or more other Member States, the other Member State or Member States shall, in accordance with paragraph 1, establish a demarcated area or demarcated areas which complete the buffer zone by a buffer zone or buffer zones whose width correspond to the width of the buffer zone in the Member State of the finding. 5. Member States shall communicate the demarcated areas in their territory to the Commission and the other Member States within one month from the date on which PWN was found to be present in the area concerned. That communication shall include a description of the demarcated areas, their location and the names of the administrative entities concerned by the demarcation, accompanied by a map indicating the location of each demarcated area, infested zone and buffer zone. Member States shall communicate amendments to the demarcated areas in their territory to the Commission and the other Member States within one month of that amendment. 6. Where the annual surveys of the susceptible plants and the vector, as set out in point 6 of Annex I, show that no PWN has been found to be present in the demarcated area concerned for the preceding four years, the Member State concerned may decide that that area is no longer demarcated. A Member State in the situation referred to in point 5 of Annex I may decide that the area is no longer demarcated in case the absence of PWN is confirmed by the sampling and testing referred to in point 7 of that Annex. It shall inform the Commission and the other Member States about that decision within one month. 7. The Commission shall establish a list of the demarcated areas and communicate that list to the Member States. That list shall be updated according to the communications received by the Commission pursuant to paragraphs 5 and 6. Article 6 Eradication 1. Member States shall take measures, as set out in Annex I, to eradicate PWN present in demarcated areas in their territory. PWN shall be considered as eradicated where the annual surveys of the susceptible plants and the vector, as set out in point 6 of Annex I, show that in the demarcated area concerned no PWN has been found for the preceding four years, or in case the absence of PWN is confirmed by the sampling and testing referred to in the third subparagraph of point 7 of Annex I. 2. Member States shall ensure that the measures referred to in paragraph 1 are carried out by technically qualified personnel of the responsible official bodies or by any other technically qualified persons acting under the supervision of the responsible official bodies. Article 7 Containment 1. Where the annual surveys of the susceptible plants and the vector, as set out in point 6 of Annex I, show the presence of PWN in a demarcated area during a period of at least four consecutive years and the experience gathered shows that, in the situation concerned, it is impossible to eradicate PWN, the Member State concerned may instead decide to contain PWN within that area. The Member State concerned may, however, before the end of that period, decide to contain PWN, instead of eradicating it, in cases where the diameter of the infested zone exceeds 20 km, there is evidence of the presence of PWN throughout the infested zone and the experience gathered shows that, in the situation concerned, it is impossible to eradicate PWN in that area. Containment measures shall be taken, as set out in Annex II. 2. Where a Member State decides in accordance with paragraph 1 to apply containment measures instead of eradication measures, it shall inform the Commission of that decision setting out its reasons. Where the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 applies, the Commission shall carry out investigations in that Member State to verify whether the conditions provided for in that subparagraph are fulfilled. 3. Demarcated areas subject to containment measures in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be marked as such in the list referred to in Article 5(7). Member States may only apply containment measures in demarcated areas that have been marked in that list as subject to containment of PWN. 4. Member States shall ensure that the measures referred to in paragraph 1 are carried out by technically qualified personnel of the responsible official bodies or by any other technically qualified persons acting under the supervision of the responsible official bodies. Article 8 Information of the operators and the public Where eradication measures in accordance with Article 6 or containment measures in accordance with Article 7 are applied, the Member States concerned shall provide for measures for the information of the operators concerned and of the public. Article 9 Communication on national measures 1. Member States shall, within one month of the notification provided for in the first subparagraph of Article 16(1) of Directive 2000/29/EC of the appearance of PWN in a part of its territory in which its presence was previously unknown, communicate to the Commission and the other Member States the measures that they have taken and those that they have decided to take for the eradication of PWN in accordance with Article 6. 2. Where a Member State takes measures for the eradication of PWN in accordance with Article 6, the communication of the measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the measures concerning the felling, sampling, testing, removal and disposal of susceptible plants, as set out in points 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9 of Annex I, and the design and organisation of the surveys including the number of inspections, samples to be taken and laboratory tests to be carried out, as set out in point 6 of Annex I. Where a Member State takes measures for the containment of PWN in accordance with Article 7, the communication of the measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the measures concerning the felling, sampling, testing, removal and disposal of susceptible plants and the design and organisation of the surveys including the number of inspections, samples to be taken and laboratory tests to be carried out, as set out in points 2 and 3 of Annex II. That communication of the measures shall also include a description of the measures for the information of the operators concerned and the public pursuant to Article 8 and of the checks to be carried out pursuant to Article 11(1). 3. Member States shall communicate to the Commission and the other Member States by 1 March of each year a report of the results of the measures taken pursuant to Articles 6 and 7 in the preceding year. That report shall include the numbers and locations of findings of the presence of PWN, including maps, the number of plants in poor health and dead plants that were identified, felled, sampled and tested, and the outcome of those tests. 4. Member States shall, by 1 March of each year following the notification referred to in paragraph 1, communicate to the Commission and the other Member States the measures that they have decided to take in that year for the eradication of PWN in accordance with Article 6. 5. Where a Member State decides to contain PWN in a demarcated area in accordance with Article 7(1), it shall immediately communicate to the Commission and the other Member States an accordingly revised version of the communication of the measures referred to in paragraph 1. That communication of the measures may cover a period of up to five years in the case of a demarcated area subject to containment measures in accordance with Article 7. Where the communication covers more than one year, the Member States concerned shall communicate to the Commission and the other Member States a revised version of that communication of the measures by 31 October of the year of its expiration. When significant changes to the containment measures are decided, that communication of the measures shall be revised and communicated to the Commission and the other Member States without delay. Article 10 Movement of susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark within the Union 1. Susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark shall only be moved from demarcated areas into areas other than demarcated areas and from infested zones into buffer zones if the conditions, as set out in Section 1 of Annex III, are fulfilled. 2. Susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark shall only be moved within infested zones subject to eradication measures if the conditions, as set out in Section 2 of Annex III, are fulfilled. 3. Member States may restrict the movement of susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark within infested zones subject to containment measures. Article 11 Checks concerning movements from demarcated areas to areas other than demarcated areas and from infested zones to buffer zones 1. Member States shall carry out frequent random checks on susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark being moved from demarcated areas situated in their territory to areas other than demarcated areas and from infested zones situated in their territory to buffer zones. When deciding in a specific case where to carry out the checks, Member States shall base their decision on the risk that the plants or wood and bark to be checked carry live PWN, taking into account the provenance of the consignments, the degree of susceptibility of the plants and wood and bark concerned, and past compliance with this Decision and Decision 2006/133/EC by the operator responsible for the movement. Checks of the susceptible plants and the susceptible wood and bark shall be carried out in the following places: Member States may decide to carry out checks additionally in other places than those referred to in points (a) to (d). Those checks shall include a documentary check as regards the requirements laid down in Section 1 of Annex III, an identity check and, in the case of non-compliance or a suspicion of non-compliance with those requirements, a plant health check which includes testing for the presence of PWN. 2. Member States shall carry out random checks on susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark being moved from demarcated areas situated outside their territory into areas in their territory other than demarcated areas. These checks shall include a documentary check as regards the requirements laid down in Section 1 of Annex III, an identity check and a plant health check which includes testing for the presence of PWN. 3. The results of the checks referred to in paragraph 1 shall be communicated to the Commission and the other Member States on a monthly basis and those referred to in paragraph 2 on an annual basis, by 1 March. Where those checks show that PWN is present in susceptible plants or susceptible wood or bark, the Member State shall immediately notify the Commission and the other Member States of that finding. Article 12 Measures in case of non-compliance with Article 10 Where the checks referred to in Article 11 show that Section 1 or 2 of Annex III is not complied with, the Member State which carried out those checks shall immediately subject the non-compliant material to one of the following measures: Article 13 Authorisation of treatment facilities 1. Member States in whose territory there is a demarcated area shall authorise treatment facilities adequately equipped to carry out one or more of the following tasks, as set out in Annex III: Those facilities are referred to hereinafter as ‘authorised treatment facilities’. 2. Authorised treatment facilities shall ensure the traceability of the treated susceptible wood, bark and wood packaging material. Article 14 Marking authorisation 1. Member States in whose territory there is a demarcated area shall authorise producers of wood packaging material adequately equipped to mark, in accordance with Annex II to the FAO International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures No 15, the wood packaging material they assemble from wood treated by an authorised treatment facility and accompanied by the plant passport referred to in Directive 92/105/EEC. Those producers are referred to hereinafter as ‘authorised wood packaging material producers’. 2. Authorised wood packaging material producers shall exclusively use wood from treatment facilities specifically authorised for this purpose and accompanied by the plant passport referred to in Directive 92/105/EEC for the production of wood packaging material and shall ensure that the wood used for that purpose can be traced back to those treatment facilities. Article 15 Supervision of authorised treatment facilities and authorised wood packaging material producers Member States shall supervise the authorised treatment facilities and the authorised wood packaging material producers to ensure that they correctly perform their tasks, as set out in their authorisation. Member States shall ensure that that supervision is carried out by technically qualified personnel of the responsible official bodies or by any other technically qualified persons acting under the supervision of the responsible official bodies. Article 16 Withdrawal of authorisations of authorised treatment facilities and authorised wood packaging material producers 1. Where the Member State which granted the authorisation becomes aware of the presence of PWN in susceptible wood, bark or wood packaging material treated by an authorised treatment facility, it shall immediately withdraw that authorisation. Where the Member State which granted the authorisation becomes aware of the presence of PWN in susceptible wood packaging material marked by an authorised wood packaging material producer, it shall immediately withdraw that authorisation. 2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, where the Member State which granted the authorisation becomes aware of the fact that an authorised treatment facility or an authorised wood packaging material producer does not correctly perform its tasks, as set out in its authorisation, it shall take the necessary measures to ensure that Articles 13 and 14 are complied with. Article 17 List of authorised treatment facilities and authorised wood packaging material producers 1. Member States shall inform the Commission when they authorise a treatment facility in accordance with Article 13 or a wood packaging material producer in accordance with Article 14 and when they withdraw such an authorisation. 2. The Commission shall establish a list of the authorised treatment facilities and authorised wood packaging material producers and shall transmit that list to the Member States. Part A of that list shall set out the authorised treatment facilities. Part B of that list shall set out the authorised wood packaging material producers. That list shall be updated on the basis of the information received from the Member States. Article 18 Repeal Decision 2006/133/EC is repealed. Article 19 Review This Decision shall be reviewed by 31 July 2015 at the latest. Article 20 Date of application The second sentence of point 2(a) of Section 1 of Annex III and the second sentence of point 2(c) of Section 2 of that Annex shall apply from 1 January 2013. Article 21 Addressees This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 26 September 2012. For the Commission John DALLI Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 52, 23.2.2006, p. 34 . ( 3 ) OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 . ( 4 ) OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7 . ( 5 ) EPPO Bulletin 39(3):344-353. ( 6 ) OJ L 4, 8.1.1993, p. 22 . ANNEX I Eradication measures provided for in Article 6 ANNEX II Containment measures provided for in Article 7 ANNEX III Conditions for movement of susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark within the Union, as provided for in Article 10 SECTION 1 Conditions for movement of susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark from demarcated areas into areas other than demarcated areas and from infested zones into buffer zones SECTION 2 Conditions for movement of susceptible plants and susceptible wood and bark within infested zones subject to eradication measures ( 1 ) Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention (2009), International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures 15: Regulation of wood packaging material in international trade.