COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2018/2026 of 19 December 2018 amending Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 48 thereof. Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 is replaced by the text in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 If the validation of an environmental statement or updated environmental statement is due to be carried out under Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 after the date of entry into force of this Regulation but before 9 January 2020, the statement may on that occasion, in agreement with the environmental verifier and the Competent Body, be validated disregarding the amendment made by Article 1 of this Regulation. If a non-validated updated environmental statement is due to be forwarded to a Competent Body under Article 7(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 after the date of entry into force of this Regulation but before 9 January 2020, the statement may on that occasion, in agreement with the Competent Body, be prepared disregarding the amendment made by Article 1 of this Regulation. Article 3 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 19 December 2018. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 . ‘ANNEX IV ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING A. Introduction Environmental information shall be presented in a clear and coherent manner and should preferably be available in electronic form. The organisation shall determine the best format to make this information available to their interested parties in a user-friendly way. B. Environmental statement The environmental statement shall contain at least the elements and shall meet the minimum requirements as set out below. C. Reporting based on environmental performance indicators and qualitative information 1. Introduction Both, in the environmental statement and the updated environmental statement, organisations shall report on their significant direct and indirect environmental aspects by using the core environmental performance indicators and the specific environmental performance indicators as set out below. In the event that no quantitative data are available, organisations shall report qualitative information as described in point 4. The reporting shall provide data on actual input and output. If disclosure would adversely affect the confidentiality of commercial or industrial information of the organisation where such confidentiality is provided for by national or Community law to protect a legitimate economic interest, the organisation may be permitted to index this information in its reporting, e.g. by establishing a baseline year (with the index number 100) from which the development of the actual input/output would appear. The indicators shall: To support this, the organisation shall briefly define the scope (including the organisational and material boundaries, applicability and calculation methodology) covered by each of the indicator. 2. Core environmental performance indicators 3. Specific environmental performance indicators Each organisation shall also report annually on its performance relating to the significant direct and indirect environmental aspects and impacts that are related to its core business activities, that are measurable and verifiable, and that are not covered already by the core indicators. Reporting on those indicators shall be done in accordance with the requirements set in the introduction to this section. Where available, the organisation shall take account of sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46 to facilitate the identification of relevant sector specific indicators. 4. Reporting on significant environmental aspects based on qualitative information In the event that no quantitative data is available to report on significant direct or indirect environmental aspects, organisations shall report their performance on the basis of qualitative information. D. Local accountability Organisations registering under EMAS may wish to produce one corporate environmental statement, covering a number of different geographic locations. As the intention of EMAS is to ensure local accountability, organisations shall ensure that the significant environmental impacts of each site are clearly identified and reported within the corporate environmental statement. E. Public availability The organisation shall ensure that it is able to demonstrate to the environmental verifier that anybody interested in the organisation's environmental performance can easily and freely obtain access to the information required under section B and C. To provide for such transparency the environmental statement should preferably be publicly available on the website of the organisation. The organisation shall ensure that this information on an individual site or organisation is published in (one of) the official language(s) of the Member State or third country in which the site or the organisation is located. In addition, in the case of a corporate environmental statement, the organisation shall ensure that (for the registration purposes) this information is available in (one of) the official language(s) of the Member State in which the organisation is registered or in (one of) the official language(s) of the Union agreed with the Competent Body responsible for the registration. The environmental statement may also be made available in additional languages provided that the content of the translated document is consistent with the content of the original environmental statement validated by the environmental verifier and that it clearly states that is a translation of the validated document.