COUNCIL DECISION of 1 December 2014 on the position to be taken, on behalf of the European Union, at the Eighth Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents with regard to the proposal for an amendment of Annex I to that Convention (2014/871/EU) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) in conjunction with Article 218(9) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The position to be taken on the Union's behalf at the Eighth Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents shall be to support, in substance, the proposed amendment of Annex I to the Convention including the corrigendum thereto as attached to this Decision. Article 2 The President of the Council is hereby authorised to designate the person(s) empowered to withdraw on behalf of the Union the remaining reservations made pursuant to Decision 98/685/EC ( 3 ) subject to the amendment to Annex I to the Convention referred to in Article 1 of this Decision becoming effective pursuant to Article 26(4) of the Convention. Article 3 This Decision shall enter into force on the date of its adoption. Done at Brussels, 1 December 2014. For the Council The President B. LORENZIN ( 1 ) OJ L 326, 3.12.1998, p. 5 . ( 2 ) Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on the control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances, amending and subsequently repealing Council Directive 96/82/EC ( OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Council Decision 98/685/EC of 23 March 1998 concerning the conclusion of the Convention on the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents ( OJ L 326, 3.12.1998, p. 1 ). DRAFT DECISION AMENDING ANNEX I TO THE CONVENTION Submitted by the Working Group on the Development of the Convention The Conference of the Parties, Recognizing the need to update the categories of substances and mixtures and the named substances and their threshold quantities, as contained in annex I to the Convention on the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents, for the purposes of introducing the criteria of the United Nations Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (ST/SG/AC.10/30/Rev.4) and of maintaining consistency with the corresponding European Union legislation, Bearing in mind its decision to undertake a revision of the hazardous substances and their quantities as contained in annex I and its decision 2004/4 on establishing the Working Group on the Development of the Convention, Acknowledging the proposal to amend annex I, drawn up by the Working Group on the basis of a thorough review, Amends annex I to the Convention on hazardous substances for the purposes of defining hazardous activities by replacing it with the text set out in the annex to this decision. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES FOR THE PURPOSES OF DEFINING HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES ( 1 ) Where a substance or mixture named in Part II also falls within one or more categories in Part I, the threshold quantity given in Part II shall be used. For the identification of hazardous activities, Parties shall take into consideration the actual or anticipated hazardous properties and/or quantities of all hazardous substances present or of hazardous substances which it is reasonable to foresee may be generated during loss of control of an activity, including storage activities, within a hazardous activity. Part I. Categories of substances and mixtures not specifically named in Part II Part II. Named substances Corrigendum ( 1 ) Criteria according the United Nations Globally Harmonized System (GHS) of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (ST/SG/AC.10/30/Rev.4). Parties should use these criteria when classifying substances or mixtures for the purposes of Part I of this annex, unless other legally binding criteria have been adopted in the national legislation. Mixtures shall be treated in the same way as the pure substance, provided they remain within concentration limits set according to their properties in accordance with the GHS unless a percentage composition or other description is specifically given. ( 2 ) According to the criteria in chapters 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 of GHS. ( 3 ) According to the criteria in chapters 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 of GHS. ( 4 ) Substances that fall within acute toxic Category 3 via the oral route shall fall under entry 2 acute toxic in those cases where neither acute inhalation toxicity classification nor acute dermal toxicity classification can be derived, for example due to lack of conclusive inhalation and dermal toxicity data. ( 5 ) Substances that have produced significant toxicity in humans, or that, on the basis of evidence from studies in experimental animals can be presumed to have the potential to produce significant toxicity in humans following single exposure. Further guidance is given in figure 3.8.1. and table 3.8.1 of part 3 of GHS. ( 6 ) Testing for explosive properties of substances and mixtures is only necessary if the screening procedure according to appendix 6, part 3, of the Manual of Tests and Criteria identifies the substance or mixture as potentially having explosive properties. ( 7 ) The hazard class Explosives includes explosive articles. If the quantity of the explosive substance or mixture contained in the article is known, that quantity shall be considered for the purposes of this Convention. If the quantity of the explosive substance or mixture contained in the article is not known, then, for the purposes of this Convention, the whole article shall be treated as explosive. ( 8 ) If Explosives of division 1.4 are unpacked or repacked, they shall be assigned to the entry 4 (Explosive), unless the hazard is shown to still correspond to Division 1.4, in accordance with GHS. ( 9 ) According to the criteria in chapter 2.2.2 of GHS. ( 10 ) Aerosols are classified according to the criteria in Chapter 2.3 of GHS and the Manual of Tests and Criteria, Part III, section 31 referred to therein. ( 11 ) In order to use this entry, it must be documented that the aerosol dispenser does not contain flammable gas Category 1 or 2 nor flammable liquid Category 1. ( 12 ) According to the criteria in chapter 2.4.2 of GHS. ( 13 ) According to the criteria in chapter 2.4.2 of GHS. ( 14 ) Liquids with a flash point of more than 35 °C may be regarded as non-flammable liquids for some regulatory purposes (e.g. transport) if negative results have been obtained in sustained combustibility test L.2, in part III, section 32 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria. This is, however, not valid under elevated conditions such as high temperature or pressure, and therefore such liquids are included in this entry. ( 15 ) According to the criteria in chapter 2.4.2 of GHS. ( 16 ) According to the criteria in chapter 2.4.2 of GHS. ( 17 ) According to the criteria in chapters 2.8.2 and 2.15.2.2 of GHS. ( 18 ) According to the criteria in chapters 2.8.2 and 2.15.2.2 of GHS. ( 19 ) According to the criteria in chapter 4.1.2 of GHS. ( 20 ) According to the criteria in chapter 4.1.2 of GHS. ( 21 ) According to the criteria in chapter 2.12.2 of GHS. ( 22 ) Ammonium nitrate (10 000): fertilizers capable of self-sustaining decomposition. This applies to ammonium nitrate–based compound/composite fertilizers (compound/composite fertilizers containing ammonium nitrate with phosphate and/or potash), which are capable of self-sustaining decomposition according to the Trough Test (see Manual of Tests and Criteria, part III, subsection 38.2), and in which the nitrogen content as a result of ammonium nitrate is: ( 23 ) Ammonium nitrate (5 000): fertilizer grade. This applies to straight ammonium nitrate-based fertilizers and to ammonium nitrate-based compound/composite fertilizers in which the nitrogen content as a result of ammonium nitrate is: ( 24 ) Ammonium nitrate (2 500): technical grade. This applies to: ( 25 ) Ammonium nitrate (50): ‘off-specs’ material and fertilizers not fulfilling the requirements of an appropriate test of resistance to detonation (e.g., 4-inch-steel-tube test). This applies to: ( 26 ) Potassium nitrate (10 000): composite potassium nitrate-based fertilizers (in prilled/granular form) which have the same properties as pure potassium nitrate. ( 27 ) Potassium nitrate (5 000): composite potassium nitrate-based fertilizers (in crystalline form) which have the same hazardous properties as pure potassium nitrate. ( 28 ) Upgraded biogas: for the purpose of the implementation of the Convention, upgraded biogas may be classified under entry 14 of Part 2 of annex I where it has been processed in accordance with applicable standards for purified and upgraded biogas ensuring a quality equivalent to that of natural gas, including the content of methane, and which has a maximum of 1 % oxygen. ( 29 ) Polychlorodibenzofurans and polychlorodibenzodioxins. The quantities of polychlorodibenzofurans and polychlorodibenzodioxins are calculated using the following World Health Organization (WHO) human and mammalian toxic equivalency factors for dioxins and dioxin-like compounds (TEF) as re-evaluated in 2005: WHO 2005 TEF ( 30 ) Provided that the mixture in the absence of sodium hypochlorite would not be classified as aquatic acute, Category 1. ( 31 ) In cases where this dangerous substance falls within the category 10 flammable liquids or 11 flammable liquids, for the purposes of the Convention the lowest qualifying quantities shall apply.