Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2023 and 2024 (2022/C 491/01) Our Union’s resolve and capacity to act are being challenged by Russia’s unprovoked, brutal aggression against Ukraine, marked by shocking violence and mounting evidence of war crimes. The spillover effects of Russia’s assault on the way of life we have long taken for granted means our citizens are feeling less stable today, less secure and less confident in the future. Despite Russia’s efforts to weaken and divide the Union, we remain united, resolute and deeply committed to supporting Ukraine and its people. Our efforts will include military and humanitarian aid, political and financial support, as well as continued access of Ukrainians to EU jobs, housing, education, training and healthcare under the temporary protection mechanism. We will also facilitate Ukraine’s access to the single market and the free roaming area, and support Ukraine’s rehabilitation and reconstruction. To maintain economic pressure and undermine Russia’s military capabilities, we will also ensure the effective and continued implementation of sanctions against Russia. We will support Ukraine and the International Criminal Court in documenting and prosecuting possible war crimes, and we will explore options so that full accountability can be ensured. The consequences of this aggression are also being felt in our immediate neighbourhood, with large numbers of persons being displaced, and globally, with dramatically increased food insecurity. At the moment when we have just begun to recover from the pandemic and are going through the radical transformation to combat other serious challenges such as the climate and nature crises, our citizens are confronted with spiralling electricity prices and rising inflation. We are committed to common EU solutions to tackle this cost-of-living crisis for our citizens and businesses that has been compounded by the war in Ukraine. Following the REPowerEU Plan, the EU swiftly reduced its dependency on Russian energy imports by boosting alternative energy sources, savings and storage. Using our joint market power, accelerating the twin transition in the energy sector and reforming the electricity market design will provide us with structural solutions. In this context, strong priority will be given to ensuring the sustainability of the multiannual financial framework in a new geopolitical and economic situation. We will also work towards introducing sufficient new own resources. We welcome the results of the Conference on the Future of Europe ( 1 ) , which was an inspiring and successful experiment in deliberative democracy. To respond to citizens’ expectations, the institutions will continue to ensure swift and effective follow-up to the recommendations made by the Conference, each within their own sphere of competence. Many Conference proposals have been reflected in the Commission work programme for 2023 and we jointly commit to giving them close attention. With this Joint Declaration, we highlight the key legislative proposals ( 2 ) to which our three institutions will commit their best efforts. Delivery on these priorities will be all the more important in view of the 2024 European elections, when citizens will assess how the EU has responded to its current challenges. This concerns both the legislative proposals already with the co-legislators, and those that the European Commission will have put forward by the end of 2023. The three institutions agree to give the utmost priority in 2023 and until the end of the parliamentary term in 2024 to the following policy objectives: Furthermore, beyond work falling under the ordinary legislative procedure, we declare our commitment: As Presidents of the European Parliament, the Council and the European Commission, we commit our institutions to work on these shared priorities in 2023 and 2024, guided by the fundamental principles of mutual trust, respect, and a collaborative spirit. Europe’s future lies in its ability to adapt with speed, fortitude and unity. We will work together also to ensure proper implementation and enforcement of existing legislation and will closely monitor the timely and effective implementation of this Joint Declaration. Съставено в Брюксел на петнадесети декември две хиляди двадесет и втора година. Hecho en Bruselas, el quince de diciembre de dos mil veintidós. V Bruselu dne patnáctého prosince dva tisíce dvacet dva. Udfærdiget i Bruxelles den femtende december to tusind og toogtyve. Geschehen zu Brüssel am fünfzehnten Dezember zweitausendzweiundzwanzig. Kahe tuhande kahekümne teise aasta detsembrikuu viieteistkümnendal päeval Brüsselis. Έγινε στις Βρυξέλλες, στις δέκα πέντε Δεκεμβρίου δύο χιλιάδες είκοσι δύο. Done at Brussels on the fifteenth day of December in the year two thousand and twenty two. Fait à Bruxelles, le quinze décembre deux mille vingt-deux. Arna dhéanamh sa Bhruiséil, an cúigiú lá déag de mhí na Nollag sa bhliain dhá mhíle fiche a dó. Sastavljeno u Bruxellesu petnaestog prosinca godine dvije tisuće dvadeset druge. Fatto a Bruxelles, addì quindici dicembre duemilaventidue. Briselē, divi tūkstoši divdesmit otrā gada piecpadsmitajā decembrī. Priimta du tūkstančiai dvidešimt antrų metų gruodžio penkioliktą dieną Briuselyje. Kelt Brüsszelben, a kétezer-huszonkettedik év december havának tizenötödik napján. Magħmul fi Brussell, fil-ħmistax-il jum ta’ Diċembru fis-sena elfejn u tnejn u għoxrin. Gedaan te Brussel, vijftien december tweeduizend tweeëntwintig. Sporządzono w Brukseli dnia piętnastego grudnia roku dwa tysiące dwudziestego drugiego. Feito em Bruxelas, em quinze de dezembro de dois mil e vinte e dois. Întocmit la Bruxelles la cincisprezece decembrie două mii douăzeci și doi. V Bruseli pätnásteho decembra dvetisícdvadsaťdva. V Bruslju, petnajstega decembra dva tisoč dvaindvajset. Tehty Brysselissä viidentenätoista päivänä joulukuuta vuonna kaksituhattakaksikymmentäkaksi. Som skedde i Bryssel den femtonde december år tjugohundratjugotvå. ( 1 ) Conference on the Future of Europe – Report on the final outcome, available at ( 2 ) Under the Ordinary Legislative Procedure.