COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2020/1677 of 31 August 2020 amending Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures in order to improve the workability of information requirements related to emergency health response (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 45(4) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Annex VIII to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 is replaced by the text in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the day after its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 31 August 2020. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/542 of 22 March 2017 amending Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures by adding an Annex on harmonised information relating to emergency health response ( OJ L 78, 23.3.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/11 of 29 October 2019 amending Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures as regards information relating to emergency health response ( OJ L 6, 10.1.2020, p. 8 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1676 of 31 August 2020 amending Article 25 of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures as regards bespoke paints (See page 1 of this Official Journal). ‘ANNEX VIII HARMONISED INFORMATION RELATING TO EMERGENCY HEALTH RESPONSE AND PREVENTATIVE MEASURES PART A GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 1. APPLICATION 2. PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS 3. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 4. GROUP SUBMISSION 5. UNIQUE FORMULA IDENTIFIER (UFI) 6. FORMATS AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT FOR SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION PART B INFORMATION CONTAINED IN A SUBMISSION 1. IDENTIFICATION OF THE MIXTURE AND OF THE SUBMITTER 1.1. Product identifier of the mixture The product identifier shall be provided in accordance with Article 18(3)(a). The complete trade name(s) of the mixture shall be provided, including, where relevant, brand name(s), name of the product and variant names as they appear on the label, without abbreviations and enabling its specific identification. In addition, the UFI(s) shall be included in the submission. 1.2. Details of the submitter and contact point The name, full address, telephone number and email address of the submitter shall be provided, and, if different, the name, full address, telephone number and email address of the point of contact to be used for obtaining further information relevant for emergency health response purposes. 1.3. Name, telephone number and email address for rapid access to additional product information In the case of a limited submission as laid down in Section 2.3 of Part A, a name, a telephone number and an email address shall be provided at which rapid access to detailed additional product information relevant for emergency health response purposes is available in the language provided in Section 3.3 of Part A. The telephone number shall be accessible 24 hours per day, 7 days per week. 2. HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION AND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION This Section sets out the information requirements related to the health and physical hazards of the mixture and the appropriate warning information associated with those hazards, as well as the additional information to be included in a submission. 2.1. Classification of the mixture The classification of the mixture for health and physical hazards (hazard class, category and statement) shall be provided in accordance with the classification rules in Annex I. 2.2. Label elements The following label elements required in accordance with Article 17 shall be provided, if applicable: 2.3. Toxicological information The submission shall include the information on the toxicological effects of the mixture or its components that is required in Section 11 of the Safety Data Sheet of the mixture, in accordance with Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. 2.4. Additional information The following additional information shall be provided: 3. INFORMATION ON MIXTURE COMPONENTS 3.1. General requirements The chemical identity and the concentrations of the components contained in the mixture shall be indicated in the submission in accordance with Sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, in the case of a limited submission as laid down in Section 2.3 of Part A, the information to be submitted on the composition of a mixture for industrial use or a mixture with an end use not subject to notification may be limited to the information contained in the Safety Data Sheet in accordance with Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, provided that additional information on the composition is rapidly available on request in emergencies in accordance with Section 1.3. Components which are not present in a mixture shall not be notified. However, if they are notified as part of an interchangeable component group in accordance with Section 3.5 or their concentration has been submitted as a range of percentages in accordance with Sections 3.6 or 3.7, they may be notified if they will certainly be present in the mixture at some point in time. By way of derogation from the third subparagraph, in a group submission, perfume components in mixtures shall be present in at least one of the mixtures For group submissions where the perfumes vary between the mixtures contained in the group, a list shall be provided of the mixtures and the perfumes they contain, including their classification. 3.2. Identification of mixture components A mixture component is either a substance or a mixture in mixture. 3.2.1. Substances The product identifier for the substances identified according to Section 3.3 shall be provided in accordance with Article 18(2). However, an INCI name, a colour index name or another international chemical name may be used, provided the chemical name is well known and unambiguously defines the substance identity. The chemical name of substances for which an alternative chemical name has been allowed in accordance with Article 24 shall be provided as well. 3.2.2. Mixture in mixture When a mixture is used in the composition of a second mixture placed on the market, the first mixture is referred to as a mixture in mixture (“MIM”). Information on the substances contained in a MIM shall be provided in accordance with the criteria of Section 3.2.1, unless the submitter does not have access to information on the full composition of the MIM. In the latter case, 3.2.3. Identification by generic component identifiers By way of derogation from Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2, the generic component identifiers “perfumes”, or “colouring agents” may be used for mixture components used exclusively to add perfume or colour, where the following conditions are met: 3.3. Mixture components subject to submission requirements The following mixture components shall be indicated: 3.4. Concentration and concentration ranges of the mixture components Submitters shall provide the information laid down in Sections 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 with regard to the concentration of the mixture components, identified in accordance with Section 3.3. 3.4.1. Hazardous components of major concern for emergency health response and preventative measures When mixture components are classified in accordance with this Regulation for at least one of the hazard categories listed below, their concentration in the mixture shall be expressed as exact percentages, in descending order by mass or volume. As an alternative to providing concentrations as exact percentages, a range of percentages may be submitted in accordance with Table 1. Table 1 Concentration ranges applicable to hazardous components of major concern for emergency health response 3.4.2. Other hazardous components and components not classified as hazardous The concentration of the hazardous components in the mixture that are not classified for any of the hazard categories listed in Section 3.4.1 and of the identified components not classified as hazardous shall be expressed, in accordance with Table 2, as ranges of percentages in descending order by mass or volume. As an alternative, exact percentages may be provided. Table 2 Concentration ranges applicable to other hazardous components and components not classified as hazardous By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, for perfume components in a group submission that are not classified or only classified for skin sensitisation Category 1, 1A or 1B or aspiration toxicity, submitters shall not be required to provide information on their concentration. 3.5. Grouping of components in an interchangeable component group Components may be grouped in a submission in an interchangeable component group provided that: Alternatively, components that are classified only for skin corrosion, skin irritation, eye damage, eye irritation, aspiration toxicity, or respiratory or skin sensitisation, or a combination thereof, may be grouped in an interchangeable component group provided that: 3.5.1. Name of interchangeable component group and identification of grouped components An interchangeable component group shall be given a name which corresponds to the technical function(s) of the grouped components for which they were incorporated in the mixture. Each component in an interchangeable component group shall be identified in accordance with Section 3.2.1 or 3.2.2, as applicable. 3.5.2. Concentration and concentration ranges of grouped components By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of Section 3.4, for components grouped in an interchangeable component group, submitters shall provide the information laid down in Sections 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 with regard to the total concentration of all components present in the mixture and grouped in the interchangeable component group. When mixture components grouped in an interchangeable component group are classified in accordance with this Regulation for at least one of the hazard categories listed in Section 3.4.1, the total concentration of the components present in the mixture and grouped in the interchangeable component group shall be expressed as exact percentages, in descending order by mass or volume. As an alternative, a range of percentages may be submitted in accordance with Table 1 of that Section. The total concentration of the hazardous components present in the mixture and grouped in an interchangeable component group that are not classified for any of the hazard categories listed in Section 3.4.1, and the total concentration of the identified components present in the mixture and grouped in an interchangeable component group not classified as hazardous, shall be expressed, in accordance with Table 2 of Section 3.4.2, as ranges of percentages in descending order by mass or volume. As an alternative, exact percentages may be provided. 3.6. Mixtures complying with standard formulas By way of derogation from Sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4, for a mixture with a composition conforming with a standard formula specified in Part D, where the mixture classification does not change depending on the components’ concentration within the ranges of percentages specified in the corresponding standard formula: 3.7. Fuels By way of derogation from Sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4, for those fuels listed in Table 3, the identity and concentration of the mixture’s components listed in the Safety Data Sheet in accordance with Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 may be submitted. The identity and concentration of any other known component shall also be submitted. Table 3 List of fuels 3.8. Classification of mixture components The classification for health and physical effects (hazard classes, hazard categories and hazard statements) of substances identified in accordance with Section 3.3 and contained in the mixture shall be provided. This includes the classification for at least all substances, indicated pursuant to Point 3.2.1 of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 in the Safety Data Sheet of the mixture and in the Safety Data Sheet of any MIM contained in the mixture. For MIMs identified in accordance with Section 3.3 where the submitter does not have access to the full composition of the MIM, the classification for health and physical effects of the MIM shall be provided in addition. 4. SUBMISSION UPDATE 4.1. Conditions for submission update Where one of the following changes applies to a mixture in an individual or group submission, submitters shall provide a submission update before placing that mixture, as changed, on the market: By way of derogation from the fourth indent of the first subparagraph, the following shall apply: When perfumes in a group submission change, the list of mixtures and the perfumes they contain as required in Section 3.1 shall be updated. 4.2. Content of the submission update The submission update shall comprise a revised version of the previous submission containing the new information available as described in Section 4.1. PART C SUBMISSION FORMAT 1. SUBMISSION FORMAT 1.1. Submission Format The submission of information to appointed bodies in accordance with Article 45 shall be in a format to be provided by the Agency. The submission format shall address the following elements: 1.2. Identification of the mixture, submitter and contact point Product identifier Contact details of the submitter and contact point Contact details for rapid access to additional product information (24 hours/7 days). Only for limited submission. 1.3. Classification of the mixture, label elements and toxicology Classification of the mixture and label elements Toxicological information Additional information on the mixture 1.4. Information on the mixture components and interchangeable component groups Identification of the mixture components Name of interchangeable component groups (where applicable) Concentration and concentration ranges of the mixture components Classification of mixture components List according to Part B, Section 3.1, fifth subparagraph (where applicable) PART D STANDARD FORMULAS For standard formulas 1-17 the following conditions apply: Note applying to standard formulas 1-17: 1. CEMENT 2. GYPSUM BINDER 3. READY MIXED CONCRETE