COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/2183 of 18 October 2023 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Evonik’s Hydrogen Peroxide Product Family’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0028964-0000 is granted to Evonik Operations GmbH for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘Evonik’s Hydrogen Peroxide Product Family’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 8 November 2023 until 31 October 2033. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 18 October 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 14 June 2022 on the Union authorisation of ‘Evonik’s Hydrogen Peroxide Product Family’ (ECHA/BPC/343/2022), Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Evonik’s Hydrogen Peroxide Product Family Product type 2 – Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Product type 4 – Food and feed area (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0028964-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0028964-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL – META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 – Surface disinfection by vaporised hydrogen peroxide (VHP) process 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use The area to disinfect is prepared for decontamination by removing standing liquid and by wiping down any visible dirt. Clean the area before disinfection. Cupboard doors should be opened, surfaces should be dried and wet areas (such as sinks) should be disinfected with suitable alternative products. Specially trained professionals replace the cap of the sealed packaging with a special cap that has a degassing valve and a fast connector. The fast connector is connected to a pipe that connects to the VHP generator. Seal the enclosed space or room and make sure that access to the vapour-treated area is denied during the whole procedure. Room volume ranging from 30m 3 to 150 m 3 . Diffusion speed can vary from 1,5 to 20 g product/minute. Starting temperature of 20 °C, ± 2 °C. Relative humidity between 40 and 80 %. During the disinfection cycle the VHP generator adjusts the hydrogen peroxide concentration up to the effective levels of 1092 mg/m 3 (780 ppm) and keeps it at this level for at least 4 hours. Concentration of hydrogen peroxide is monitored during the disinfection. After disinfection the aeration of the sealed area is required to reduce the concentration of hydrogen peroxide below 1,25 mg/m 3 or a lower relevant national reference value before entering the area. This step can be quick but can also last several hours resulting in a total decontamination cycle of 5 – 8 hours. The user shall always carry out a microbiological validation of the disinfection in the rooms to be disinfected (or in a suitable ‘standard room’, if applicable) with the devices to be used, after which a protocol for disinfection of these rooms can be made and used thereafter. In the event that there are methods available for chemically monitoring the active substance in the air or on surfaces, chemical validation should be performed besides biological validation, for example with test strips or with a device that measures ppm hydrogen peroxide in the air. When it concerns a ‘standard room’ for which a protocol is available, the validation may be limited to only a chemical validation. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, chemical resistant gloves classified under European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and Respiratory Protective Equipment (RPE) (Assigned Protection Factor (APF) = 10) during mixing and loading. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. No access to the treated area is permitted during treatment. During aeration and before permitting re-entry to the treated area it should be checked that the concentration of hydrogen peroxide is below 1,25 mg/m 3 or a lower relevant national reference value, using for example test strips. During the operation of the VHP generator or in the event of malfunctions, entry to the room is only possible if wearing chemical protective suits and RPE (APF = 10), when the concentration of hydrogen peroxide is at or below 12,5 mg/m 3 . Observe label instructions. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment.See General directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See General directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See General directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Use # 2 – Surface disinfection by vaporised hydrogen peroxide (VHP) process 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use The area to disinfect is prepared for decontamination by removing standing liquid and by wiping down any visible dirt. Clean the area before disinfection. Cupboard doors should be opened, surfaces should be dried and wet areas (such as sinks) should be disinfected with suitable alternative products. Specially trained professionals replace the cap of the sealed packaging with a special cap that has a degassing valve and a fast connector. The fast connector is connected to a pipe that connects to the VHP generator. Seal the enclosed space or room and make sure that access to the vapour-treated area is denied during the whole procedure. Room volume ranging from 30m 3 to 150 m 3 . Diffusion speed can vary from 1,5 to 20 g product/minute. Starting temperature of 20 °C, ± 2 °C. Relative humidity between 40 and 80 %. During the disinfection cycle the VHP generator adjusts the hydrogen peroxide concentration up to the effective levels of 1 092 mg/m 3 (780 ppm) and keeps it at this level for at least 4 hours. Concentration of hydrogen peroxide is monitored during the disinfection. After disinfection the aeration of the sealed area is required to reduce the concentration of hydrogen peroxide below 1,25 mg/m 3 or a lower relevant national reference value before entering the area. This step can be quick but can also last several hours resulting in a total decontamination cycle of 5 – 8 hours. The user shall always carry out a microbiological validation of the disinfection in the rooms to be disinfected (or in a suitable ‘standard room’, if applicable) with the devices to be used, after which a protocol for disinfection of these rooms can be made and used thereafter. In the event that there are methods available for chemically monitoring the active substance in the air or on surfaces, chemical validation should be performed besides biological validation, for example with test strips or with a device that measures ppm hydrogen peroxide in the air. When it concerns a ‘standard room’ for which a protocol is available, the validation may be limited to only a chemical validation. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, chemical resistant gloves classified under European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. No access to the treated area is permitted during treatment. During aeration and before permitting re-entry to the treated area it should be checked that the concentration of hydrogen peroxide is below 1,25 mg/m 3 or a lower relevant national reference value, using for example test strips. During the operation of the VHP generator or in the event of malfunctions entry to the room is only possible by wearing chemical protective suits and RPE (APF = 10), when the concentration of hydrogen peroxide is at or below 12,5 mg/m 3 . Observe label instructions. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Use # 3 – Aseptic packaging in food and feed industries 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use The aseptic filling systems are based on the principle of aseptically forming a tube from a sterilised sheet of package material, which is continuously filled with commercially sterile liquid food product and subsequently transversally sealed to form pouches, which in turn are folded into the final package shape. The packaging material are delivered to the aseptic filling machine either in the form of (sheet) reels or in the form of pre-formed packs, tubs and bottles. Then, 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide is sprayed or nebulised to the packaging material gradually via a nozzle. After that, several stages follow to evaporate any excess hydrogen peroxide with sterile hot air. Depending on the size of the receptacle, an amount of 0,1 – 1 mL of 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide is sprayed or nebulised gradually via a nozzle. Temperature: ≥ 100 °C Contact time: at least 5,5 seconds. For example, for a product containing 49,9 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide; add 700 ml product to 357 ml water to achieve a dilution of 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. The user shall always carry out a microbiological validation of the disinfection, after which a protocol for disinfection of this packaging/system can be made and used thereafter. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, chemical resistant gloves classified under European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) when handling concentrated solutions during mixing and loading; chemical resistant gloves classified under European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, and chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent face shield during application. During maintenance work, wear chemical resistant gloves classified under EN 374 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, chemical resistant goggles consistent with EN 16321 or equivalent face shield and RPE (APF = 4) and spray water for approximately 10 seconds before opening the machine. The instructions for use of the re-filling station specify that the loading operations must take place in a cool and ventilated place. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. Observe label instructions. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Use # 4 – Disinfection of distribution system for drinking water by cleaning in place (CIP) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use CIP (Cleaning in place): Clean before disinfection (Remove all deposits and dirt by a pre-flush or pre-scrape, and when necessary, a pre-soak treatment). Circulate the diluted product through the system under conditions of increased turbulence and flow velocity. After 3 hours contact time, pipelines and tanks are rinsed with water before refilled with drinking water. For disinfection of bacteria, yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide: add 114 ml product to 819 ml water to achieve a dilution of 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent/face shield, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent. and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 air changes per hour (ACH)). Observe label instructions. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.5. Use description Table 5 Use # 5 – Disinfection of non-porous hard surfaces and equipment by immersion 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use For disinfection of bacteria yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 8,1 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide; add 200 ml product to 738 ml water to achieve a dilution of 8,1 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. Immersion: Equipment in the food and feed industry is disinfected by immersion. Pre-clean the equipment. The disinfection solution should be diluted into vats (i.e. pouring or pumping the product into vats). The equipment to be disinfected is manually or automatically placed into these vats (closed baths) and taken out after a contact time of not less than 60 minutes. After the disinfection procedure is completed, equipment is rinsed with water. The disinfection solution in the immersion/dipping bath should be replaced after each disinfection cycle. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading and application. Glove and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. No access of other worker to the room is permitted during disinfection without wearing adequate PPE and RPE as described above. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Dipping bath has to be placed in a separated room. For use only in areas inaccessible to the general public. Professional users without PPE and RPE (APF = 10) are not allowed to enter the disinfection room. Keep the bath closed during disinfection, only open to load and discharge. Observe label instructions. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.6. Use description Table 6 Use # 6 – Disinfection of surfaces by cleaning in place (CIP) 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions for use Clean prior to disinfection. The inner surfaces of pipe work and tank systems are disinfected by CIP process. For disinfection of bacteria yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide; add 114 ml product to 819 ml water to achieve a dilution of 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. The process is carried out by circulating the disinfection solution through the system under conditions of increased turbulence and flow velocity. The application is automated and a closed process. After 3 hours contact time, pipelines and tanks are rinsed with water under closed system conditions as well. 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent/face shield, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Observe label instructions. 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use See use specific instructions for each use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use specific risk mitigation measures for each use. Observe label instructions. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. Information to Healthcare personnel/doctor: Initiate life support measures if needed, thereafter call a POISON CENTRE. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Accidental release measures Large spillage: Collect product in suitable containers (for example made of plastic) using appropriate equipment (for example liquid pump) for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. Keep away from flammable and incompatible substances. Rinse away any residue with plenty of water. Dispose of absorbed material in accordance with the applicable environmental regulations. Small spillage: Dilute product with lots of water and rinse away or absorb with liquid-binding material (for example diatomaceous earth or universal binder). Pick up mechanically and collect in suitable containers. Clean contaminated surface thoroughly. Pack and label wastes like the product. Do not detach label from the delivery containers prior to disposal. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Advice on protection against fir e and explosion: Storage: Advice on common storage: Shelf-life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in the “Use-specific mitigation measures” sections are: The Council Directive referenced in the “Use-specific mitigation measures” sections is: Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) ( OJ L 131, 5.5.1998[RMJ1], p. 11 ). 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 7 Use # 1 – Aseptic packaging in food and feed industries 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use The aseptic filling systems are based on the principle of aseptically forming a tube from a sterilised sheet of package material, which is continuously filled with commercially sterile liquid food product and subsequently transversally sealed to form pouches, which in turn are folded into the final package shape. The packaging material are delivered to the aseptic filling machine either in the form of (sheet) reels or in the form of pre-formed packs, tubs and bottles. The packaging material in the form of (sheet) reels passes through a deep bath filled with 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide by dipping. The pre-formed packs, tubs and bottles are sprayed or fogged with 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide stepwise via a nozzle. After that, several stages follow to evaporate any excess hydrogen peroxide with sterile hot air. Depending on the size of the receptacle, an amount of 0,1 – 1 mL of 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide is sprayed or nebulized gradually via a nozzle. Temperature: ≥ 100 °C Contact time: at least 5,5 seconds The packaging material in the form of (sheet) reels passes through a deep bath filled with 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide by dipping. Temperature: ≥ 80 °C Contact time: at least 2,5 seconds For example, for a product containing 49,9 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide; add 700 ml product to 357 ml water to achieve a dilution of 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. The user shall always carry out a microbiological validation of the disinfection, after which a protocol for disinfection of this packaging/system can be made and used thereafter. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, chemical resistant gloves classified under European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) when handling concentrated solutions during mixing and loading; chemical resistant gloves classified under European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, and chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent face shield during application. During maintenance work, wear chemical resistant gloves classified under EN 374 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal products, chemical resistant goggles consistent with EN 16321 or equivalent face shield and RPE (APF = 4) and spray water for approximately 10 seconds before opening the machine. The instructions for use of the re-filling station specify that the loading operations must take place in a cool and ventilated place. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. Observe label instructions. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. The instructions for use of the re-filling station specify that the loading operations must take place in a cool and ventilated place. Observe label instructions. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 8 Use # 2 – Disinfection of distribution system for drinking water by cleaning in place (CIP) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use CIP (Cleaning in place): Clean prior to disinfection. Circulate the diluted product through the system under conditions of increased turbulence and flow velocity. After 3 hours contact time, pipelines and tanks are rinsed with water before refilled with drinking water. For disinfection of bacteria, yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide: add 114 ml product to 819 ml water to achieve a dilution of 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent/face shield, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Observe label instructions. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 9 Use # 3 – Disinfection of non-porous hard surfaces and equipment by immersion 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use For disinfection of bacteria yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 8,1 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide: add 200 ml product to 738 ml water to achieve a dilution of 8,1 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. Immersion: Equipment in the food and feed industry is disinfected by immersion. Pre-clean the equipment. The disinfection solution should be diluted into vats (i.e. pouring or pumping the product into vats). The equipment to be disinfected is manually or automatically placed into these vats (closed baths) and taken out after a contact time of at least 60 minutes. After the disinfection procedure is completed, equipment is rinsed with water. The disinfection solution in the immersion/dipping bath should be replaced after each disinfection cycle. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent/face shield, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading and application. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. No access of other worker to the room is permitted during disinfection without wearing adequate PPE and RPE as described above. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Dipping bath has to be placed in a separate room. For use only in areas inaccessible to the general public. Professional users without PPE and RPE (APF = 10) are not allowed to enter the disinfection room. Keep the bath closed during disinfection, only open to load and discharge. Observe label instructions. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 10 Use # 4 – Disinfection of surfaces by cleaning in place (CIP) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Clean prior to disinfection. For disinfection of bacteria yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide; add 114 ml product to 819 ml water to achieve a dilution of 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. The process is carried out by circulating the disinfection solution through the system under conditions of increased turbulence and flow velocity. The application is automated and a closed process. After 3 hours contact time, pipelines and tanks are rinsed with water under closed system conditions as well. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. Gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Observe label instructions 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use See use specific instructions for each use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use specific risk mitigation measures for each use. Observe label instructions. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. Information to Healthcare personnel/doctor: Initiate life support measures if needed, thereafter call a POISON CENTRE. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Accidental release measures Large spillage: Collect product in suitable containers (e.g. made of plastic) using appropriate equipment (e.g. liquid pump) for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. Keep away from flammable and incompatible substances. Rinse away any residue with plenty of water. Dispose of absorbed material in accordance with the applicable environmental regulations. Small spillage: Dilute product with lots of water and rinse away or absorb with liquid-binding material (e.g. diatomaceous earth or universal binder). Pick up mechanically and collect in suitable containers. Clean contaminated surface thoroughly. Pack and label wastes like the product. Do not detach label from the delivery containers prior to disposal 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose of unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Advice on protection against fir e and explosion: Storage: Temperature requirement- during storage maximum 40 °C and protect from frost. Store in clean, dry and well-ventilated places. Transport and store container in upright position only. Always close container tightly after removal of product. Avoid leakage and residues of the product on the containers. Advice on common storage: Do not store together with alkalis, reductants, metallic salts (risk of decomposition). Do not store together with organic solvents (risk of explosion). Shelf-life: 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in the “Use-specific mitigation measures” sections are: EN 16321 – Eye and face protection for occupational users EN 374 – Protective gloves against chemicals and micro-organisms The Council Directive referenced in the “Use-specific mitigation measures” sections is: Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) ( OJ L 131, 5.5.1998[RMJ1], p. 11 ). 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 11 Use # 1 – Laundry disinfection in closed washing machines by dosing 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use The product and alkaline buffering agent (BEIPUR ANP) are automatically dosed into the closed washing machine during the washing process. The dosing of both components, i.e. the biocidal product and the alkaline buffering agent BEIPUR ANP, is realised via two separate pipes and dosing stations. Biocidal product and alkaline buffering agent should not be mixed prior the dosing into the washing machine. Treatment Interval – daily/if required (0,5 hours/day). 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. Glove and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Observe label instructions. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 12 Use # 2 – Disinfection of distribution system for drinking water by cleaning in place (CIP) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use CIP (Cleaning in place): Clean prior to disinfection. Circulate the diluted product through the system under conditions of increased turbulence and flow velocity. After 3 hours contact time, pipelines and tanks are rinsed with water before refilled with drinking water. For disinfection of bacteria, yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide: add 114 ml product to 819 ml water to achieve a dilution of 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. Glove and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Observe label instructions. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 13 Use # 3 – Disinfection of non-porous hard surfaces and equipment by immersion 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use For disinfection of bacteria yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 8,1 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide: add 200 ml product to 738 ml water to achieve a dilution of 8,1 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. Immersion: Equipment in the food and feed industry is disinfected by immersion. Pre-clean the equipment. The disinfection solution should be diluted into vats (i.e. pouring or pumping the product into vats). The equipment to be disinfected is manually or automatically placed into these vats (closed baths) and taken out after a contact time of not less than 60 minutes. After the disinfection procedure is completed, equipment is rinsed with water. The disinfection of the immersion/dipping bath should be replaced after each disinfection cycle. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading and application. Glove and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. No access to the room is permitted during disinfection without wearing adequate PPE and RPE as described above. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Dipping bath has to be placed in a separate room. For use only in areas inaccessible to the general public. Professional users without PPE and RPE (APF = 10) are not allowed to enter the disinfection room. Keep the bath closed during disinfection, only open to load and discharge. Observe label instructions. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 14 Use # 4 – Disinfection of surfaces by cleaning in place (CIP) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Clean prior to disinfection. The inner surfaces of pipe work and tank systems are disinfected by CIP process. For disinfection of bacteria yeasts and fungi the product should be diluted to 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For example, for a product containing 35 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide: add 114 ml product to 819 ml water to achieve a dilution of 4,7 % (w/w) hydrogen peroxide. For products with different concentrations of hydrogen peroxide the values have to be adjusted accordingly. The process is carried out by circulating the disinfection solution through the system under conditions of increased turbulence and flow velocity. The application is automated and a closed process. After 3 hours contact time, pipelines and tanks are rinsed with water under closed system conditions as well. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear chemical resistant goggles consistent with European Standard EN 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN 374 or equivalent, face shield and RPE (APF = 10) during mixing and loading. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. Glove and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to Council Directive 98/24/EC. Technical RMM: Local exhaust ventilation (50 %) and good standard of general ventilation (3 ACH). Observe label instructions 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment No use specific first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment. See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging No use specific instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging. See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage No use specific instructions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage. See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use See use specific instructions for each use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use specific risk mitigation measures for each use. Observe label instructions. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. Information to Healthcare personnel/doctor: Initiate life support measures if needed, thereafter call a POISON CENTRE. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Accidental release measures Large spillage: Collect product in suitable containers (for example made of plastic) using appropriate equipment (for exampl liquid pump) for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. Keep away from flammable and incompatible substances. Rinse away any residue with plenty of water. Dispose of absorbed material in accordance with the applicable environmental regulations. Small spillage: Dilute product with lots of water and rinse away or absorb with liquid-binding material (for example diatomaceous earth or universal binder). Pick up mechanically and collect in suitable containers. Clean contaminated surface thoroughly. Pack and label wastes like the product. Do not detach label from the delivery containers prior to disposal 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose of unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Advice on protection against fire and explosion Store away from direct sunlight and heat sources. Store away from sources of ignition – No smoking. Store away from flammable substances. Store away from incompatible substances. Storage Temperature requirement- during storage maximum 40 °C and protect from frost. Store in clean, dry and well- ventilated places. Transport and store container in upright position only. Always close container tightly after removal of product. Avoid leakage and residues of the product on the containers. Advice on common storage Do not store together with alkalis, reductants, metallic salts (risk of decomposition). Do not store together with organic solvents (risk of explosion). Shelf-life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in the “Use-specific mitigation measures” sections are: The Council Directive referenced in the “Use-specific mitigation measures” sections is: Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) ( OJ L 131, 5.5.1998[RMJ1], p. 11 ). 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)