DIRECTIVE 2010/40/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 7 July 2010 on the framework for the deployment of Intelligent Transport Systems in the field of road transport and for interfaces with other modes of transport (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 91 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having consulted the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Directive establishes a framework in support of the coordinated and coherent deployment and use of Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) within the Union, in particular across the borders between the Member States, and sets out the general conditions necessary for that purpose. 2. This Directive provides for the development of specifications for actions within the priority areas referred to in Article 2, as well as for the development, where appropriate, of necessary standards. 3. This Directive shall apply to ITS applications and services in the field of road transport and to their interfaces with other modes of transport without prejudice to matters concerning national security or necessary in the interest of defence. Article 2 Priority areas 1. For the purpose of this Directive the following shall constitute priority areas for the development and use of specifications and standards: 2. The scope of the priority areas is specified in Annex I. Article 3 Priority actions Within the priority areas the following shall constitute priority actions for the development and use of specifications and standards, as set out in Annex I: Article 4 Definitions For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply: Article 5 Deployment of ITS 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the specifications adopted by the Commission in accordance with Article 6 are applied to ITS applications and services, when these are deployed, in accordance with the principles in Annex II. This is without prejudice to the right of each Member State to decide on its deployment of such applications and services on its territory. This right is without prejudice to any legislative act adopted under the second subparagraph of Article 6(2). 2. Member States shall also make efforts to cooperate in respect of the priority areas, insofar as no specifications have been adopted. Article 6 Specifications 1. The Commission shall first adopt the specifications necessary to ensure the compatibility, interoperability and continuity for the deployment and operational use of ITS for the priority actions. 2. The Commission shall aim at adopting specifications for one or more of the priority actions by 27 February 2013. At the latest 12 months after the adoption of the necessary specifications for a priority action, the Commission shall, where appropriate, after conducting an impact assessment including a cost-benefit analysis, present a proposal to the European Parliament and the Council in accordance with Article 294 of the TFEU on the deployment of that priority action. 3. Once the necessary specifications for the priority actions have been adopted, the Commission shall adopt specifications ensuring compatibility, interoperability and continuity for the deployment and operational use of ITS for other actions in the priority areas. 4. Where relevant, and depending on the area covered by the specification, the specification shall include one or more of the following types of provisions: 5. Without prejudice to the procedures under Directive 98/34/EC the specifications shall, where appropriate, stipulate the conditions in which Member States may, after notification to the Commission, establish additional rules for the provision of ITS services on all or part of their territory, provided that those rules do not hinder interoperability. 6. The specifications shall, where appropriate, be based on any standards referred to in Article 8. The specifications shall, as appropriate, provide for conformity assessment in accordance with Decision No 768/2008/EC. The specifications shall comply with the principles set out in Annex II. 7. The Commission shall conduct an impact assessment including a cost-benefit analysis prior to the adoption of the specifications. Article 7 Delegated acts 1. The Commission may adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of the TFEU as regards specifications. When adopting such delegated acts the Commission shall act in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Directive, in particular Article 6 and Annex II. 2. A separate delegated act shall be adopted for each of the priority actions. 3. For the delegated acts referred to in this Article, the procedure set out in Articles 12, 13 and 14 shall apply. Article 8 Standards 1. The necessary standards to provide for interoperability, compatibility and continuity for the deployment and operational use of ITS shall be developed in the priority areas and for the priority actions. To that effect, the Commission, after having consulted the Committee referred to in Article 15, shall request the relevant standardisation bodies in accordance with the procedure laid down in Directive 98/34/EC to make every necessary effort to adopt these standards rapidly. 2. When issuing a mandate to the standardisation bodies, the principles set out in Annex II shall be observed as well as any functional provision included in a specification adopted in accordance with Article 6. Article 9 Non-binding measures The Commission may adopt guidelines and other non-binding measures to facilitate Member States' cooperation relating to the priority areas in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 15(2). Article 10 Rules on privacy, security and re-use of information 1. Member States shall ensure that the processing of personal data in the context of the operation of ITS applications and services is carried out in accordance with Union rules protecting fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals, in particular Directive 95/46/EC and Directive 2002/58/EC. 2. In particular, Member States shall ensure that personal data are protected against misuse, including unlawful access, alteration or loss. 3. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, in order to ensure privacy, the use of anonymous data shall be encouraged, where appropriate, for the performance of the ITS applications and services. Without prejudice to Directive 95/46/EC personal data shall only be processed insofar as such processing is necessary for the performance of ITS applications and services. 4. With regard to the application of Directive 95/46/EC and in particular where special categories of personal data are involved, Member States shall also ensure that the provisions on consent to the processing of such personal data are respected. 5. Directive 2003/98/EC shall apply. Article 11 Rules on liability Member States shall ensure that issues related to liability, concerning the deployment and use of ITS applications and services set out in specifications adopted in accordance with Article 6, are addressed in accordance with Union law, including in particular Council Directive 85/374/EEC of 25 July 1985 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning liability for defective products ( 17 ) as well as relevant national legislation. Article 12 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt the delegated acts referred to in Article 7 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of seven years following 27 August 2010. The Commission shall make a report in respect of the delegated powers no later than six months before the end of a five year period following 27 August 2010. 2. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 3. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in Articles 13 and 14. Article 13 Revocation of the delegation 1. The delegation of powers referred to in Article 7 may be revoked by the European Parliament or by the Council. 2. The institution which has commenced an internal procedure for deciding whether to revoke the delegation of powers shall endeavour to inform the other institution and the Commission within a reasonable time before the final decision is taken, indicating the delegated powers which could be subject to revocation and possible reasons for a revocation. 3. The decision of revocation shall put an end to the delegation of the powers specified in that decision. It shall take effect immediately or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of the delegated acts already in force. It shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 14 Objections to delegated acts 1. The European Parliament or the Council may object to a delegated act within a period of two months from the date of notification. At the initiative of the European Parliament or the Council this period shall be extended by two months. 2. If, on expiry of that period, neither the European Parliament nor the Council has objected to the delegated act, it shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and shall enter into force on the date stated therein. The delegated act may be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and enter into force before the expiry of that period if the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission of their intention not to raise objections. 3. If the European Parliament or the Council objects to a delegated act, it shall not enter into force. The institution which objects shall state the reasons for objecting to the delegated act. Article 15 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the European ITS Committee (EIC). 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 3 and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. Article 16 European ITS Advisory Group The Commission shall establish a European ITS Advisory Group to advise it on business and technical aspects of the deployment and use of ITS in the Union. The group shall be composed of high level representatives from relevant ITS service providers, associations of users, transport and facilities operators, manufacturing industry, social partners, professional associations, local authorities and other relevant fora. Article 17 Reporting 1. Member States shall submit to the Commission by 27 August 2011 a report on their national activities and projects regarding the priority areas. 2. Member States shall provide the Commission by 27 August 2012 with information on national ITS actions envisaged over the following five year period. Guidelines for reporting by the Member States shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 15(2). 3. Following the initial report, Member States shall report every three years on the progress made in the deployment of the actions referred to in paragraph 1. 4. The Commission shall submit a report every three years to the European Parliament and to the Council on the progress made for the implementation of this Directive. The report shall be accompanied by an analysis on the functioning and implementation, including the financial resources used and needed, of Articles 5 to 11 and Article 16, and shall assess the need to amend this Directive, where appropriate. 5. In accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 15(2), the Commission shall adopt a working program by 27 February 2011. The working program shall include objectives and dates for its implementation every year and if necessary shall propose the necessary adaptations. Article 18 Transposition 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 27 February 2012. When Member States adopt those provisions, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference, and its wording, shall be laid down by Member States. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 19 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 20 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 7 July 2010. For the European Parliament The President J. BUZEK For the Council The President O. CHASTEL ( 1 ) OJ C 277, 17.11.2009, p. 85 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 23 April 2009 (not yet published in the Official Journal), position of the Council of 10 May 2010 (not yet published in the Official Journal), position of the European Parliament of 6 July 2010 (not yet published in the Official Journal). ( 3 ) OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31 . ( 4 ) OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p. 37 . ( 5 ) OJ L 345, 31.12.2003, p. 90 . ( 6 ) OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 82 . ( 7 ) OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1 . ( 8 ) OJ L 124, 9.5.2002, p. 1 . ( 9 ) OJ L 171, 9.7.2003, p. 1 . ( 10 ) OJ L 3, 5.1.2005, p. 1 . ( 11 ) OJ L 196, 24.7.2008, p. 1 . ( 12 ) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 . ( 13 ) OJ L 166, 30.4.2004, p. 124 . ( 14 ) OJ L 370, 31.12.1985, p. 8 . ( 15 ) OJ L 108, 25.4.2007, p. 1 . ( 16 ) OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37 . ( 17 ) OJ L 210, 7.8.1985, p. 29 . ANNEX I PRIORITY AREAS AND ACTIONS (as referred to in Articles 2 and 3) — Priority area I: Optimal use of road, traffic and travel data The specifications and standards for an optimal use of road, traffic and travel data shall include the following: 1. Specifications for priority action (a) The definition of the necessary requirements to make EU-wide multimodal travel information services accurate and available across borders to ITS users, based on: 2. Specifications for priority action (b) The definition of the necessary requirements to make EU-wide real-time traffic information services accurate and available across borders to ITS users, based on: 3. Specifications for priority actions (a) and (b) 4. Specifications for priority action (c) The definition of minimum requirements, for road safety related ‘universal traffic information’ provided, where possible, free of charge to all users, as well as their minimum content, based on: — Priority area II: Continuity of traffic and freight management ITS services The specifications and standards for the continuity and interoperability of traffic and freight management services, in particular on the TEN-T network, shall include the following: 1. Specifications for other actions — Priority area III: ITS road safety and security applications The specifications and standards for ITS road safety and security applications shall include the following: — Priority area IV: Linking the vehicle with the transport infrastructure The specifications and standards for linking vehicles with the transport infrastructure shall include the following: ANNEX II PRINCIPLES FOR SPECIFICATIONS AND DEPLOYMENT OF ITS (as referred to in Articles 5, 6 and 8) The adoption of specifications, the issuing of mandates for standards and the selection and deployment of ITS applications and services shall be based upon an evaluation of needs involving all relevant stakeholders, and shall comply with the following principles. These measures shall: (a) Be effective – make a tangible contribution towards solving the key challenges affecting road transportation in Europe (e.g. reducing congestion, lowering of emissions, improving energy efficiency, attaining higher levels of safety and security including vulnerable road users); (b) Be cost-efficient – optimise the ratio of costs in relation to output with regard to meeting objectives; (c) Be proportionate – provide, where appropriate, for different levels of achievable service quality and deployment, taking into account the local, regional, national and European specificities; (d) Support continuity of services – ensure seamless services across the Union, in particular on the trans-European network, and where possible at its external borders, when ITS services are deployed. Continuity of services should be ensured at a level adapted to the characteristics of the transport networks linking countries with countries, and where appropriate, regions with regions and cities with rural areas; (e) Deliver interoperability – ensure that systems and the underlying business processes have the capacity to exchange data and to share information and knowledge to enable effective ITS service delivery; (f) Support backward compatibility – ensure, where appropriate, the capability for ITS systems to work with existing systems that share a common purpose, without hindering the development of new technologies; (g) Respect existing national infrastructure and network characteristics – take into account the inherent differences in the transport network characteristics, in particular in the sizes of the traffic volumes and in road weather conditions; (h) Promote equality of access – do not impede or discriminate against access to ITS applications and services by vulnerable road users; (i) Support maturity – demonstrate, after appropriate risk assessment, the robustness of innovative ITS systems, through a sufficient level of technical development and operational exploitation; (j) Deliver quality of timing and positioning – use of satellite-based infrastructures, or any technology providing equivalent levels of precision for the purposes of ITS applications and services that require global, continuous, accurate and guaranteed timing and positioning services; (k) Facilitate inter-modality – take into account the coordination of various modes of transport, where appropriate, when deploying ITS; (l) Respect coherence – take into account existing Union rules, policies and activities which are relevant in the field of ITS, in particular in the field of standardisation.