REGULATION (EC) No 595/2009 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 18 June 2009 on type-approval of motor vehicles and engines with respect to emissions from heavy duty vehicles (Euro VI) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information and amending Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 and Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directives 80/1269/EEC, 2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 95 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes common technical requirements for the type-approval of motor vehicles, engines and replacement parts with regard to their emissions. This Regulation also lays down rules for in-service conformity of vehicles and engines, durability of pollution control devices, OBD systems, measurement of fuel consumption and CO 2 emissions and accessibility of vehicle OBD and vehicle repair and maintenance information. Article 2 This Regulation shall apply to motor vehicles of categories M 1 , M 2 , N 1 and N 2 as defined in Annex II of Directive 2007/46/EC with a reference mass exceeding 2 610 kg and to all motor vehicles of categories M 3 and N 3 , as defined in that Annex. This Regulation shall apply without prejudice to Article 2(2) of Regulation (EC) No 715/2007. At the request of the manufacturer, the type-approval of a completed vehicle granted under this Regulation and its implementing measures shall be extended to its incomplete vehicle with a reference mass not exceeding 2 610 kg. Type-approvals shall be extended if the manufacturer can demonstrate that all bodywork combinations expected to be built onto the incomplete vehicle increase the reference mass of the vehicle to above 2 610 kg. At the request of the manufacturer, the type-approval of a vehicle granted under this Regulation and its implementing measures shall be extended to its variants and versions with a reference mass exceeding 2 380 kg provided that it also meets the requirements relating to the measurement of greenhouse gas emissions and fuel consumption established in Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 and its implementing measures. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: The Commission may adapt the definition in point 7 of the first subparagraph to reflect technical progress in OBD systems. That measure, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2). Article 4 Obligations of the manufacturers 1. Manufacturers shall demonstrate that all new vehicles sold, registered or put into service within the Community, all new engines sold or put into service within the Community and all new replacement pollution control devices requiring type-approval pursuant to Articles 8 and 9, which are sold or put into service within the Community, are type-approved in accordance with this Regulation and its implementing measures. 2. Manufacturers shall ensure that type-approval procedures for verifying conformity of production, durability of pollution control devices and in-service conformity are followed. The technical measures taken by the manufacturer shall be such as to ensure that the tailpipe emissions are effectively limited, pursuant to this Regulation and its implementing measures, throughout the normal life of the vehicles under normal conditions of use. For that purpose, the mileage and period of time by reference to which the tests for durability of pollution control devices undertaken for type-approval and testing of conformity of in-service vehicles or engines are to be carried out shall be the following: 3. The Commission shall establish specific procedures and requirements for the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2). Article 5 Requirements and tests 1. Manufacturers shall ensure compliance with the emission limits set out in Annex I. 2. Manufacturers shall equip vehicles and engines so that the components likely to affect emissions are designed, constructed and assembled so as to enable the vehicle or engine, in normal use, to comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures. 3. The use of defeat strategies that reduce the effectiveness of emission control equipment shall be prohibited. 4. The Commission shall adopt measures for the implementation of this Article including measures in relation to the following: Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2). Article 6 Access to information 1. Manufacturers shall provide unrestricted and standardised access to vehicle OBD information, diagnostic and other equipment, tools including any relevant software and vehicle repair and maintenance information to independent operators. Manufacturers shall provide a standardised, secure and remote facility to enable independent repairers to complete operations which involve access to the vehicle security system. In the case of multi-stage type-approval, the manufacturer responsible for the respective type-approval shall also be responsible for communicating repair information relating to the particular stage to both the final manufacturer and independent operators. The final manufacturer shall be responsible for communicating information about the whole vehicle to independent operators. Articles 6 and 7 of Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 shall apply mutatis mutandis . Until the adoption of the relevant standard, for example through the work of CEN, the vehicle OBD and vehicle repair and maintenance information shall be presented in an easily accessible, non-discriminatory manner. That information shall be made available on the websites of manufacturers, or, if this is not feasible due to the nature of the information, in another appropriate format. 2. The Commission shall establish and update, for the implementation of paragraph 1, the appropriate technical specifications relating to the way in which vehicle OBD and vehicle repair and maintenance information shall be provided. The Commission shall take into account current information technology, foreseeable vehicle technology developments, existing ISO standards and the possibility of a worldwide ISO standard. The Commission may adopt other measures necessary for the implementation of paragraph 1. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2). Article 7 Obligations concerning systems using a consumable reagent 1. Manufacturers, repairers and operators of the vehicles shall not tamper with systems which use a consumable reagent. 2. Operators of the vehicles shall ensure that vehicles are not being driven without a consumable reagent. Article 8 Timetable for application of type-approval of vehicles and engines 1. With effect from 31 December 2012, national authorities shall refuse, on grounds relating to emissions, to grant EC type-approval or national type-approval in respect of new types of vehicles or engines which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures. Type-approval technical certificates corresponding to the emission stages prior to Euro VI may be granted to vehicles and engines intended for export to third countries, provided such certificates clearly state that the vehicles and engines in question cannot be placed on the Community market. 2. With effect from 31 December 2013, national authorities shall, in the case of new vehicles which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures, consider certificates of conformity to be no longer valid for the purposes of Article 26 of Directive 2007/46/EC and shall, on grounds relating to emissions, prohibit the registration, sale and entry into service of such vehicles. With effect from the same date and except in the case of replacement engines for in-service vehicles, national authorities shall prohibit the sale or use of new engines which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures. 3. Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, and subject to entry into force of the implementing measures referred to in Article 4(3), Article 5(4) and in the first subparagraph of Article 6(2), if a manufacturer so requests, national authorities may not, on grounds relating to emissions of vehicles, refuse to grant EC type-approval or national type-approval for a new type of vehicle or engine, or prohibit the registration, sale or entry into service of a new vehicle and the sale or use of new engines, where the vehicle or engines concerned comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures. Article 9 Obligations of Member States concerning type-approval of replacement parts The sale or installation on a vehicle of new replacement pollution control devices intended to be fitted on vehicles approved under this Regulation and its implementing measures shall be prohibited if they are not of a type in respect of which a type-approval has been granted in compliance with this Regulation and its implementing measures. Article 10 Financial incentives 1. Subject to the entry into force of the implementing measures to this Regulation, Member States may provide for financial incentives that apply to motor vehicles in series production, which comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures. Those incentives shall apply to all new vehicles put on the market of the Member State concerned, which comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures. However, they shall cease to apply on 31 December 2013 at the latest. 2. Subject to the entry into force of the implementing measures to this Regulation, Member States may grant financial incentives for retrofitting in order to meet the emission limit values set out in Annex I of in-use vehicles and for scrapping vehicles which do not comply with this Regulation and its implementing measures. 3. For each type of motor vehicle, the financial incentives referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not exceed the additional cost of the technical devices used to ensure compliance with the emission limits specified in Annex I, including the cost of installation on the vehicle. 4. The Commission shall be informed of plans to institute or change the financial incentives referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. Article 11 Penalties 1. Member States shall lay down the provisions on penalties applicable for infringement of the provisions of this Regulation and its implementing measures and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall notify those provisions to the Commission by 7 February 2011 and shall notify it without delay of any subsequent amendment affecting them. 2. The types of infringements by manufacturers which are subject to a penalty shall include: The types of infringements by manufacturers, repairers and operators of the vehicles which are subject to a penalty shall include tampering with systems which control NO x emissions. This shall include, for example, tampering with systems which use a consumable reagent. The types of infringements committed by operators of the vehicles which are subject to a penalty shall include driving a vehicle without a consumable reagent. Article 12 Redefinition of specifications 1. After the completion of the relevant parts of the PMP of the UN/ECE, conducted under the auspices of the World Forum for Harmonisation of Vehicle Regulations, the Commission shall, without lowering the level of environmental protection within the Community: The Commission shall also, without lowering the level of environmental protection within the Community, specify a limit value for emissions of NO 2 in addition to that for total emissions of NO x , if appropriate. The limit for emissions of NO 2 shall be set at a level reflecting the performance of then existing technologies. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2). 2. The Commission shall establish correlation factors between the European transient cycle (ETC) and the European steady state cycle (ESC) as described in Directive 2005/55/EC, and the worldwide harmonised transient driving cycle (WHTC) and the worldwide harmonised steady state driving cycle (WHSC) and shall adapt the limit values to that effect. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2). 3. The Commission shall keep under review the procedures, tests and requirements referred to in Article 5(4) as well as the test cycles used to measure emissions. If the review finds that those procedures, tests, requirements and test cycles are no longer adequate or no longer reflect actual world emissions, they shall be adapted so as to adequately reflect the emissions generated by real driving on the road. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, inter alia, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 13(2). 4. The Commission shall keep under review the pollutants listed in point 2 of Article 3. If the Commission concludes that it is appropriate to regulate the emissions of additional pollutants, it shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a proposal for amending this Regulation. Article 13 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the Technical Committee — Motor Vehicles (TCMV) established by Article 40(1) of Directive 2007/46/EC. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1) to (4) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. Article 14 Implementation The Commission shall adopt the implementing measures referred to in Article 4(3), Article 5(4), Article 6(2) and Article 12(1)(a) and (b) by 1 April 2010. Article 15 Amendments to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 is hereby amended as follows: Article 16 Amendments to Directive 2007/46/EC Annexes IV, VI and XI to Directive 2007/46/EC are amended in accordance with Annex II to this Regulation. Article 17 Repeal 1. Directives 80/1269/EEC, 2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC are repealed with effect from 31 December 2013. 2. Article 18 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 7 August 2009. However, Articles 8(3) and 10 shall apply from 7 August 2009 and points 1(a)(i), 1(b)(i), 2(a), 3(a)(i), 3(b)(i), 3(c)(i), 3(d)(i) and 3(e)(i) of Annex II shall apply from 31 December 2013. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 18 June 2009. For the European Parliament The President H.-G. PÖTTERING For the Council The President Š. FÜLE ( 1 ) OJ C 211, 19.8.2008, p. 12 . ( 2 ) Opinion of the European Parliament of 16 December 2008 (not yet published in Official Journal) and Council Decision of 8 June 2009. ( 3 ) OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1 . ( 4 ) OJ L 242, 10.9.2002, p. 1 . ( 5 ) OJ L 375, 31.12.1980, p. 46 . ( 6 ) OJ L 171, 29.6.2007, p. 1 . ( 7 ) Directive 2005/55/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 September 2005 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the measures to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from compression-ignition engines for use in vehicles, and the emission of gaseous pollutants from positive-ignition engines fuelled with natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas for use in vehicles ( OJ L 275, 20.10.2005, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Commission Directive 2005/78/EC of 14 November 2005 implementing Directive 2005/55/EC and amending Annexes I, II, III, IV and VI thereto ( OJ L 313, 29.11.2005, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 . ANNEX I Euro VI emission limits ( 1 ) The admissible level of NO 2 component in the NO x limit value may be defined at a later stage. ( 2 ) A number standard is to be defined at a later stage and no later than 1 April 2010. ( 3 ) The limit values relating to WHSC and WHTC, replacing the limit values relating to ESC and ETC, will be introduced, at a later stage, once correlation factors with respect to the current cycles (ESC and ETC) have been established, no later than 1 April 2010. ANNEX II Amendments to Directive 2007/46/EC Directive 2007/46/EC is hereby amended as follows: