REGULATION (EU) No 538/2014 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 16 April 2014 amending Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 on European environmental economic accounts (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 338(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 1 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 is amended as follows: Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 16 April 2014. For the European Parliament The President M. SCHULZ For the Council The President D. KOURKOULAS ( 1 ) Position of the European Parliament of 2 April 2014 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 14 April 2014. ( 2 ) Decision No 1386/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on a General Union Environment Action Programme to 2020 ‘Living well, within the limits of our planet’ ( OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 171 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2011 on European environmental economic accounts ( OJ L 192, 22.7.2011, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ‘ANNEX IV MODULE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION EXPENDITURE ACCOUNTS Section 1 OBJECTIVES Environmental protection expenditure accounts present data, in a way that is compatible with the data reported under ESA, on the expenditure for environmental protection, i.e. the economic resources devoted by resident units to environmental protection. Such accounts allow for the compiling of national expenditure for environmental protection which is defined as the sum of uses of environmental protection services by resident units, gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) for environmental protection activities, and transfers for environmental protection which are not a counterpart of previous items, less financing by the rest of the world. The environmental protection expenditure accounts should make use of the already existing information from the national accounts (production and generation of income accounts; GFCF by NACE, supply and use tables; data based on the classification of functions of government), structural business statistics, business register and other sources. This Annex defines the data to be collected, compiled, transmitted and evaluated for the purposes of environmental protection expenditure accounts by the Member States. Section 2 COVERAGE Environmental protection expenditure accounts have the same system boundaries as ESA and show environmental protection expenditure for principal, secondary and ancillary activities. The following sectors are covered: Section 3 LIST OF CHARACTERISTICS Member States shall produce environmental protection expenditure accounts according to the following characteristics which are defined in accordance with ESA: All data shall be reported in million national currency. Section 4 FIRST REFERENCE YEAR, FREQUENCY AND TRANSMISSION DEADLINES Section 5 REPORTING TABLES Section 6 MAXIMUM DURATION OF THE TRANSITIONAL PERIODS For the implementation of the provisions of this Annex, the maximum duration of the transitional period is 2 years from the first transmission deadline. ANNEX V MODULE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL GOODS AND SERVICES SECTOR ACCOUNTS Section 1 OBJECTIVES Statistics on environmental goods and services record and present data on national economy production activities that generate environmental products in a way that is compatible with the data reported under ESA. The environmental goods and services sector accounts should make use of the already existing information from the national accounts, structural business statistics, business register and other sources. This Annex defines the data to be collected, compiled, transmitted and evaluated for environmental goods and services accounts, by the Member States. Section 2 COVERAGE The environmental goods and services sector has the same system boundaries as ESA and consists of all environmental goods and services that are created within the production boundary. ESA defines production as the activity carried out under the control and responsibility of an institutional unit that uses inputs of labour, capital and goods and services to produce goods and services. Environmental goods and services fall within the following categories: environmental specific services, environmental sole purpose products (connected products), adapted goods and environmental technologies. Section 3 LIST OF CHARACTERISTICS Member States shall produce statistics on the environmental goods and services sector according to the following characteristics: All data shall be reported in million national currency, except for the characteristic “employment” for which the reporting unit shall be “full time equivalent”. Section 4 FIRST REFERENCE YEAR, FREQUENCY AND TRANSMISSION DEADLINES Section 5 REPORTING TABLES Section 6 MAXIMUM DURATION OF THE TRANSITIONAL PERIODS For the implementation of the provisions of this Annex, the maximum duration of the transitional period is 2 years from the first transmission deadline. ANNEX VI MODULE FOR PHYSICAL ENERGY FLOW ACCOUNTS Section 1 OBJECTIVES Physical energy flow accounts present data on the physical flows of energy expressed in terajoules in a way that is fully compatible with the ESA. Physical energy flow accounts record energy data in relation to the economic activities of resident units of national economies in a breakdown by economic activity. They present the supply and use of natural energy inputs, energy products and energy residuals. Economic activities comprise production, consumption, and accumulation. This Annex defines the data to be collected, compiled, transmitted and evaluated for physical energy flow accounts by the Member States. Section 2 COVERAGE Physical energy flow accounts have the same system boundaries as ESA and are also based on the residence principle. In accordance with ESA, a unit is said to be a resident unit of a country when it has a centre of economic interest in the economic territory of that country, that is, when it engages for an extended period (1 year or more) in economic activities in that territory. Physical energy flow accounts record physical energy flows arising from the activities of all resident units, regardless of where these flows actually occur geographically. Physical energy flow accounts record the physical flows of energy from the environment to the economy, within the economy, and from the economy back to the environment. Section 3 LIST OF CHARACTERISTICS Member States shall produce physical energy flow accounts according to the following characteristics: All data shall be reported in terajoules. Section 4 FIRST REFERENCE YEAR, FREQUENCY AND TRANSMISSION DEADLINES Section 5 REPORTING TABLES Section 6 MAXIMUM DURATION OF THE TRANSITIONAL PERIODS For the implementation of the provisions of this Annex, the maximum duration of the transitional period is 2 years from the first transmission deadline.’ ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 295/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2008 concerning structural business statistics ( OJ L 97, 9.4.2008, p. 13 ).