REGULATION (EU) No 598/2014 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 16 April 2014 on the establishment of rules and procedures with regard to the introduction of noise-related operating restrictions at Union airports within a Balanced Approach and repealing Directive 2002/30/EC THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 100(2) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 2 ) , Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 3 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter, objectives and scope 1. This Regulation lays down, where a noise problem has been identified, rules on the process to be followed for the introduction of noise-related operating restrictions in a consistent manner on an airport-by-airport basis, so as to help improve the noise climate and to limit or reduce the number of people significantly affected by potentially harmful effects of aircraft noise, in accordance with the Balanced Approach. 2. The objectives of this Regulation are: 3. This Regulation shall apply to aircraft engaged in civil aviation. It shall not apply to aircraft engaged in military, customs, police or similar operations. Article 2 Definitions For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 Competent authorities 1. A Member State in which an airport as referred to in point (2) of Article 2 is located shall designate one or more competent authorities responsible for the process to be followed when adopting operating restrictions. 2. The competent authorities shall be independent of any organisation which could be affected by noise-related action. That independence may be achieved through a functional separation. 3. The Member States shall notify the Commission, in a timely manner, of the names and addresses of the designated competent authorities referred to in paragraph 1. The Commission shall publish that information. Article 4 Right of appeal 1. Member States shall ensure the right to appeal against operating restrictions adopted pursuant to this Regulation before an appeal body other than the authority that adopted the contested restriction, in accordance with national legislation and procedures. 2. The Member State in which an airport as referred to in point (2) of Article 2 is located shall notify the Commission, in a timely manner, of the name and address of the designated appeal body referred to in paragraph 1 or, where appropriate, of the arrangements for ensuring that an appeal body is appointed. Article 5 General rules on aircraft noise management 1. Member States shall ensure that the noise situation at an individual airport as referred to in point (2) of Article 2 is assessed in accordance with Directive 2002/49/EC. 2. Member States shall ensure that the Balanced Approach is adopted in respect of aircraft noise management at those airports where a noise problem has been identified. To that end, they shall ensure that: 3. Member States shall ensure that, when noise-related action is taken, the following combination of available measures is considered, with a view to determining the most cost-effective measure or combination of measures: The available measures may if necessary include the withdrawal of marginally compliant aircraft. Member States, or airport managing bodies, as appropriate, may offer economic incentives to encourage aircraft operators to use less noisy aircraft during the transitional period referred to in point (4) of Article 2. Those economic incentives shall comply with the applicable rules on State aid. 4. The measures may, within the Balanced Approach, be differentiated according to aircraft type, aircraft noise performance, use of airport and air navigation facilities, flight path and/or the timeframe covered. 5. Without prejudice to paragraph 4, operating restrictions which take the form of the withdrawal of marginally compliant aircraft from airport operations shall not affect civil subsonic aircraft that comply, through either original certification or re-certification, with the noise standard laid down in Volume 1, Part II, Chapter 4 of Annex 16 to the Chicago Convention. 6. Measures or a combination of measures taken in accordance with this Regulation for a given airport shall not be more restrictive than is necessary in order to achieve the environmental noise abatement objectives set for that airport. Operating restrictions shall be non-discriminatory, in particular on grounds of nationality or identity, and shall not be arbitrary. Article 6 Rules on noise assessment 1. The competent authorities shall ensure that the noise situation at airports for which they are responsible is assessed on a regular basis, in accordance with Directive 2002/49/EC and the legislation applicable within each Member State. The competent authorities may call on the support of the Performance Review Body referred to in Article 3 of Commission Regulation (EU) No 691/2010 ( 7 ) . 2. If the assessment referred to in paragraph 1 indicates that new operating restriction measures may be required to address a noise problem at an airport, the competent authorities shall ensure that: 3. The competent authorities shall follow up and monitor the implementation of the operating restrictions and take action as appropriate. They shall ensure that relevant information is made available free of charge and that it is readily and promptly accessible to local residents living in the vicinity of the airports and to the relevant local authorities. 4. The relevant information may include: Article 7 Noise performance information 1. Decisions on noise-related operating restrictions shall be based on the noise performance of the aircraft as determined by the certification procedure conducted in accordance with Volume 1 of Annex 16 to the Chicago Convention, sixth edition of March 2011. 2. At the request of the Commission, aircraft operators shall communicate the following noise information in respect of the aircraft that they operate at Union airports: 3. Upon request of the Agency, holders of an aircraft type certificate or a supplemental type certificate issued in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 9 ) , and legal or natural persons operating aircraft for which no type certificate has been issued under that Regulation, shall provide aircraft noise and performance information for noise modelling purposes. The Agency shall specify the data required and the timeframe for, and the form and manner of, its provision. The Agency shall verify the received aircraft noise and performance information for modelling purposes and shall make the information available to other parties for noise modelling purposes. 4. The data referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall be limited to what is strictly necessary and shall be provided free of charge, in electronic form and using the format specified, where applicable. 5. The Agency shall verify the aircraft noise and performance data for modelling purposes in relation to its tasks performed in accordance with Article 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 216/2008. 6. Data shall be stored in a central database and made available to competent authorities, aircraft operators, air navigation service providers and airport operators for operational purposes. Article 8 Rules on the introduction of operating restrictions 1. Before introducing an operating restriction, the competent authorities shall give to the Member States, the Commission and the relevant interested parties six months’ notice, ending at least two months prior to the determination of the slot coordination parameters as defined in point (m) of Article 2 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 95/93 ( 10 ) for the airport concerned for the relevant scheduling period. 2. Following the assessment carried out in accordance with Article 6, the notification shall be accompanied by a written report in accordance with the requirements specified in Article 5 explaining the reasons for introducing the operating restriction, the noise abatement objective established for the airport, the measures that were considered to meet that objective, and the evaluation of the likely cost-effectiveness of the various measures considered, including, where relevant, their cross-border impact. 3. At the request of a Member State or on its own initiative, the Commission may, within a period of three months after the day on which it receives notice under paragraph 1, review the process for the introduction of an operating restriction. Where the Commission finds that the introduction of a noise-related operating restriction does not follow the process set out in this Regulation, it may notify the relevant competent authority accordingly. The relevant competent authority shall examine the Commission notification and inform the Commission of its intentions before introducing the operating restriction. 4. Where the operating restriction concerns the withdrawal of marginally compliant aircraft from an airport, no additional services above the number of movements with marginally compliant aircraft in the corresponding period of the previous year shall be allowed at that airport six months after the notification referred to in paragraph 1. The Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities decide on the annual rate for reducing the number of movements of marginally compliant aircraft of affected operators at that airport, taking due account of the age of the aircraft and the composition of the total fleet. Without prejudice to Article 5(4), that rate shall not be more than 25 % of the number of movements of marginally compliant aircraft for each operator serving that airport. Article 9 Developing countries 1. In order to avoid undue economic hardship, the competent authorities may exempt marginally compliant aircraft registered in developing countries from noise operating restrictions, while fully respecting the principle of non-discrimination, provided that such aircraft: 2. Where a Member State grants an exemption provided for in paragraph 1, it shall forthwith inform the competent authorities of the other Member States and the Commission thereof. Article 10 Exemption for aircraft operations of an exceptional nature The competent authorities may, on a case-by-case basis, authorise individual operations at airports for which they are responsible in respect of marginally compliant aircraft which could not otherwise take place on the basis of this Regulation. The exemption shall be limited to: Article 11 Delegated acts The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 12 concerning: The purpose of those updates shall be to take into account changes to relevant international rules, as appropriate. Article 12 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 11 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 13 June 2016. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 11 may be revoked by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the powers specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 5. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 11 shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 13 Information and revision Member States shall upon request submit information on the application of this Regulation to the Commission. No later than 14 June 2021, the Commission shall report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the application of this Regulation. That report shall be accompanied, where necessary, by proposals for revision of this Regulation. Article 14 Existing operating restrictions Noise-related operating restrictions which were already introduced before 13 June 2016 shall remain in force until the competent authorities decide to revise them in accordance with this Regulation. Article 15 Repeal Directive 2002/30/EC is repealed with effect from 13 June 2016. Article 16 Transitional provisions Notwithstanding Article 15 of this Regulation, noise-related operating restrictions adopted after 13 June 2016 may be adopted in accordance with Directive 2002/30/EC where the consultation process prior to their adoption was ongoing at that date and provided that those restrictions are adopted at the latest one year after that date. Article 17 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on 13 June 2016. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 16 April 2014. For the European Parliament The President M. SCHULZ For the Council The President D. KOURKOULAS ( 1 ) OJ C 181, 21.6.2012, p. 173 . ( 2 ) OJ C 277, 13.9.2012, p. 110 . ( 3 ) Position of the European Parliament of 12 December 2012 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and position of the Council at first reading of 24 March 2014 [(not yet published in the Official Journal). Position of the European Parliament of 15 April 2014 (not yet published in the Official Journal). ( 4 ) Directive 2002/30/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 March 2002 on the establishment of rules and procedures with regard to the introduction of noise-related operating restrictions at Community airports ( OJ L 85, 28.3.2002, p. 40 ). ( 5 ) Directive 2006/93/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on the regulation of the operation of aeroplanes covered by Part II, Chapter 3, Volume 1 of Annex 16 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, second edition (1988) ( OJ L 374, 27.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise ( OJ L 189, 18.7.2002, p. 12 ). ( 7 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 691/2010 of 29 July 2010 laying down a performance scheme for air navigation services and network functions and amending Regulation (EC) No 2096/2005 laying down common requirements for the provision of air navigation services ( OJ L 201, 3.8.2010, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 677/2011 of 7 July 2011 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of air traffic management (ATM) network functions and amending Regulation (EU) No 691/2010 ( OJ L 185, 15.7.2011, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 February 2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency, and repealing Council Directive 91/670/EEC, Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 and Directive 2004/36/EC ( OJ L 79, 19.3.2008, p. 1 ). ( 10 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 95/93 of 18 January 1993 on common rules for the allocation of slots at Community airports ( OJ L 14, 22.1.1993, p. 1 ). ANNEX I ASSESSMENT OF THE NOISE SITUATION AT AN AIRPORT Methodology: Competent authorities will ensure the use of noise assessment methods which have been developed in accordance with the European Civil Aviation Conference Report Doc 29 entitled ‘Standard Method of Computing Noise Contours around Civil Airports’, 3rd Edition. Indicators: Noise management information: 1. Current inventory 2. Forecast without new measures 3. Assessment of additional measures ANNEX II Assessment of the cost-effectiveness of noise-related operating restrictions The cost-effectiveness of envisaged noise-related operating restrictions will be assessed taking due account of the following elements, to the extent possible, in quantifiable terms: In addition, competent authorities may take due account of the following factors: Statement by the Commission on the revision of Directive 2002/49/EC The Commission is discussing with the Member States Annex II to Directive 2002/49/EC (noise calculation methods) with a view to adopting it in the coming months. Based on work the WHO is currently undertaking regarding the methodology to assess health implications of the noise impact, the Commission intends to revise Annex III to Directive 2002/49/ EC (estimation of health impact, dose response curves).