COMMISSION DECISION of 20 April 2009 on the definition of the criteria for the classification of waste facilities in accordance with Annex III of Directive 2006/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the management of waste from extractive industries (notified under document number C(2009) 2856) (2009/337/EC) THE COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, Having regard to Directive 2006/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the management of waste from extractive industries and amending Directive 2004/35/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 22(1)(g) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 1. A waste facility shall be classified under Category A in accordance with the first indent of Annex III of Directive 2006/21/EC if the predicted consequences in the short or the long term of a failure due to loss of structural integrity, or due to incorrect operation of a waste facility could lead to: 2. For the purpose of the classification referred to in paragraph 1, the entire life-cycle of the facility, including the after-closure phase, shall be considered in the evaluation of the hazard potential of the facility. Article 2 1. For the purpose of this Decision, structural integrity of a waste facility shall mean its ability to contain the waste within the boundaries of the facility in the manner for which it was designed. 2. The loss of structural integrity shall cover all possible failure mechanisms relevant to the structures of the waste facility concerned. 3. An evaluation of the consequences of the loss of structural integrity shall comprise the immediate impact of any material transported from the facility as a consequence of the failure and the resulting short and long term effects. Article 3 1. For the purpose of this Decision, incorrect operation of the waste facility shall mean any operation which may give rise to a major accident, including the malfunction of environmental protection measures and faulty or insufficient design. 2. An assessment of the release of contaminants resulting from incorrect operation shall comprise the effects of short-term pulses as well as of the long-term release of contaminants. That assessment shall cover the operational period of the facility and as well as the long-term period following closure. It shall include an evaluation of the potential hazards constituted by facilities containing reactive waste, regardless of the classification of the waste as hazardous or non-hazardous under Council Directive 91/689/EEC ( 3 ) . Article 4 1. Member States shall assess the consequences of a failure due to loss of structural integrity or incorrect operation of a waste facility in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 4. 2. The potential for loss of life or danger to human health shall be considered to be negligible or not serious if people other than workers operating the facility that might be affected are not expected to be present permanently or for prolonged periods in the potentially affected area. Injuries leading to disability or prolonged states of ill-health shall count as serious dangers to human health. 3. The potential danger for the environment shall be considered to be not serious if: 4. In establishing the potential for loss of life or danger to human health or to the environment, the specific evaluations of the extent of the potential impacts shall be considered in the context of the source-pathway-receptor chain. Where there is no pathway between the source and the receptor, the facility concerned shall not be classified as Category A on the basis of failure due to loss of structural integrity or incorrect operation. Article 5 1. In the case of loss of structural integrity for tailings dams, human lives shall be deemed to be threatened where water or slurry levels are at least 0,7 m above ground or where water or slurry velocities exceed 0,5 m/s. 2. The assessment of the potential for loss of life and danger to human health, shall comprise at least the following factors: Article 6 1. In the case of waste heap slides any waste-mass in movement shall be deemed likely to threaten human lives if people are staying within range of the moving waste-mass. 2. The assessment of the potential for loss of life and danger to human health shall comprise at least the following factors: Article 7 1. The threshold referred to in the second indent of Annex III of Directive 2006/21/EC shall be determined, as the ratio of the weight on a dry matter basis of: 2. Where the ratio referred to in paragraph 1 exceeds 50 %, the facility shall be classified as Category A. 3. Where the ratio referred to paragraph 1 is between 5 % and 50 %, the facility shall be classified as Category A. However, that facility may not be classified as Category A where it is justified on the basis of a site specific risk assessment, with specific focus on the effects of the hazardous waste, carried out as part of the classification based on the consequences of failure due to loss of integrity or incorrect operation, and demonstrating that the facility should not be classified as Category A on the basis of the contents of hazardous waste. 4. Where the ratio referred in paragraph 1 is less than 5 %, then the facility shall not be classified as Category A on the basis of the contents of hazardous waste. Article 8 1. Member States shall assess whether the criterion set out in the third indent of Annex III of Directive 2006/21/EC is met in accordance with the considerations set out in paragraphs 2, 3, and 4. 2. For planned tailing ponds, the following methodology shall be used: If, on the basis of the estimation of the maximum yearly concentrations (C max), the aqueous phase is considered to be ‘dangerous’ within the meaning of Directives 1999/45/EC or 67/548/EEC, the facility shall be classified as a Category A facility. 3. For operating tailings ponds, the classification of the facility shall be based on the methodology set out in paragraph 2, or on direct chemical analysis of the water and solids contained in the facility. If the aqueous phase and its contents have to be considered as dangerous preparation within the meaning of Directive 1999/45/EC or 67/548/EEC, the facility shall be classified as a Category A facility. 4. For heap leaching facilities, where metals are extracted from ore heaps by percolating leach solutions, Member States shall undertake a screening for dangerous substances at closure based on an inventory of used leach chemicals and the residual concentrations of these leach chemicals in the drainage after washing has been finalised. If these leachates have to be considered as dangerous preparation within the meaning of Directives 1999/45/EC or 67/548/EEC, the facility shall be classified as a Category A facility. Article 9 Article 7 and 8 of this Decision shall not apply to waste facilities containing inert waste or unpolluted soil only. Article 10 A review of the classification shall be carried out by the competent authority within the meaning of Directive 2006/21/EC where the permit is substantially modified or the operational conditions have changed significantly. That review shall be carried out at the latest at the end of the operational period of the facility. Article 11 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 20 April 2009. For the Commission Stavros DIMAS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 102, 11.4.2006, p. 15 . ( 2 ) OJ L 114, 27.4.2006, p. 9 . ( 3 ) OJ L 377, 31.12.1991, p. 20 . ( 4 ) OJ 196, 16.8.1967, p. 1 . ( 5 ) OJ L 200, 30.7.1999, p. 1 . ANNEX I Formula for the calculation of the average yearly increase in stored water within the tailings pond ΔQ as referred in Article 8 paragraph 2 If exact data are not available, default values of 1,4 tonnes/m 3 for the dry bulk density and 0,5 m 3 /m 3 for the porosity should be used. ANNEX II Estimation of the maximum concentration in the aqueous phase C max as referred in Article 8 paragraph 2 C max = the maximum of the following value: Si/ΔQi, where: Si = yearly mass of each substance and preparation as identified under Article 8(2)(c), discharged into the pond during the year ‘i’.