DIRECTIVE (EU) 2016/802 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 11 May 2016 relating to a reduction in the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels (codification) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , After consulting the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Purpose and scope 1. The purpose of this Directive is to reduce the emissions of sulphur dioxide resulting from the combustion of certain types of liquid fuels and thereby to reduce the harmful effects of such emissions on man and the environment. 2. Reductions in emissions of sulphur dioxide resulting from the combustion of certain petroleum-derived liquid fuels shall be achieved by imposing limits on the sulphur content of such fuels as a condition for their use within Member States' territory, territorial seas and exclusive economic zones or pollution control zones. The limitations on the sulphur content of certain petroleum-derived liquid fuels as laid down in this Directive shall not, however, apply to: Article 2 Definitions For the purpose of this Directive the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 Maximum sulphur content of heavy fuel oil 1. Member States shall ensure that heavy fuel oils are not used within their territory if their sulphur content exceeds 1,00 % by mass. 2. Until 31 December 2015, subject to appropriate monitoring of emissions by competent authorities, paragraph 1 shall not apply to heavy fuel oils used: 3. As from 1 January 2016, subject to appropriate monitoring of emissions by competent authorities, paragraph 1 shall not apply to heavy fuel oils used: Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that no combustion plant using heavy fuel oil with a sulphur concentration greater than that referred to in paragraph 1 is operated without a permit issued by a competent authority, which specifies the emission limits. Article 4 Maximum sulphur content in gas oil Member States shall ensure that gas oils are not used within their territory if their sulphur content exceeds 0,10 % by mass. Article 5 Maximum sulphur content in marine fuel Member States shall ensure that marine fuels are not used within their territory if their sulphur content exceeds 3,50 % by mass, except for fuels supplied to ships using emission abatement methods subject to Article 8 operating in closed mode. Article 6 Maximum sulphur content of marine fuels used in territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones of Member States, including SO x Emission Control Areas, and by passenger ships operating on regular services to or from Union ports 1. Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that marine fuels are not used in the areas of their territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones if the sulphur content of those fuels by mass exceeds: This paragraph shall apply to all vessels of all flags, including vessels whose journey began outside of the Union, without prejudice to paragraphs 2 and 5 of this Article and Article 7. 2. Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that marine fuels are not used in the areas of their territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones falling within SO x Emission Control Areas if the sulphur content of those fuels by mass exceeds: This paragraph shall apply to all vessels of all flags, including vessels whose journey began outside the Union. The Commission shall have due regard to any future changes to the requirements pursuant to Annex VI to MARPOL applicable within SO x Emission Control Areas, and, where appropriate, without undue delay make any relevant proposals with a view to amending this Directive accordingly. 3. The application date for paragraph 2 for any new sea areas, including ports, designated by the IMO as SO x Emission Control Areas in accordance with Regulation 14(3)(b) of Annex VI to MARPOL shall be 12 months after the date of entry into force of the designation. 4. Member States shall be responsible for the enforcement of paragraph 2 at least in respect of: Member States may also take additional enforcement action in respect of other vessels in accordance with international maritime law. 5. Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that marine fuels are not used in their territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones falling outside SO x Emission Control Areas by passenger ships operating on regular services to or from any Union port if the sulphur content of those fuels exceeds 1,50 % by mass until 1 January 2020. Member States shall be responsible for the enforcement of this requirement at least in respect of vessels flying their flag and vessels of all flags while in their ports. 6. Member States shall require the correct completion of ships' logbooks, including fuel-changeover operations. 7. Member States shall endeavour to ensure the availability of marine fuels which comply with this Directive and inform the Commission of the availability of such marine fuels in its ports and terminals. 8. If a ship is found by a Member State not to be in compliance with the standards for marine fuels which comply with this Directive, the competent authority of the Member State is entitled to require the ship to: The ship shall not be required to deviate from its intended voyage or to delay unduly the voyage in order to achieve compliance. If a ship provides the information referred to in the first subparagraph, the Member State concerned shall take into account all relevant circumstances and the evidence presented to determine the appropriate action to take, including not taking control measures. A ship shall notify its flag State and the competent authority of the relevant port of destination when it cannot purchase marine fuel which complies with this Directive. A port State shall notify the Commission when a ship has presented evidence of the non-availability of marine fuels which comply with this Directive. 9. Member States shall, in accordance with Regulation 18 of Annex VI to MARPOL: 10. Member States shall ensure that marine diesel oils are not placed on the market in their territory if the sulphur content of those marine diesel oils exceeds 1,50 % by mass. Article 7 Maximum sulphur content of marine fuels used by ships at berth in Union ports 1. Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that ships at berth in Union ports do not use marine fuels with a sulphur content exceeding 0,10 % by mass, allowing sufficient time for the crew to complete any necessary fuel-changeover operation as soon as possible after arrival at berth and as late as possible before departure. Member States shall require the time of any fuel-changeover operation to be recorded in ships' logbooks. 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply: 3. Member States shall ensure that marine gas oils are not placed on the market in their territory if the sulphur content of those marine gas oils exceeds 0,10 % by mass. Article 8 Emission abatement methods 1. Member States shall allow the use of emission abatement methods by ships of all flags in their ports, territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and pollution control zones, as an alternative to using marine fuels that meet the requirements of Articles 6 and 7, subject to paragraphs 2 and 4 of this Article. 2. Ships using the emission abatement methods referred to in paragraph 1 shall continuously achieve reductions of sulphur dioxide emissions that are at least equivalent to the reductions that would be achieved by using marine fuels that meet the requirements of Articles 6 and 7. Equivalent emission values shall be determined in accordance with Annex I. 3. Member States shall, as an alternative solution for reducing emissions, encourage the use of onshore power supply systems by docked vessels. 4. The emission abatement methods referred to in paragraph 1 shall comply with the criteria specified in the instruments referred to in Annex II. 5. Where justified in the light of scientific and technical progress regarding alternative emission abatement methods and in such a way as to ensure strict consistency with the relevant instruments and standards adopted by the IMO, the Commission shall: Article 9 Approval of emission abatement methods for use on board ships flying the flag of a Member State 1. Emission abatement methods falling within the scope of Directive 96/98/EC shall be approved in accordance with that Directive. 2. Emission abatement methods not covered by paragraph 1 of this Article shall be approved in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 3(2) of Regulation (EC) No 2099/2002, taking into account: Article 10 Trials of new emission abatement methods Member States may, in cooperation with other Member States, as appropriate, approve trials of ship emission abatement methods on vessels flying their flag, or in sea areas within their jurisdiction. During those trials, the use of marine fuels meeting the requirements of Articles 6 and 7 shall not be mandatory, provided that all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 11 Financial measures Member States may adopt financial measures in favour of operators affected by this Directive where such financial measures are in accordance with State aid rules applicable and to be adopted in this area. Article 12 Change in the supply of fuels If, as a result of a sudden change in the supply of crude oil, petroleum products or other hydrocarbons, it becomes difficult for a Member State to apply the limits on the maximum sulphur content referred to in Articles 3 and 4, that Member State shall inform the Commission thereof. The Commission may authorise a higher limit to be applicable within the territory of that Member State for a period not exceeding 6 months. It shall notify the Council and the Member States of its decision. Any Member State may refer that decision to the Council within 1 month. The Council, acting by a qualified majority, may adopt a different decision within 2 months. Article 13 Sampling and analysis 1. Member States shall take all necessary measures to check by sampling that the sulphur content of fuels used complies with Articles 3 to 7. The sampling shall commence on the date on which the relevant limit for maximum sulphur content in the fuel comes into force. It shall be carried out periodically with sufficient frequency and quantities such that the samples are representative of the fuel examined, and in the case of marine fuel, of the fuel being used by vessels while in relevant sea areas and ports. The samples shall be analysed without undue delay. 2. The following means of sampling, analysis and inspection of marine fuel shall be used: 3. The reference method adopted for determining the sulphur content shall be ISO method 8754 (2003) or EN ISO 14596:2007. In order to determine whether marine fuel delivered to, and used on board, ships is compliant with the sulphur limits required by Articles 4 to 7, the fuel verification procedure set out in Appendix VI to Annex VI to MARPOL shall be used. 4. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt implementing acts concerning: Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17(2). Article 14 Reporting and review 1. Each year by 30 June, Member States shall, on the basis of the results of the sampling, analysis and inspections carried out in accordance with Article 13, submit a report to the Commission on the compliance with the sulphur standards set out in this Directive for the preceding year. On the basis of the reports received in accordance with the first subparagraph of this paragraph and the notifications regarding the non-availability of marine fuel which complies with this Directive submitted by Member States in accordance with the fifth subparagraph of Article 6(8), the Commission shall, within 12 months of the date referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, draw up and publish a report on the implementation of this Directive. The Commission shall evaluate the need for further strengthening of the relevant provisions of this Directive and make any appropriate legislative proposals to that effect. 2. By 31 December 2013, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council which shall be accompanied, if appropriate, by legislative proposals. The Commission shall consider in its report the potential for reducing air pollution taking into account, inter alia: annual reports submitted in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 3; observed air quality and acidification; fuel costs; potential economic impact and observed modal shift; and progress in reducing emissions from ships. 3. The Commission may adopt implementing acts concerning the information to be included in the report and the format of the report referred to in paragraph 1. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 17(2). Article 15 Adaptation to scientific and technical progress The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 16 concerning the adaptations of points (a) to (e) and (p) of Article 2, point (b)(i) of Article 13(2) and Article 13(3) to scientific and technical progress. Such adaptations shall not result in any direct changes to the scope of this Directive or to sulphur limits for fuels specified in this Directive. Article 16 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 8(5) and Article 15 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of 5 years from 17 December 2012. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than 9 months before the end of the 5-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than 3 months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 8(5) and Article 15 may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the powers specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 5. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 8(5) and Article 15 shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of 3 months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by 3 months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 17 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Where the committee delivers no opinion, the Commission shall not adopt the draft implementing act and the third subparagraph of Article 5(4) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Article 18 Penalties Member States shall determine the penalties applicable to breaches of the national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive. The penalties determined shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive and may include fines calculated in such a way as to ensure that the fines at least deprive those responsible of the economic benefits derived from the infringement of the national provisions as referred to in the first paragraph and that those fines gradually increase for repeated infringements. Article 19 Repeal Directive 1999/32/EC, as amended by the acts listed in Annex III, Part A, is repealed, without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for the transposition into national law of the Directives set out in Annex III, Part B. Article 20 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 21 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 11 May 2016. For the European Parliament The President M. SCHULZ For the Council The President J.A. HENNIS-PLASSCHAERT ( 1 ) OJ C 12, 15.1.2015, p. 117 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 9 March 2016 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 11 April 2016. ( 3 ) Council Directive 1999/32/EC of 26 April 1999 relating to a reduction in the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels and amending Directive 93/12/EEC ( OJ L 121, 11.5.1999, p. 13 ). ( 4 ) See Annex III, Part A. ( 5 ) Decision No 1600/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 July 2002 laying down the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme ( OJ L 242, 10.9.2002, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) Decision No 1386/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on a General Union Environment Action Programme to 2020 ‘Living well, within the limits of our planet’ ( OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 171 ). ( 7 ) Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 September 2015 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical regulations and of rules on Information Society services ( OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Directive 2001/80/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2001 on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from large combustion plants ( OJ L 309, 27.11.2001, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 ). ( 10 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ( 11 ) Regulation (EC) No 2099/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 November 2002 establishing a Committee on Safe Seas and the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (COSS) and amending the Regulations on maritime safety and the prevention of pollution from ships ( OJ L 324, 29.11.2002, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Council Directive 96/98/EC of 20 December 1996 on marine equipment ( OJ L 46, 17.2.1997, p. 25 ). ( 13 ) Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 1998 relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending Council Directive 93/12/EEC ( OJ L 350, 28.12.1998, p. 58 ). ( 14 ) Directive 97/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1997 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery ( OJ L 59, 27.2.1998, p. 1 ). ( 15 ) Directive 94/25/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 June 1994 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to recreational craft ( OJ L 164, 30.6.1994, p. 15 ). ANNEX I EQUIVALENT EMISSION VALUES FOR EMISSION ABATEMENT METHODS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 8(2) Marine fuel sulphur limits referred to in Articles 6 and 7 of this Directive and Regulations 14.1 and 14.4 of Annex VI to MARPOL and corresponding emission values referred to in Article 8(2): ANNEX II CRITERIA FOR THE USE OF EMISSION ABATEMENT METHODS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 8(4) The emission abatement methods referred to in Article 8 shall comply at least with the criteria specified in the following instruments, as applicable: ( 1 ) Commission Decision 2010/769/EU of 13 December 2010 on the establishment of criteria for the use by liquefied natural gas carriers of technological methods as an alternative to using low sulphur marine fuels meeting the requirements of Article 4b of Council Directive 1999/32/EC relating to a reduction in the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels as amended by Directive 2005/33/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the sulphur content of marine fuels ( OJ L 328, 14.12.2010, p. 15 ). ( 2 ) Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC ( OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 16 ). ANNEX III PART A Repealed Directive with list of the successive amendments thereto (referred to in Article 19) PART B Time limits for transposition into national law (referred to in Article 19) ANNEX IV CORRELATION TABLE