COUNCIL DECISION of 24 January 2005 approving the accession of the European Atomic Energy Community to the ‘Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management’ (2005/84/Euratom) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, and in particular the second paragraph of Article 101 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Whereas: HAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS: Sole article 1. The accession of the European Atomic Energy Community to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management is hereby approved. 2. The text of the declaration by the European Atomic Energy Community according to the provisions of Article 39(4)(iii) of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management is attached to the present Decision. Done at Brussels, 24 January 2005. For the Council The President F. BODEN ( 1 ) OJ L 35, 12.2.1992, p. 24 . Declaration by the European Atomic Energy Community According to the provisions of Article 39(4)(iii) of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management The following States are presently members of the European Atomic Energy Community: the Kingdom of Belgium, the Czech Republic, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Republic of Estonia, the Hellenic Republic, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, Ireland, the Italian Republic, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Poland, the Portuguese Republic, the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, the Republic of Finland, the Kingdom of Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The Community declares that Articles 1 to 16, 18, 19, 21 and 24 to 44 of the Joint Convention apply to it. The Community possesses competences, shared with the abovementioned Member States, in the fields covered by Articles 4, 6 to 11, 13 to 16, 19 and 24 to 28 of the Joint Convention as provided by the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community in Article 2(b) and the relevant Articles of Title II, Chapter 3, entitled ‘Health and Safety’.