COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 493/2012 of 11 June 2012 laying down, pursuant to Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, detailed rules regarding the calculation of recycling efficiencies of the recycling processes of waste batteries and accumulators (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators and repealing Directive 91/157/EEC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 12(6)(a) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 This Regulation shall apply to the recycling processes carried out to waste batteries and accumulators from 1 January 2014. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 Calculation of recycling efficiency 1. The method set out in Annex I shall be used to calculate the recycling efficiency of a process for recycling waste lead-acid, nickel-cadmium and other batteries and accumulators. 2. The method set out in Annex II shall be used to calculate the rate of recycled lead content for any recycling process. 3. The method set out in Annex III shall be used to calculate the rate of recycled cadmium content for any recycling process. 4. Recyclers shall report the information shown in Annex IV, Annex V and Annex VI, as applicable, on an annual basis and shall send it to the Member State’s competent authorities by no later than four months from the end of a calendar year concerned. Recyclers shall send their first annual reports no later than the 30 April 2015. 5. Reporting on the recycling efficiency shall cover all individual steps of recycling and all corresponding output fractions. 6. Where a recycling process is carried out at more than one facility, the first recycler is responsible for submitting the information required under point 4 to the Member State’s competent authorities. Article 4 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 June 2012. For the Commission The President José Manuel BARROSO ( 1 ) OJ L 266, 26.9.2006, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 . ANNEX I Method for the calculation of the recycling efficiency of the recycling process of waste batteries and accumulators ANNEX II Method for the calculation of the rate of recycled lead content ANNEX III Method for the calculation of the rate of recycled cadmium content ANNEX IV Reporting on recycling efficiencies for lead-acid batteries and accumulators ( 1 ) Facility treating the waste batteries and accumulators after collection, eventual sorting and preparation for recycling. ( 2 ) Description of the complete battery recycling process, no matter if carried out by one or several facilities (including a description of the individual recycling steps and their output fractions). ( 3 ) Description of waste batteries and accumulators as received after collection, eventual sorting and preparation for recycling. ( 4 ) Wet mass of waste batteries and accumulators as received after collection, eventual sorting and preparation for recycling (the mass of separated impurities and outer casing of battery packs as well as the water content as specified in the field ‘overall composition’ shall be subtracted for the calculation of the recycling efficiency). ( 5 ) Data transferred from Annex IV(2). ( 6 ) Calculated according to the formula for RE based on data reported according to Annex IV(2). ( 7 ) Calculated according to the formula for R Pb based on data reported according to Annex IV(2). ( 8 ) Examples of impurities include plastic, ebonite chips, items/pieces of iron, fibres from electronic scrap, molten aluminium. ( 9 ) Facility carrying out an individual process step. ( 10 ) For step 1 = the same as input into the complete battery recycling process. For subsequent steps = intermediate fractions from the previous process step. ( 11 ) Intermediate fractions = fractions destined for subsequent step(s) in the recycling process. ( 12 ) Resulting from the batteries input (dry mass). ( 13 ) Facility to which the intermediate fraction is handed over or — if the further process step is carried out internally — the same as 1. ( 14 ) Final output fractions accounting for recycling = that have ceased to be waste and that will be used for their original purpose or for other purposes without undergoing further treatment, but excluding energy recovery. See also examples in Annex I(5). ( 15 ) Elements and compounds if they were component of the batteries input (waste battery). See special provisions and examples in Annex I(5). For lead (Pb) in slag see the provision in Annex II(2). Lead must be entered as ‘Pb’. ANNEX V Reporting on recycling efficiencies for nickel-cadmium batteries and accumulators ( 1 ) Facility reprocessing the waste batteries and accumulators after collection and eventual sorting. ( 2 ) Description of the complete battery recycling process, no matter if carried out by one or several facilities (including a description of the individual recycling steps and their output fractions). ( 3 ) Description of waste batteries and accumulators as received after collection and eventual sorting and preparation for recycling. ( 4 ) Wet mass of waste batteries and accumulators as received after collection and eventual sorting (the mass of separated impurities and outer casing of battery packs as well as the water content as specified in the field ‘overall composition’ shall be subtracted for the calculation of the recycling efficiency). ( 5 ) Data transferred from Annex V(2). ( 6 ) Calculated according to the formula for RE based on data reported according to Annex V(2). ( 7 ) Calculated according to the formula for R Cd based on data reported according to Annex V(2). ( 8 ) Examples of impurities include plastic, ebonite chips, items/pieces of iron, fibres from electronic scrap, molten aluminium. ( 9 ) Facility carrying out an individual process step. ( 10 ) For step 1 = the same as input into the complete battery recycling process. For subsequent steps = intermediate fractions from the previous process step. ( 11 ) Intermediate fractions = fractions destined for subsequent step(s) in the recycling process. ( 12 ) Resulting from the batteries input (dry mass). ( 13 ) Facility to which the intermediate fraction is handed over or — if the further process step is carried out internally — the same as 1. ( 14 ) Final output fractions accounting for recycling = that will be used for their original purpose or for other purposes without undergoing further treatment, see also examples in Annex I(5). ( 15 ) Elements and compounds if they were component of the batteries input (waste battery). See special provisions and examples in Annex I(5). For cadmium (Cd) in slag see provisions in Annex III(2). Cadmium must be entered as ‘Cd’. ANNEX VI Reporting on recycling efficiencies for other batteries and accumulators ( 1 ) Facility treating the waste batteries and accumulators after collection, eventual sorting and preparation for recycling. ( 2 ) Description of the complete battery recycling process, no matter if carried out by one or several facilities (including a description of the individual recycling steps and their output fractions). ( 3 ) Description of waste batteries and accumulators as received after collection, eventual sorting and preparation for recycling. ( 4 ) Wet mass of waste batteries and accumulators as received after collection, eventual sorting and preparation for recycling (the mass of separated impurities and outer casing of battery packs as well as the water content as specified in the field ‘overall composition’ shall be subtracted for the calculation of the recycling efficiency). ( 5 ) Data transferred from Annex VI(2). ( 6 ) Calculated according to the formula for R E based on data reported according to Annex VI(2). ( 7 ) Examples of impurities include plastic, ebonite chips, items/pieces of iron, fibres from electronic scrap, molten aluminium. ( 8 ) Facility carrying out an individual process step ( 9 ) For step 1 = the same as input into the complete battery recycling process. For subsequent steps = intermediate fractions from the previous process step. ( 10 ) Intermediate fractions = fractions destined for subsequent step(s) in the recycling process. ( 11 ) Resulting from the batteries input (dry mass). ( 12 ) Facility to which the intermediate fraction is handed over or — if the further process step is carried out internally — the same as 1. ( 13 ) Final output fractions accounting for recycling = that will be used for their original purpose or for other purposes without undergoing further treatment, see also examples in Annex I(5). ( 14 ) Elements and compounds if they were component of the batteries input (spent battery). See special provisions and examples in Annex I(5).