COUNCIL DECISION of 14 October 2004 concerning the conclusion, on behalf of the European Community, of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (2006/507/EC) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 175(1), in conjunction with the first sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 300(2), and the first subparagraph of Article 300(3) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS: Article 1 The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, hereinafter referred to as ‘the Convention’, is hereby approved on behalf of the Community. The text of the Convention is attached to this Decision. Article 2 1. Whenever an amendment to Annexes A, B or C or additional Annexes to the Convention is not implemented in the Annexes to Regulation No 850/2004 or other relevant Community legislation, within one year from the date of communication by the depository of the adoption of the amendment, the Commission shall notify the depository in accordance with Article 22 of the Convention. 2. In case an amendment to Annexes A, B or C or additional Annexes to the Convention is implemented after a notification referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall withdraw the notification without delay. Article 3 1. The President of the Council is hereby authorised to designate the person(s) empowered to deposit the instrument of approval on behalf of the European Community with the Secretary‐General of the United Nations, in accordance with Article 25(1) of the Convention. 2. The President of the Council is hereby authorised to designate the person(s) empowered to deposit, on behalf of the European Community, the declaration of competence set out in the Annex to this Decision, in accordance with Article 25(3) of the Convention. Done at Luxembourg, 14 October 2004. For the Council The President P. VAN GEEL ( 1 ) OJ C 87 E, 7.4.2004, p. 495 . ( 2 ) OJ C 32, 5.2.2004, p. 45 . ( 3 ) OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 7 . ( 4 ) OJ L 63, 6.3.2003, p. 1 . Regulation as last amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 777/2006 ( OJ L 136, 24.5.2006, p. 3 ). ( 5 ) OJ L 243, 24.9.1996, p. 31 . STOCKHOLM CONVENTION ON PERSISTENT ORGANIC POLLUTANTS THE PARTIES TO THIS CONVENTION, RECOGNISING that persistent organic pollutants possess toxic properties, resist degradation, bioaccumulate and are transported, through air, water and migratory species, across international boundaries and deposited far from their place of release, where they accumulate in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, AWARE of the health concerns, especially in developing countries, resulting from local exposure to persistent organic pollutants, in particular impacts upon women and, through them, upon future generations, ACKNOWLEDGING that the Arctic ecosystems and indigenous communities are particularly at risk because of the biomagnification of persistent organic pollutants and that contamination of their traditional foods is a public health issue, CONSCIOUS of the need for global action on persistent organic pollutants, MINDFUL of Decision 19/13 C of 7 February 1997 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to initiate international action to protect human health and the environment through measures which will reduce and/or eliminate emissions and discharges of persistent organic pollutants, RECALLING the pertinent provisions of the relevant international environmental conventions, especially the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade, and the Basel Convention on the Control of Trans-boundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal including the regional agreements developed within the framework of its Article 11, RECALLING also the pertinent provisions of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development and Agenda 21, ACKNOWLEDGING that precaution underlies the concerns of all the Parties and is embedded within this Convention, RECOGNISING that this Convention and other international agreements in the field of trade and the environment are mutually supportive, REAFFIRMING that States have, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law, the sovereign right to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own environmental and developmental policies, and the responsibility to ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the circumstances and particular requirements of developing countries, in particular the least developed among them, and countries with economies in transition, especially the need to strengthen their national capabilities for the management of chemicals, including through the transfer of technology, the provision of financial and technical assistance and the promotion of cooperation among the Parties, TAKING FULL ACCOUNT OF the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, adopted in Barbados on 6 May 1994, NOTING the respective capabilities of developed and developing countries, as well as the common but differentiated responsibilities of States as set forth in Principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, RECOGNISING the important contribution that the private sector and non‐governmental organisations can make to achieving the reduction and/or elimination of emissions and discharges of persistent organic pollutants, UNDERLINING the importance of manufacturers of persistent organic pollutants taking responsibility for reducing adverse effects caused by their products and for providing information to users, Governments and the public on the hazardous properties of those chemicals, CONSCIOUS OF the need to take measures to prevent adverse effects caused by persistent organic pollutants at all stages of their life cycle, REAFFIRMING Principle 16 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development which states that national authorities should endeavour to promote the internalisation of environmental costs and the use of economic instruments, taking into account the approach that the polluter should, in principle, bear the cost of pollution, with due regard to the public interest and without distorting international trade and investment, ENCOURAGING Parties not having regulatory and assessment schemes for pesticides and industrial chemicals to develop such schemes, RECOGNISING the importance of developing and using environmentally sound alternative processes and chemicals, DETERMINED to protect human health and the environment from the harmful impacts of persistent organic pollutants, HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: Article 1 Objective Mindful of the precautionary approach as set forth in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, the objective of this Convention is to protect human health and the environment from persistent organic pollutants. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Convention: Article 3 Measures to reduce or eliminate releases from intentional production and use 1. Each Party shall: 2. Each Party shall take measures to ensure: 3. Each Party that has one or more regulatory and assessment schemes for new pesticides or new industrial chemicals shall take measures to regulate with the aim of preventing the production and use of new pesticides or new industrial chemicals which, taking into consideration the criteria in paragraph 1 of Annex D, exhibit the characteristics of persistent organic pollutants. 4. Each Party that has one or more regulatory and assessment schemes for pesticides or industrial chemicals shall, where appropriate, take into consideration within these schemes the criteria in paragraph 1 of Annex D when conducting assessments of pesticides or industrial chemicals currently in use. 5. Except as otherwise provided in this Convention, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to quantities of a chemical to be used for laboratory-scale research or as a reference standard. 6. Any Party that has a specific exemption in accordance with Annex A or a specific exemption or an acceptable purpose in accordance with Annex B shall take appropriate measures to ensure that any production or use under such exemption or purpose is carried out in a manner that prevents or minimises human exposure and release into the environment. For exempted uses or acceptable purposes that involve intentional release into the environment under conditions of normal use, such release shall be to the minimum extent necessary, taking into account any applicable standards and guidelines. Article 4 Register of specific exemptions 1. A Register is hereby established for the purpose of identifying the Parties that have specific exemptions listed in Annex A or Annex B. It shall not identify Parties that make use of the provisions in Annex A or Annex B that may be exercised by all Parties. The Register shall be maintained by the Secretariat and shall be available to the public. 2. The Register shall include: 3. Any State may, on becoming a Party, by means of a notification in writing to the Secretariat, register for one or more types of specific exemptions listed in Annex A or Annex B. 4. Unless an earlier date is indicated in the Register by a Party, or an extension is granted pursuant to paragraph 7, all registrations of specific exemptions shall expire five years after the date of entry into force of this Convention with respect to a particular chemical. 5. At its first meeting, the Conference of the Parties shall decide upon its review process for the entries in the Register. 6. Prior to a review of an entry in the Register, the Party concerned shall submit a report to the Secretariat justifying its continuing need for registration of that exemption. The report shall be circulated by the Secretariat to all Parties. The review of a registration shall be carried out on the basis of all available information. Thereupon, the Conference of the Parties may make such recommendations to the Party concerned as it deems appropriate. 7. The Conference of the Parties may, upon request from the Party concerned, decide to extend the expiry date of a specific exemption for a period of up to five years. In making its decision, the Conference of the Parties shall take due account of the special circumstances of the developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition. 8. A Party may, at any time, withdraw an entry from the Register for a specific exemption upon written notification to the Secretariat. The withdrawal shall take effect on the date specified in the notification. 9. When there are no longer any Parties registered for a particular type of specific exemption, no new registrations may be made with respect to it. Article 5 Measures to reduce or eliminate releases from unintentional production Each Party shall at a minimum take the following measures to reduce the total releases derived from anthropogenic sources of each of the chemicals listed in Annex C, with the goal of their continuing minimisation and, where feasible, ultimate elimination: When applying best available techniques and best environmental practices, Parties should take into consideration the general guidance on prevention and release reduction measures in Annex C and guidelines on best available techniques and best environmental practices to be adopted by decision of the Conference of the Parties; Article 6 Measures to reduce or eliminate releases from stockpiles and wastes 1. In order to ensure that stockpiles consisting of or containing chemicals listed either in Annex A or Annex B and wastes, including products and articles upon becoming wastes, consisting of, containing or contaminated with a chemical listed in Annex A, B or C, are managed in a manner protective of human health and the environment, each Party shall: 2. The Conference of the Parties shall cooperate closely with the appropriate bodies of the Basel Convention on the Control of Trans-boundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal to, inter alia : Article 7 Implementation plans 1. Each Party shall: 2. The Parties shall, where appropriate, cooperate directly or through global, regional and sub-regional organisations, and consult their national stakeholders, including women's groups and groups involved in the health of children, in order to facilitate the development, implementation and updating of their implementation plans. 3. The Parties shall endeavour to utilise and, where necessary, establish the means to integrate national implementation plans for persistent organic pollutants in their sustainable development strategies where appropriate. Article 8 Listing of chemicals in Annexes A, B and C 1. A Party may submit a proposal to the Secretariat for listing a chemical in Annexes A, B and/or C. The proposal shall contain the information specified in Annex D. In developing a proposal, a Party may be assisted by other Parties and/or by the Secretariat. 2. The Secretariat shall verify whether the proposal contains the information specified in Annex D. If the Secretariat is satisfied that the proposal contains the information so specified, it shall forward the proposal to the Persistent Organic Pollutants Review Committee. 3. The Committee shall examine the proposal and apply the screening criteria specified in Annex D in a flexible and transparent way, taking all information provided into account in an integrative and balanced manner. 4. If the Committee decides that: 5. Any Party may resubmit a proposal to the Committee that has been set aside by the Committee pursuant to paragraph 4. The resubmission may include any concerns of the Party as well as a justification for additional consideration by the Committee. If, following this procedure, the Committee again sets the proposal aside, the Party may challenge the decision of the Committee and the Conference of the Parties shall consider the matter at its next session. The Conference of the Parties may decide, based on the screening criteria in Annex D and taking into account the evaluation of the Committee and any additional information provided by any Party or observer, that the proposal should proceed. 6. Where the Committee has decided that the screening criteria have been fulfilled, or the Conference of the Parties has decided that the proposal should proceed, the Committee shall further review the proposal, taking into account any relevant additional information received, and shall prepare a draft risk profile in accordance with Annex E. It shall, through the Secretariat, make that draft available to all Parties and observers, collect technical comments from them and, taking those comments into account, complete the risk profile. 7. If, on the basis of the risk profile conducted in accordance with Annex E, the Committee decides: 8. For any proposal set aside pursuant to paragraph 7(b), a Party may request the Conference of the Parties to consider instructing the Committee to invite additional information from the proposing Party and other Parties during a period not to exceed one year. After that period and on the basis of any information received, the Committee shall reconsider the proposal pursuant to paragraph 6 with a priority to be decided by the Conference of the Parties. If, following this procedure, the Committee again sets the proposal aside, the Party may challenge the decision of the Committee and the Conference of the Parties shall consider the matter at its next session. The Conference of the Parties may decide, based on the risk profile prepared in accordance with Annex E and taking into account the evaluation of the Committee and any additional information provided by any Party or observer, that the proposal should proceed. If the Conference of the Parties decides that the proposal shall proceed, the Committee shall then prepare the risk management evaluation. 9. The Committee shall, based on the risk profile referred to in paragraph 6 and the risk management evaluation referred to in paragraph 7(a) or 8, recommend whether the chemical should be considered by the Conference of the Parties for listing in Annexes A, B and/or C. The Conference of the Parties, taking due account of the recommendations of the Committee, including any scientific uncertainty, shall decide, in a precautionary manner, whether to list the chemical, and specify its related control measures, in Annexes A, B and/or C. Article 9 Information exchange 1. Each Party shall facilitate or undertake the exchange of information relevant to: 2. The Parties shall exchange the information referred to in paragraph 1 directly or through the Secretariat. 3. Each Party shall designate a national focal point for the exchange of such information. 4. The Secretariat shall serve as a clearing-house mechanism for information on persistent organic pollutants, including information provided by Parties, intergovernmental organisations and non-governmental organisations. 5. For the purposes of this Convention, information on health and safety of humans and the environment shall not be regarded as confidential. Parties that exchange other information pursuant to this Convention shall protect any confidential information as mutually agreed. Article 10 Public information, awareness and education 1. Each Party shall, within its capabilities, promote and facilitate: 2. Each Party shall, within its capabilities, ensure that the public has access to the public information referred to in paragraph 1 and that the information is kept up to date. 3. Each Party shall, within its capabilities, encourage industry and professional users to promote and facilitate the provision of the information referred to in paragraph 1 at the national level and, as appropriate, sub-regional, regional and global levels. 4. In providing information on persistent organic pollutants and their alternatives, Parties may use safety data sheets, reports, mass media and other means of communication, and may establish information centres at national and regional levels. 5. Each Party shall give sympathetic consideration to developing mechanisms, such as pollutant release and transfer registers, for the collection and dissemination of information on estimates of the annual quantities of the chemicals listed in Annex A, B or C that are released or disposed of. Article 11 Research, development and monitoring 1. The Parties shall, within their capabilities, at the national and international levels, encourage and/or undertake appropriate research, development, monitoring and cooperation pertaining to persistent organic pollutants and, where relevant, to their alternatives and to candidate persistent organic pollutants, including on their: 2. In undertaking action under paragraph 1, the Parties shall, within their capabilities: Article 12 Technical assistance 1. The Parties recognise that rendering of timely and appropriate technical assistance in response to requests from developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition is essential to the successful implementation of this Convention. 2. The Parties shall cooperate to provide timely and appropriate technical assistance to developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition, to assist them, taking into account their particular needs, to develop and strengthen their capacity to implement their obligations under this Convention. 3. In this regard, technical assistance to be provided by developed country Parties, and other Parties in accordance with their capabilities, shall include, as appropriate and as mutually agreed, technical assistance for capacity‐building relating to implementation of the obligations under this Convention. Further guidance in this regard shall be provided by the Conference of the Parties. 4. The Parties shall establish, as appropriate, arrangements for the purpose of providing technical assistance and promoting the transfer of technology to developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition relating to the implementation of this Convention. These arrangements shall include regional and sub-regional centres for capacity-building and transfer of technology to assist developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition to fulfil their obligations under this Convention. Further guidance in this regard shall be provided by the Conference of the Parties. 5. The Parties shall, in the context of this Article, take full account of the specific needs and special situation of least developed countries and small island developing states in their actions with regard to technical assistance. Article 13 Financial resources and mechanisms 1. Each Party undertakes to provide, within its capabilities, financial support and incentives in respect of those national activities that are intended to achieve the objective of this Convention in accordance with its national plans, priorities and programmes. 2. The developed country Parties shall provide new and additional financial resources to enable developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition to meet the agreed full incremental costs of implementing measures which fulfil their obligations under this Convention as agreed between a recipient Party and an entity participating in the mechanism described in paragraph 6. Other Parties may also on a voluntary basis and in accordance with their capabilities provide such financial resources. Contributions from other sources should also be encouraged. The implementation of these commitments shall take into account the need for adequacy, predictability, the timely flow of funds and the importance of burden sharing among the contributing Parties. 3. Developed country Parties, and other Parties in accordance with their capabilities and in accordance with their national plans, priorities and programmes, may also provide and developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition avail themselves of financial resources to assist in their implementation of this Convention through other bilateral, regional and multilateral sources or channels. 4. The extent to which the developing country Parties will effectively implement their commitments under this Convention will depend on the effective implementation by developed country Parties of their commitments under this Convention relating to financial resources, technical assistance and technology transfer. The fact that sustainable economic and social development and eradication of poverty are the first and overriding priorities of the developing country Parties will be taken fully into account, giving due consideration to the need for the protection of human health and the environment. 5. The Parties shall take full account of the specific needs and special situation of the least developed countries and the small island developing states in their actions with regard to funding. 6. A mechanism for the provision of adequate and sustainable financial resources to developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition on a grant or concessional basis to assist in their implementation of the Convention is hereby defined. The mechanism shall function under the authority, as appropriate, and guidance of, and be accountable to the Conference of the Parties for the purposes of this Convention. Its operation shall be entrusted to one or more entities, including existing international entities, as may be decided upon by the Conference of the Parties. The mechanism may also include other entities providing multilateral, regional and bilateral financial and technical assistance. Contributions to the mechanism shall be additional to other financial transfers to developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition as reflected in, and in accordance with, paragraph 2. 7. Pursuant to the objectives of this Convention and paragraph 6, the Conference of the Parties shall at its first meeting adopt appropriate guidance to be provided to the mechanism and shall agree with the entity or entities participating in the financial mechanism upon arrangements to give effect thereto. The guidance shall address, inter alia : 8. The Conference of the Parties shall review, not later than its second meeting and thereafter on a regular basis, the effectiveness of the mechanism established under this Article, its ability to address the changing needs of the developing country Parties and Parties with economies in transition, the criteria and guidance referred to in paragraph 7, the level of funding as well as the effectiveness of the performance of the institutional entities entrusted to operate the financial mechanism. It shall, based on such review, take appropriate action, if necessary, to improve the effectiveness of the mechanism, including by means of recommendations and guidance on measures to ensure adequate and sustainable funding to meet the needs of the Parties. Article 14 Interim financial arrangements The institutional structure of the Global Environment Facility, operated in accordance with the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility, shall, on an interim basis, be the principal entity entrusted with the operations of the financial mechanism referred to in Article 13, for the period between the date of entry into force of this Convention and the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties, or until such time as the Conference of the Parties decides which institutional structure will be designated in accordance with Article 13. The institutional structure of the Global Environment Facility should fulfill this function through operational measures related specifically to persistent organic pollutants taking into account that new arrangements for this area may be needed. Article 15 Reporting 1. Each Party shall report to the Conference of the Parties on the measures it has taken to implement the provisions of this Convention and on the effectiveness of such measures in meeting the objectives of the Convention. 2. Each Party shall provide to the Secretariat: 3. Such reporting shall be at periodic intervals and in a format to be decided by the Conference of the Parties at its first meeting. Article 16 Effectiveness evaluation 1. Commencing four years after the date of entry into force of this Convention, and periodically thereafter at intervals to be decided by the Conference of the Parties, the Conference shall evaluate the effectiveness of this Convention. 2. In order to facilitate such evaluation, the Conference of the Parties shall, at its first meeting, initiate the establishment of arrangements to provide itself with comparable monitoring data on the presence of the chemicals listed in Annexes A, B and C as well as their regional and global environmental transport. These arrangements: 3. The evaluation described in paragraph 1 shall be conducted on the basis of available scientific, environmental, technical and economic information, including: Article 17 Non-compliance The Conference of the Parties shall, as soon as practicable, develop and approve procedures and institutional mechanisms for determining non-compliance with the provisions of this Convention and for the treatment of Parties found to be in non-compliance. Article 18 Settlement of disputes 1. Parties shall settle any dispute between them concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention through negotiation or other peaceful means of their own choice. 2. When ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the Convention, or at any time thereafter, a Party that is not a regional economic integration organisation may declare in a written instrument submitted to the depository that, with respect to any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention, it recognises one or both of the following means of dispute settlement as compulsory in relation to any Party accepting the same obligation: 3. A Party that is a regional economic integration organisation may make a declaration with like effect in relation to arbitration in accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph 2(a). 4. A declaration made pursuant to paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 shall remain in force until it expires in accordance with its terms or until three months after written notice of its revocation has been deposited with the depository. 5. The expiry of a declaration, a notice of revocation or a new declaration shall not in any way affect proceedings pending before an arbitral tribunal or the International Court of Justice unless the parties to the dispute otherwise agree. 6. If the parties to a dispute have not accepted the same or any procedure pursuant to paragraph 2, and if they have not been able to settle their dispute within 12 months following notification by one party to another that a dispute exists between them, the dispute shall be submitted to a conciliation commission at the request of any party to the dispute. The conciliation commission shall render a report with recommendations. Additional procedures relating to the conciliation commission shall be included in an Annex to be adopted by the Conference of the Parties no later than at its second meeting. Article 19 Conference of the Parties 1. A Conference of the Parties is hereby established. 2. The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties shall be convened by the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme no later than one year after the entry into force of this Convention. Thereafter, ordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties shall be held at regular intervals to be decided by the Conference. 3. Extraordinary meetings of the Conference of the Parties shall be held at such other times as may be deemed necessary by the Conference, or at the written request of any Party provided that it is supported by at least one third of the Parties. 4. The Conference of the Parties shall by consensus agree upon and adopt at its first meeting, rules of procedure and financial rules for itself and any subsidiary bodies, as well as financial provisions governing the functioning of the Secretariat. 5. The Conference of the Parties shall keep under continuous review and evaluation the implementation of this Convention. It shall perform the functions assigned to it by the Convention and, to this end, shall: 6. The Conference of the Parties shall, at its first meeting, establish a subsidiary body to be called the Persistent Organic Pollutants Review Committee for the purposes of performing the functions assigned to that Committee by this Convention. In this regard: 7. The Conference of the Parties shall, at its third meeting, evaluate the continued need for the procedure contained in paragraph 2(b) of Article 3, including consideration of its effectiveness. 8. The United Nations, its specialised agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as any State not Party to this Convention, may be represented at meetings of the Conference of the Parties as observers. Any body or agency, whether national or international, governmental or non-governmental, qualified in matters covered by the Convention, and which has informed the Secretariat of its wish to be represented at a meeting of the Conference of the Parties as an observer may be admitted unless at least one third of the Parties present object. The admission and participation of observers shall be subject to the rules of procedure adopted by the Conference of the Parties. Article 20 Secretariat 1. A Secretariat is hereby established. 2. The functions of the Secretariat shall be: 3. The secretariat functions for this Convention shall be performed by the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, unless the Conference of the Parties decides, by a three-fourths majority of the Parties present and voting, to entrust the secretariat functions to one or more other international organisations. Article 21 Amendments to the Convention 1. Amendments to this Convention may be proposed by any Party. 2. Amendments to this Convention shall be adopted at a meeting of the Conference of the Parties. The text of any proposed amendment shall be communicated to the Parties by the Secretariat at least six months before the meeting at which it is proposed for adoption. The Secretariat shall also communicate proposed amendments to the signatories to this Convention and, for information, to the depository. 3. The Parties shall make every effort to reach agreement on any proposed amendment to this Convention by consensus. If all efforts at consensus have been exhausted, and no agreement reached, the amendment shall as a last resort be adopted by a three‐fourths majority vote of the Parties present and voting. 4. The amendment shall be communicated by the depository to all Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval. 5. Ratification, acceptance or approval of an amendment shall be notified to the depository in writing. An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 3 shall enter into force for the Parties having accepted it on the 90th day after the date of deposit of instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval by at least three-fourths of the Parties. Thereafter, the amendment shall enter into force for any other Party on the 90th day after the date on which that Party deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval of the amendment. Article 22 Adoption and amendment of Annexes 1. Annexes to this Convention shall form an integral part thereof and, unless expressly provided otherwise, a reference to this Convention constitutes at the same time a reference to any Annexes thereto. 2. Any additional Annexes shall be restricted to procedural, scientific, technical or administrative matters. 3. The following procedure shall apply to the proposal, adoption and entry into force of additional Annexes to this Convention: 4. The proposal, adoption and entry into force of amendments to Annex A, B or C shall be subject to the same procedures as for the proposal, adoption and entry into force of additional Annexes to this Convention, except that an amendment to Annex A, B or C shall not enter into force with respect to any Party that has made a declaration with respect to amendment to those Annexes in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article 25, in which case any such amendment shall enter into force for such a Party on the 90th day after the date of deposit with the depository of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with respect to such amendment. 5. The following procedure shall apply to the proposal, adoption and entry into force of an amendment to Annex D, E or F: 6. If an additional Annex or an amendment to an Annex is related to an amendment to this Convention, the additional Annex or amendment shall not enter into force until such time as the amendment to the Convention enters into force. Article 23 Right to vote 1. Each Party to this Convention shall have one vote, except as provided for in paragraph 2. 2. A regional economic integration organisation, on matters within its competence, shall exercise its right to vote with a number of votes equal to the number of its Member States that are Parties to this Convention. Such an organisation shall not exercise its right to vote if any of its member States exercises its right to vote, and vice versa. Article 24 Signature This Convention shall be open for signature at Stockholm by all States and regional economic integration organisations on 23 May 2001, and at the United Nations Headquarters in New York from 24 May 2001 to 22 May 2002. Article 25 Ratification, acceptance, approval or accession 1. This Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States and by regional economic integration organisations. It shall be open for accession by States and by regional economic integration organisations from the day after the date on which the Convention is closed for signature. Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be deposited with the depository. 2. Any regional economic integration organisation that becomes a Party to this Convention without any of its member States being a Party shall be bound by all the obligations under the Convention. In the case of such organisations, one or more of whose Member States is a Party to this Convention, the organisation and its Member States shall decide on their respective responsibilities for the performance of their obligations under the Convention. In such cases, the organisation and the Member States shall not be entitled to exercise rights under the Convention concurrently. 3. In its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, a regional economic integration organisation shall declare the extent of its competence in respect of the matters governed by this Convention. Any such organisation shall also inform the depository, who shall in turn inform the Parties, of any relevant modification in the extent of its competence. 4. In its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, any Party may declare that, with respect to it, any amendment to Annex A, B or C shall enter into force only upon the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with respect thereto. Article 26 Entry into force 1. This Convention shall enter into force on the 90th day after the date of deposit of the 50th instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. 2. For each State or regional economic integration organisation that ratifies, accepts or approves this Convention or accedes thereto after the deposit of the 50th instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the 90th day after the date of deposit by such State or regional economic integration organisation of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. 3. For the purpose of paragraphs 1 and 2, any instrument deposited by a regional economic integration organisation shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by member States of that organisation. Article 27 Reservations No reservations may be made to this Convention. Article 28 Withdrawal 1. At any time after three years from the date on which this Convention has entered into force for a Party, that Party may withdraw from the Convention by giving written notification to the depository. 2. Any such withdrawal shall take effect upon the expiry of one year from the date of receipt by the depository of the notification of withdrawal, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification of withdrawal. Article 29 Depository The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the depository of this Convention. Article 30 Authentic texts The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary‐General of the United Nations. IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised to that effect, have signed this Convention. Done at Stockholm on this twenty-second day of May, two thousand and one. ANNEX A ELIMINATION Part I Notes: Part II Polychlorinated biphenyls Each Party shall: ANNEX B RESTRICTION Part I Notes: Part II DDT (1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane) ANNEX C UNINTENTIONAL PRODUCTION Part I: Persistent organic pollutants subject to the requirements of Article 5 This Annex applies to the following persistent organic pollutants when formed and released unintentionally from anthropogenic sources: Part II: Source categories Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, hexachlorobenzene and polychlorinated biphenyls are unintentionally formed and released from thermal processes involving organic matter and chlorine as a result of incomplete combustion or chemical reactions. The following industrial source categories have the potential for comparatively high formation and release of these chemicals to the environment: Part III: Source categories Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, hexachlorobenzene and polychlorinated biphenyls may also be unintentionally formed and released from the following source categories, including: Part IV: Definitions Part V: General guidance on best available techniques and best environmental practices This Part provides general guidance to Parties on preventing or reducing releases of the chemicals listed in Part I. A. General prevention measures relating to both best available techniques and best environmental practices Priority should be given to the consideration of approaches to prevent the formation and release of the chemicals listed in Part I. Useful measures could include: B. Best available techniques The concept of best available techniques is not aimed at the prescription of any specific technique or technology, but at taking into account the technical characteristics of the installation concerned, its geographical location and the local environmental conditions. Appropriate control techniques to reduce releases of the chemicals listed in Part I are in general the same. In determining best available techniques, special consideration should be given, generally or in specific cases, to the following factors, bearing in mind the likely costs and benefits of a measure and consideration of precaution and prevention: C. Best environmental practices The Conference of the Parties may develop guidance with regard to best environmental practices. ANNEX D INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS AND SCREENING CRITERIA The proposing Party shall provide a statement of the reasons for concern including, where possible, a comparison of toxicity or ecotoxicity data with detected or predicted levels of a chemical resulting or anticipated from its long-range environmental transport, and a short statement indicating the need for global control. The proposing Party shall, to the extent possible and taking into account its capabilities, provide additional information to support the review of the proposal referred to in paragraph 6 of Article 8. In developing such a proposal, a Party may draw on technical expertise from any source. ANNEX E INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE RISK PROFILE The purpose of the review is to evaluate whether the chemical is likely, as a result of its long-range environmental transport, to lead to significant adverse human health and/or environmental effects, such that global action is warranted. For this purpose, a risk profile shall be developed that further elaborates on, and evaluates, the information referred to in Annex D and includes, as far as possible, the following types of information: ANNEX F INFORMATION ON SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS An evaluation should be undertaken regarding possible control measures for chemicals under consideration for inclusion in this Convention, encompassing the full range of options, including management and elimination. For this purpose, relevant information should be provided relating to socio-economic considerations associated with possible control measures to enable a decision to be taken by the Conference of the Parties. Such information should reflect due regard for the differing capabilities and conditions among the Parties and should include consideration of the following indicative list of items: Declaration by the community in accordance with Article 25(3) of the Convention The Community declares that, in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 175 thereof, it is competent for entering into international environmental agreements, and for implementing the obligations resulting therefrom, which contribute to the pursuit of the following objectives: Moreover, the Community declares that it has already adopted legal instruments, binding on its Member States, covering matters governed by this Convention, and will submit and update, as appropriate, a list of those legal instruments to the Conference of the Parties in accordance with Article 15(1) of the Convention. The Community is responsible for the performance of those obligations resulting from the Convention which are covered by Community law in force. The exercise of Community competence is, by its nature, subject to continuous development.