COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2020/1147 of 31 July 2020 granting a Union authorisation for the single biocidal product ‘ClearKlens product based on IPA’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular the first subparagraph of Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0022128-0000 is granted to Diversey Europe Operations B.V. for the making available on the market and use of the single biocidal product ‘ClearKlens product based on IPA’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 24 August 2020 until 31 July 2030. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 31 July 2020. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 11 December 2019 on the Union authorisation of ‘ClearKlens product based on IPA’ (ECHA/BPC/236/2019). Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product ClearKlens product based on IPA Product type 2 – Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0022128-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0022128-0000 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Trade name(s) of the product 1.2. Authorisation holder 1.3. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the product 2.2. Type of formulation AL – Any other liquid 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1 – PT02: Non-porous hard surface disinfectant – professionals – mopping 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Ready to use product for the disinfection of non-porous hard surfaces. Clean and dry the surface before disinfection. Wet the mop with the disinfectant and mop the surface. Wet the surface completely. Allow to take effect for at least 30 seconds. Used mops must be stored in a closed container. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Apply the product only in a sufficiently ventilated room. The minimum air change rates required are: Do not use more than 18,4 mL product/m 2 . 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 2 – PT02: Non-porous hard surface disinfectant – professionals – cloth 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Ready to use product for the disinfection of non-porous hard surfaces. Clean and dry the surface before disinfection. Wet the cloth with the disinfectant and wipe the surface. Wet the surface completely. Allow to take effect for at least 30 seconds. In cleanrooms, the exact amount of required product can also be dispensed either using a low flow-rate spray lance or into a bucket via a system of pipes. Used cloths must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Apply the product only in a sufficiently ventilated room. The minimum air change rates required are Do not use more than 18,4 mL product/m 2 . The following personal risk mitigation measure can be applied for wiping disinfection unless it can be replaced by technical and/or organisational measures: Wear eye protection during handling of the product. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 3 – PT02: Non-porous hard surface disinfectant – professionals – spraying 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Ready to use product for the disinfection of non-porous hard surfaces. Clean and dry the surface before disinfection. Spray the surface, wipe if necessary to spread the product. Wet the surface completely. Allow to take effect for at least 30 seconds. Used cloths must be disposed in a closed container. Number of applications per type of packaging, necessary to obtain an application rate of 18,4 mL product/m 2 surface: 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Apply the product only in a sufficiently ventilated room. The minimum air change rates required are Do not use more than 18,4 mL product/m 2 . 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 4. Use # 4 – PT02: Non-porous glove disinfectant – professionals – non-porous glove disinfection 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Ready to use product for the disinfection of non-porous gloves. Automatic and manual dosing: Apply 3 mL of the product directly on clean gloved hands, distribute evenly and make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to take effect for at least 30 seconds. Number of applications per type of packaging, necessary to apply 3 mL of product on clean gloved hands: 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Apply the product only in a sufficiently ventilated room. The minimum air change rates required are 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) 5.1. Instructions for use See use specific instructions. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear new protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). Avoid contact with eyes. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Inhalation: May cause drowsiness or dizziness. Eye contact: Causes severe irritation. IF INHALED: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. Call a POISON CENTRE, doctor or physician if you feel unwell. IF IN EYES: Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. If irritation occurs and persists, get medical attention. IF SWALLOWED: Rinse mouth. Do NOT induce vomiting. Get medical attention or advice if you feel unwell. Environmental precautions: The product should not reach sewage water or drainage ditch undiluted or unneutralised. Do not allow the product to enter drainage system, surface or ground water. Dilute with plenty of water. Methods and material for containment and cleaning up. Absorb the product with liquid-binding material (sand, diatomite, universal binders, sawdust). 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The product and its container must be disposed of in a safe way, in compliance with any relevant legislation on the disposal of hazardous waste. Dispose of or incinerate in accordance with the local regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 2 years shelf-life. Keep only in original packaging. Store away from direct sunlight and below 30 °C. Store in a closed container. 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No: 67-63-0), for which a European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for all authorised uses.