COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2020/692 of 30 January 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for entry into the Union, and the movement and handling after entry of consignments of certain animals, germinal products and products of animal origin (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health (‘Animal Health Law’) ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 234(2), 237(4) and 239(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: PART I GENERAL RULES TITLE 1 SUBJECT MATTER, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation lays down supplementing animal health rules concerning the entry into the Union of consignments of certain species and categories of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin from third countries or territories or zones thereof, or compartments in the case of aquaculture animals. It also lays down rules concerning the movement and handling of those consignments after their entry in the Union. 2. Part I lays down: 3. Part II lays down the general animal health requirements for entry into the Union, as well as the movement and handling after the entry, and derogations from such requirements for certain terrestrial animals (Title 1). In addition, it lays down specific animal health requirements that are also applicable to the each of those species and categories of terrestrial animals, in particular: 4. Part III lays down the general animal health requirements for entry into the Union, as well as the movement and handling after the entry, and derogations from such requirements for germinal products of the following species and categories of kept terrestrial animals: 5. Part IV lays down the general animal health requirements for entry into the Union, as well as the movement and handling after the entry, and derogations from those requirements for products of animal origin of the following species and categories of terrestrial animals: 6. Part V lays down the animal health requirements for entry into the Union, as well as the movement and handling after the entry, and derogations from those requirements for the following species of aquatic animals at all life stages as well as their products of animal origin, other than wild aquatic animals and products of animal origin from those wild aquatic animals landed from fishing vessels for direct human consumption: 7. Part VI lays down the general rules, certain derogations and additional requirements for transit through the Union and for the return to the Union of certain species and categories of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin. 8. Part VII lays down final provisions. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the definitions laid down in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 and Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 shall apply, except where those definitions cover terms that are defined in the second paragraph of this Article. In addition, the following definitions shall also apply: TITLE 2 GENERAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION, AND MOVEMENT AND HANDLING AFTER THE ENTRY OF CONSIGNMENTS OF ANIMALS, GERMINAL PRODUCTS AND PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN Article 3 Obligations of the competent authorities of Member States The competent authority shall permit the entry into the Union of consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin of species and categories covered by Parts II to VI, which are presented for the purpose of official controls as provided for in Article 47(1) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, provided that: Article 4 The date of certification of consignments 1. Consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin of species and categories falling within the scope of this Regulation shall only be permitted to enter the Union provided that such consignments were certified for dispatch to the Union not earlier than the date on which the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof, or compartment thereof in the case of aquaculture animals, was listed for entry into the Union of the particular species and category of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin. 2. Consignments of animals, hatching eggs and products of animal origin originating from a third country or territory or zone thereof, or compartment thereof in the case of aquaculture animals, shall not be permitted to enter the Union from the date on which it no longer complies with the animal health requirements for entry into the Union of the particular species and category of animals, hatching eggs or products of animal origin, unless specific conditions have been assigned by the Union in the list to the listed third country, territory or zone thereof and to the particular species and categories of animals, hatching eggs or products of animal origin. Article 5 Obligations of operators 1. Operators responsible for entry into the Union of consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin of the species and categories falling within the scope of this Regulation, shall present those consignments to the competent authority in the Union for the purpose of official controls, as provided for in Article 47(1) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625, and shall ensure that such consignments comply with the following requirements: 2. Operators responsible for the movement of consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin of the species and categories falling within the scope of this Regulation from the point of entry in the Union to their place of destination, and those responsible for the handling of such consignments after their entry into the Union shall ensure that the consignments: Article 6 National legislation and animal health systems of the third country or territory of origin 1. Consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union from a third country or territory where: 2. Consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin intended for entry into the Union shall only be permitted to enter the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof where such consignments may be lawfully placed on the market and traded in that third country or territory of origin or zone thereof. Article 7 General requirements as regards the health status of the animals, germinal products and products of animal origin 1. Consignments of animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment: 2. Consignments of germinal products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were obtained from animals which at the time of collection: 3. Consignments of products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were obtained from animals which: Article 8 General requirements as regards the establishment of origin of the animals In addition to the specific requirements laid down in Parts II to V, consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the establishment of origin of the kept animals, or the establishment of origin of the kept animals from which the germinal products or products of animal origin were obtained, complies with the following requirements: Article 9 Sampling, laboratory tests and other tests Consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union if sampling, laboratory tests and other tests required by this Regulation have been carried out: Article 10 Disease freedom of the place of origin and specific conditions 1. Consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the freedom from particular diseases of the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof or of the establishment of origin of the animals, germinal products or products of animal origin, required by this Regulation has been demonstrated by the competent authority of the third country or territory of origin: 2. In the case of aquaculture animals and products of animal origin from aquaculture animals, where disease freedom from particular diseases is required for the compartment of origin, consignments of those commodities shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the competent authority of the third country of origin has demonstrated disease freedom in accordance with paragraph 1(a) and (b). 3. Where specific conditions related to the disease freedom from particular diseases of the third country or territory of origin, or zone thereof, are required in this Regulation: PART II ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF KEPT TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 3 AND 5 TITLE 1 GENERAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR KEPT TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS Article 11 The residency period required for kept terrestrial animals Consignments of kept terrestrial animals other than dogs, cats and ferrets, shall only be permitted to enter the Union subject to compliance with the following requirements: Article 12 Derogations regarding the residency period for registered horses for competition, races and cultural events 1. By way of derogation of point (b)(i) of Article 11, equine animals other than equine animals intended for slaughter shall be regarded as complying with the residency period provided for in Table 1 of Annex III, if prior to their dispatch to the Union they have been resident during the period indicated in the second column of Table 1 of Annex III in addition to the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof also in: 2. By way of derogation from point (b)(ii) of Article 11, registered horses for competition, races and cultural equestrian events shall be regarded as complying with the residency requirements provided for in the third column of Table 1 of Annex III if they have been resident in the third country of origin or the third country of intermediate residence in establishments other than the establishment of origin provided that the other establishments: 3. Also by way of derogation from point (b)(ii) of Article 11, registered horses for competition, races and cultural equestrian events that have had contact with equine animals which were entered into the third country, territory or zone thereof from another third country territory, or zone thereof, or from another zone in the third country or territory of origin shall be permitted to enter the Union provided that: Article 13 Inspection of terrestrial animals prior to dispatch to the Union 1. Consignments of terrestrial animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment have been subjected to a clinical inspection, carried out by an official veterinarian in the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof within the period of 24 hours prior to the time of loading for dispatch to the Union for the purpose of the detection of signs indicative of the occurrence of diseases, including the relevant listed diseases referred to in Annex I and emerging diseases. In the case of poultry and captive birds, that inspection shall cover both the animals intended for dispatch to the Union and the flock of origin. 2. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, in the case of registered equine animals the inspection referred to therein may be carried out within 48 hours prior to the time of loading for dispatch to the Union or on the last working day prior to dispatch to the Union. 3. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, in the case of dogs, cats and ferrets the inspection referred to therein may be carried out within the period of 48 hours prior to the time of loading for dispatch to the Union. Article 14 General rules for the dispatch to the Union of terrestrial animals 1. Consignments of terrestrial animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if, from the time of loading at the establishment of origin for dispatch to the Union until the time of their arrival in the Union, the animals of the consignment have not been in contact with other terrestrial animals of: 2. When transported by air, sea, railway, road or on foot, the consignments referred to in paragraph 1 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they have not been transported through, unloaded or transhipped in a third country or territory or zone thereof which is not listed for entry into the Union of the specific species and category of animals and their intended use in the Union. 3. When transported by sea, even for part of the journey, the consignments referred to in paragraph 1 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they arrive to the Union accompanied by a declaration, attached to the animal health certificate accompanying the animals and signed by the master of the vessel, providing the following information: Article 15 Derogation for the transhipment of terrestrial animals other than equine animals in non-listed third countries or territories in the event of a technical problem or another unforeseen incident 1. By way of derogation from Article 14(2), the competent authority shall authorise the entry into the Union of consignments of terrestrial animals, other than equine animals, which have been transhipped from the original means of transport of dispatch into another means of transport for onward travel in a third country or territory or zone thereof which is not a listed third country or territory or zone thereof for entry of the particular species and category of animals into the Union, only if the transhipment operation took place because of the occurrence of a technical problem or another unforeseen incident causing logistic problems during the transport of the animals to the Union by sea or by air, in order to complete the transport to the point of entry into Union, provided that: 2. The derogation provided for in paragraph 1 shall not apply to consignments of honeybees and bumble bees. Article 16 Derogation for the transhipment of equine animals in non-listed third countries or territories By way of derogation from Article 14(2), where consignments of equine animals have been transhipped to another means of transport during the transport of the animals to the Union in a third country or territory or zone thereof which is not a listed third country or territory or zone thereof for entry of the particular category of equine animals, those consignments shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they comply with the following requirements: Article 17 General requirements regarding means of transport of terrestrial animals 1. Consignments of kept terrestrial animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the means of transport used for their transport are: 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the transport of consignments of honeybees and bumble bees intended for entry into the Union. Article 18 Requirements regarding containers in which terrestrial animals are transported to the Union Consignments of kept terrestrial animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the containers in which kept terrestrial animals are transported to the Union in the means of transport: Article 19 Movement and handling after entry of terrestrial animals 1. Following their entry into the Union, consignments of terrestrial animals shall be transported directly without delay to: 2. Where the destination of the consignments of terrestrial animals entered from a third country or territory or zone thereof is a slaughterhouse, an approved quarantine establishment or a confined establishment in the Union, the transport to and arrival at the place of the destination of the consignment shall be monitored in accordance with Article 2 and 3 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1666 ( 19 ) . 3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the entry into the Union of registered equine animals from third countries and to the re-entry after temporary export of registered horses. TITLE 2 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR UNGULATES CHAPTER 1 Specific animal health requirements for ungulates Article 20 Dispatch of ungulates to the Union 1. Consignments of ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments have been dispatched from the establishment of origin to the Union without passing through any other establishment. 2. By way of derogation of paragraph 1, consignments of ungulates coming from more than one establishment of origin may be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment have undergone a single assembly operation in the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof subject to compliance with the following conditions: Article 21 Identification of ungulates 1. Consignments of ungulates, other than equine animals, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment were individually identified prior to being dispatched from the establishment of origin, by a physical means of identification with a visible, legible and indelible display of: 2. Consignments of equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment were individually identified prior to being dispatched from the establishment of origin at least by one of the following methods: 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, consignments of ungulates intended for confined establishments may be permitted to enter the Union if those animals are individually identified by an injectable transponder or an alternative method of identification which ensures an unequivocal link between the animal and its accompanying entry documentation. 4. Where ungulates are identified with an electronic identifier which does not comply with ISO Standards 11784 and 11785 the operator responsible for entry into the Union of the consignments of ungulates shall provide the reading device which enables at any time the verification of the identification of the animal. Article 22 The third country or territory of origin of ungulates or zone thereof 1. Consignments of ungulates, other than equine animals, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof free from the category A diseases referred to in the table set out in point 1 of Part A of Annex IV for the period referred to in that table. 2. Consignments of equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof: 3. The periods referred to in paragraph 1 and 2 may be reduced for diseases included in Part B of Annex IV under the relevant specific conditions referred therein. 4. Consignments of ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof where vaccination against the category A diseases referred to in Part C of Annex IV has not been carried out in accordance with the details set out in: 5. As regards infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex ( M. bovis, M. caprae, M. tuberculosis ), consignments of bovine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment either: 6. As regards infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis , consignments of bovine, ovine and caprine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment either: 7. As regards infection with bluetongue virus (serotypes 1-24), consignments of ungulates of listed species shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment either: 8. As regards enzootic bovine leukosis, consignments of bovine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if those animals either: 9. Consignments of ungulates intended for entry into Member States or zones thereof with disease-free status or with an approved eradication programme for the category C diseases referred to in Annex VII, for which the species of ungulates are listed, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment: Article 23 The establishment of origin of ungulates 1. Consignments of ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment: 2. As regards infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex ( M. bovis , M. caprae, M. tuberculosis ), consignments of bovine, ovine, caprine, camelid and cervid animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the establishment of origin of the animals of the consignment complies with the relevant requirements set out in point 1 of Annex IX. 3. As regards infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis , consignments of bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, camelid and cervid animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the establishment of origin of the animals of the consignment complies with the relevant requirements set out in point 2 of Annex IX. Article 24 The ungulates of the consignment 1. Consignments of ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment comply with the following requirements: 2. As regards infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex ( M. bovis , M. caprae, M. tuberculosis ) and infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis consignments of listed species of ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment have not been vaccinated against those diseases. 3. As regards infection with bluetongue virus (serotypes 1-24), consignments of listed species of ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment have not been vaccinated with a live vaccine against this disease in the last 60 days prior to the date of movement. 4. Consignments of ungulates intended for entry into Member States or zones thereof with disease-free status or with an approved eradication programme for the category C diseases referred to in Annex VII, for which the species of ungulates are listed, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment have not been vaccinated against those diseases. 5. In addition to requirements laid down in paragraph 1, consignments of uncastrated males of ovine animals and ungulates of the family Tayassuidae shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment comply with the relevant specific requirements as regards infection with Brucella laid down in Annex X. 6. In addition to requirements laid down in paragraph 1, consignments of equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment comply with the specific conditions set out in point 2 of Annex XI, depending on the sanitary group, as determined in accordance with point 1 of Annex XI, to which the third country or territory or zone thereof has been assigned in the list. Article 25 Derogations and additional requirements for entry into the Union of ungulates for slaughter By way of derogation from the requirements laid down in Article 22(5) and (6), consignments of ungulates of the species referred to in those paragraphs which do not comply with those requirements shall be permitted to enter the Union provided that the animals of the consignment are only intended for slaughter. Article 26 Movement and handling of ungulates after their entry into the Union Following their entry into the Union, ungulates, except horses entering for competition, races and cultural equestrian events, shall remain in their establishment of destination for a period of time of at least 30 days since their arrival to that establishment. CHAPTER 2 Special rules for entry into the Union of kept ungulates intended for confined establishments Article 27 Animal health requirements not applicable to ungulates intended for confined establishments Articles 11, 22, 23, 24 and 26 shall not apply to consignments of ungulates, excluding equine animals, entering the Union under the conditions laid down in Articles 28 to 34. Article 28 Specific rules for entry of ungulates intended for confined establishments 1. Consignments of ungulates intended for confined establishments shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment comply with the following requirements: 2. The competent authority of the Member State of destination shall grant a specific authorisation for entry of each consignment of ungulates referred to in paragraph 1, following the favourable outcome of an assessment of the potential risks that the entry of such consignment may present for the Union. 3. The entry into the Union and the movement of each consignment of ungulates referred to in paragraph 1 through Member States other than the Member State of destination shall be only permitted subject to the authorisation of the competent authorities of those Member States of passage. That authorisation shall be granted only on the basis of the favourable outcome of a risk assessment carried out by the competent authority of those Member States of passage, based on the information submitted to them by the Member State of the place of destination in the Union. 4. The Member State of the place of destination of the consignments referred to in paragraph 1 shall notify the Commission and the other Member States within the framework of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food and Feed and notify directly the point of entry in the Union of the ungulates, of the authorisations granted pursuant to paragraph 1 and 2, prior to any possible movement through other Member States and prior to the arrival of such ungulates into their territory. Article 29 Listing of confined establishments of origin of ungulates in third countries or territories 1. Member States may draw up a list of confined establishments in third countries and territories, from which the entry of ungulates into their territory shall be permitted. That list shall specify the species of ungulates permitted to enter the territory of the Member State from each confined establishment in the third country or territory. 2. Member States may include in their list of confined establishments provided for in paragraph 1, confined establishments that are already included in such lists of other Member States. Except as provided for in the first subparagraph, Member States shall only include a confined establishment in a third country or territory in the list of confined establishments provided for in paragraph 1, following the favourable outcome of a complete assessment based on the following: 3. Member States shall keep the lists of confined establishments provided for in paragraph 1 up-to-date, taking into account in particular any suspension or withdrawal of the approval granted by the competent authority of a third country or territory of origin as referred to in Article 30, or by the competent authority of another Member State. 4. Member States shall make the lists provided for in paragraph 1 publicly available on their websites. Article 30 Conditions for confined establishments of origin of ungulates in third countries or territories for the purpose of Article 29 Member States shall only include a confined establishment located in a third country or territory on the list of confined establishments provided for in Article 29, if the confined establishment is approved by the competent authority of the third country or territory and complies with the following conditions: Article 31 Derogation from the requirement of listing of the third country or territory and the listing of the confined establishment of origin of ungulates 1. By way of derogation from the requirements laid down Article 3(1) and Article 28(1), consignments of ungulates from establishments in third countries or territories which do not comply with those requirements shall be permitted to enter the Union if they are intended for a confined establishment and provided that: 2. The Member State of the place of destination of the consignment referred to in paragraph 1 shall notify the Commission and the Member States within the framework of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food and Feed and notify directly the point of entry in the Union of the ungulates, of the authorisations granted pursuant to paragraph 1, prior to any possible movement through other Member States and prior to the arrival of such ungulates into their territory. Article 32 Additional requirements to be fulfilled by establishments of origin of ungulates intended for a confined establishment pursuant to the derogation laid down in Article 31 The competent authority of a Member State of destination shall only authorise derogations, as provided for in Article 31, for consignments of ungulates that comply with the following additional conditions: Article 33 Animal health requirements for the confined establishment of origin of ungulates as regards listed diseases Consignments of ungulates intended for a confined establishment located in the Union shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the confined establishment of origin complies with the following requirements as regards listed diseases: Article 34 Animal health requirements for the ungulates of the consignment as regards listed diseases Consignments of ungulates intended for a confined establishment located in the Union shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment comply with the following additional animal health requirements: Where the specific guarantees referred to in point (c)(ii) include a quarantine period in a vector-protected facility in the confined establishment, this facility must comply with the requirements set out in Part F of Annex XII. Article 35 Movement and handling of ungulates intended to confined establishments after the entry Following their entry into the Union, ungulates originating from a confined establishment in a third country or territory, as referred to in Article 27, must remain in the confined establishment of destination for a period of at least 6 months prior to the date of movement to another confined establishment in the Union, unless they are exported from the Union or moved for slaughter. TITLE 3 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR POULTRY AND CAPTIVE BIRDS CHAPTER 1 Specific animal health requirements for poultry SECTION 1 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SPECIES AND CATEGORIES OF POULTRY Article 36 Poultry imported into the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof prior to entry into Union 1. The following consignments shall only be permitted to enter the Union where the competent authority of the third country or territory of origin has provided guarantees in accordance with paragraph 2: 2. Consignments of animals referred to in paragraph 1 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the competent authority of the third country or territory of origin of the poultry has provided guarantees that: Article 37 Requirements concerning the third country or territory of origin of poultry or zone thereof Consignments of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof which complies with the following requirements: Article 38 Freedom from highly pathogenic avian influenza of the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof 1. A third country or territory or zone thereof shall be considered as being free from highly pathogenic avian influenza when it has provided the following guarantees to the Commission: 2. Following an outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza in a third country or territory or zone thereof previously considered as free of that disease, as referred to in paragraph 1, that third country or territory or zone thereof shall again be considered as free from highly pathogenic avian influenza, subject to compliance with the following conditions: Article 39 Freedom from infection with Newcastle disease virus of the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof 1. A third country or territory or zone thereof shall be considered free from infection with Newcastle disease virus when no outbreak of infection with Newcastle disease virus has occurred in poultry in that third country or territory or zone thereof for a period of at least 12 months preceding the date of certification of the consignment by the official veterinarian for dispatch to the Union. 2. When an outbreak of infection with Newcastle disease virus occurs in a third country or territory or zone thereof previously free from that disease, as referred to in paragraph 1, that third country or territory or zone thereof shall again be considered as free from that infection with Newcastle disease virus subject to compliance with the following conditions: Article 40 The establishment of origin of poultry 1. Consignments of breeding poultry and productive poultry shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment come from establishments approved by the competent authority of the third country or territory of origin in accordance with requirements which are at least as stringent as to those laid down in Article 8 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/2035, and: 2. Consignments of poultry intended for slaughter shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment come from establishments: 3. Consignments of day-old chicks shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment: Article 41 Specific preventive measures for the containers in which poultry are transported Consignments of poultry shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if such consignments have been transported in containers which, in addition to the requirements of Article 18, comply with the following requirements: Article 42 Entry of poultry into Member States with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination 1. Consignments of breeding poultry and productive poultry intended for a Member State with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment comply with the following requirements: 2. Consignments of poultry intended for slaughter intended for a Member State with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination, shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment come from flocks which: 3. Consignments of day-old chicks intended for a Member State with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment: SECTION 2 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR BREEDING AND PRODUCTIVE POULTRY Article 43 Identification of breeding ratites and productive ratites Consignments of breeding ratites and productive ratites shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment are individually identified by neck-tags or an injectable transponder: Article 44 Specific animal health requirements for the flock of origin of consignments of breeding and productive poultry Consignments of breeding poultry and productive poultry shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from flocks which comply with the following requirements: SECTION 3 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR POULTRY INTENDED FOR SLAUGHTER Article 45 Specific animal health requirements for the flock of origin of consignments of poultry intended for slaughter Consignments of poultry intended for slaughter shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from flocks which comply with the following requirements: SECTION 4 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR DAY-OLD CHICKS Article 46 Specific animal health requirements for the flocks of origin of consignments of day-old chicks Consignments of day-old chicks shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from flocks which comply with the following requirements: Article 47 Specific animal health requirements for the hatching eggs of origin of consignments of day-old chicks Consignments of day-old chicks shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from hatching eggs which: Article 48 Specific animal health requirements for the day-old chicks Consignments of day-old chicks shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment have not been vaccinated against avian influenza. SECTION 5 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR LESS THAN 20 HEADS OF POULTRY Article 49 Derogation and specific requirements for consignments of less than 20 heads of poultry, other than ratites By way of derogation from Article 14(3), Article 17, Article 18, Article 40 and Article 41 and Articles 43 to 48, consignments containing less than 20 heads of poultry other than ratites, shall be permitted to enter the Union provided that such consignments comply with the following requirements: SECTION 6 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVEMENT AND HANDLING OF POULTRY AFTER THE ENTRY INTO THE UNION Article 50 Obligations on operators at the establishment of destination following the entry into the Union of consignments of poultry 1. Operators at the establishment of destination shall keep breeding poultry, productive poultry, except productive poultry for restocking supplies of game birds, and day-old chicks which have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof on the establishments of destination from their date of arrival for a continuous period of at least: 2. In the case of poultry other than ratites, the 6-week period provided for in paragraph 1(a), may be reduced to 3 weeks, provided that, at the request of the operator, sampling and testing in accordance with Article 51(b) have been carried out with favourable results. 3. Operators at the establishment of destination shall ensure that poultry referred to in paragraph 1, undergo a clinical inspection carried out by an official veterinarian on the establishment of destination no later than the date of expiry of the relevant periods provided for in that paragraph. 4. During the periods provided for in paragraph 1, operators shall keep poultry which have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof, separate from other flocks of poultry. 5. Where poultry referred to in paragraph 1 are placed in the same flock as other poultry present at the establishment of destination, the periods referred to in paragraph 1(a) and (b) shall commence from the date of introduction of the last bird on the establishment of destination and no poultry present shall be moved from the flock before the expiry of those periods. Article 51 Obligation on the competent authorities as regards sampling and testing of consignments of poultry after entry into the Union The competent authority of the Member State of destination shall ensure that: Article 52 Obligation on the competent authorities as regards sampling and testing following the entry into the Union of consignments of ratites originating from a third country or territory or zone thereof not free from infection with Newcastle disease virus The competent authority of the Member State of destination shall ensure that breeding ratites, productive ratites and day-old chicks of ratites that have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof that is not free from infection with Newcastle disease virus, during the periods provided for in Article 50(1): CHAPTER 2 Specific animal health requirements for captive birds SECTION 1 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR CAPTIVE BIRDS Article 53 Requirements concerning the identification of captive birds Consignments of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment are identified with an individual identification number by means of a unique marked closed leg-ring or an injectable transponder, which contains at least the following information: Article 54 Specific preventive measures for the containers in which captive birds are transported Consignments of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments have been transported in containers which, in addition to the requirements regarding containers laid down in Article 18, comply with the following requirements: Article 55 Requirements concerning the establishment of origin of the consignment of captive birds Consignments of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment come from an establishment which complies with the following requirements: Article 56 Specific animal health requirements for the approval, maintenance of approval and suspension, withdrawal or re-granting of the approval of the establishments of origin of the consignment of captive birds 1. Consignments of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment come from establishments approved by the competent authority of the third country or territory of origin as referred to in Article 55, and that comply with the following requirements set out in Annex XIX: 2. Consignments of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if the animals of the consignment come from establishments which are under the control of an official veterinarian of the competent authority of the third country or territory, who shall: 3. The approval of an establishment of captive birds shall be suspended or withdrawn where that establishment no longer complies with the conditions set out in paragraphs 1 and 2, or there has been a change of use so that it is no longer used exclusively for captive birds. 4. The approval of an establishment of captive birds shall be suspended when the competent authority of the third country or territory has received notification of the suspicion of highly pathogenic avian influenza, infection with Newcastle disease virus or avian chlamydiosis, and until the suspicion has been officially ruled out. Following the notification of suspicion, the necessary measures to confirm or rule out the suspicion and to avoid any spread of disease shall be taken, in accordance with the requirements of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/687. 5. When the approval of an establishment has been suspended or withdrawn, the establishment shall again be approved provided the following conditions are met: 6. Consignments of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter into the Union when the third country or territory of origin has undertaken to inform the Commission of the suspension, withdrawal or re-granting of approval of any establishment. Article 57 Specific animal health requirements for the captive birds Consignments of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment: Article 58 Requirements concerning the entry of consignments of captive birds into Member States with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination Consignments of captive birds of galliformes species intended for a Member State with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment: SECTION 2 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVEMENT AND HANDLING OF CAPTIVE BIRDS AFTER THEIR ENTRY INTO THE UNION Article 59 Requirements concerning the movement of captive birds after entry into the Union Following their entry into the Union, consignments of captive birds shall be transported without delay directly to a quarantine establishment approved in accordance with Article 14 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/2035, as follows: Article 60 Obligation on operators at the quarantine establishment following the entry into the Union of consignments of captive birds Operators of the quarantine establishment for the captive birds referred to in Article 59 shall: Article 61 Obligation on the competent authorities following the entry into the Union of consignments of captive birds Following the arrival of the captive birds in the quarantine establishment referred to in Article 59, the competent authority shall: SECTION 3 DEROGATIONS FROM THE ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF CAPTIVE BIRDS AND FOR MOVEMENT AND HANDLING OF THOSE BIRDS AFTER THEIR ENTRY INTO THE UNION Article 62 Derogation from animal health requirements for captive birds originating from certain third countries or territories By way of derogation from requirements laid down in Articles 3 to 10 of Part I, except point (a)(i) of Article 3, Articles 11 to 19 and Articles 53 to 61, consignments of captive birds which do not comply with those requirements shall be permitted to enter the Union if they originate from third countries or territories specifically listed for the entry into the Union of captive birds based on equivalent guarantees. TITLE 4 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR HONEYBEES AND BUMBLE BEES CHAPTER 1 General animal health requirements for honeybees and bumble bees Article 63 Authorised categories of bees Only consignments of the following categories of bees shall be permitted to enter the Union: Article 64 Dispatch to the Union of honeybees and bumble bees Consignments of queen honeybees and bumble bees shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they comply with the following requirements: CHAPTER 2 Specific animal health requirements for queen honeybees Article 65 The apiary of origin of queen honeybees Consignments of queen honeybees shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the honeybees of the consignment originate from an apiary which is situated in an area: Article 66 The hive of origin of queen honeybees Consignments of queen honeybees shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the honeybees of the consignment originate from hives from which samples of the comb have been tested for American foulbrood with negative results within the period of 30 days prior to the date of loading for dispatch to the Union. Article 67 The consignment of queen honeybees Consignments of queen honeybees shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments are in closed cages, each containing one single queen honeybee with a maximum of 20 accompanying attendants. Article 68 Additional guarantees for queen honeybees destined to certain Member States or zone as regards the infestation with Varroa spp. ( Varroosis ) Consignments of queen honeybees destined to a Member State or zone with disease-free status for infestation with Varroa spp. ( Varroosis ) shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments comply with the following requirements: CHAPTER 3 Specific animal health requirements for bumble bees Article 69 The establishment of origin of bumble bees Consignments of bumble bees shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the bumble bees of the consignment: Article 70 The consignment of bumble bees Consignments of bumble bees shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments have been dispatched to the Union in closed containers, each containing a colony of a maximum of 200 adult bumble bees, with or without a queen. CHAPTER 4 Specific animal health requirements for handling after the entry of queen honeybees and bumble bees Article 71 Handling after the entry of queen honeybees and bumble bees 1. Following their entry into the Union, queen honeybees must not be introduced in local colonies unless they are transferred from the transport cage to new cages in accordance with paragraph 2 with the permission and, as appropriate, under the direct supervision of the competent authority. 2. Following the transfer in new cages as referred to in paragraph 1, the transport cages, attendants, and other material that accompanied the queen honeybees from the third country of origin must be submitted to an official laboratory for examination to rule out the presence of Aethina Tumida (Small hive beetle), including eggs and larvae, and any signs of the Tropilaelaps mite. 3. Operators receiving bumble bees shall destroy the container and the packaging material that accompanied them from the third country or territory of origin but they may keep them in the container in which they entered into the Union until the end of the lifespan of the colony. Article 72 Specific obligations for the competent authorities in the Member States The competent authority of the Member State of the place of destination of consignments of honeybees or bumble bees shall: TITLE 5 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS Article 73 Dispatch of the dogs, cats and ferrets to the Union 1. Consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments have been dispatched from their establishment of origin to the Union, without passing through any other establishment. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets coming from more than one establishment of origin may be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment have undergone a single assembly operation in the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof subject to compliance with the following conditions: Article 74 Identification of dogs, cats and ferrets 1. Consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment have been individually identified by means of an injectable transponder implanted by a veterinarian which fulfils the technical requirements for means of identification of animals laid down in implementing acts adopted by the Commission pursuant Article 120 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 2. Where the implanted injectable transponder referred to in paragraph 1 does not fulfil the technical specifications referred to in that paragraph, the operator responsible for entry into the Union of the consignment shall provide the reading device which enables the verification of the individual identification of the animal at any time. Article 75 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof of dogs, cats and ferrets Consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof where rules on the prevention and control of infection with rabies virus are in force and implemented effectively to minimise the risk of infection of dogs, cats and ferrets, including rules on imports of those species from other third countries or territories. Article 76 The dogs, cats and ferrets 1. Consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the animals of the consignment comply with the following requirements: 2. By way of derogation of paragraph 1(b), dogs, cats and ferrets originating in third countries or territories or zones thereof included in the list set out in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013 ( 22 ) shall be permitted to enter the Union without being subjected to the rabies titration test. 3. Consignments of dogs shall be permitted to enter into a Member State with disease-free status for Echinococcus multilocularis or an approved eradication programme for infestation with that disease, if the animals of the consignment have been treated against this infestation in accordance with Part 2 of Annex XXI. Article 77 Derogation for dogs, cats and ferrets intended for a confined or a quarantine establishment By way of derogation from Article 76, consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets which do not comply with the requirements regarding vaccination against rabies and requirements regarding infestation with Echinococcus multilocularis shall be permitted to enter the Union provided that such consignments are intended for direct entry either to: Article 78 Moving and handling after the entry into the Union of dogs, cats and ferrets intended for a confined or a quarantine establishment 1. Consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets intended to a confined establishment in the Union shall be maintained in the confined establishment of destination for a period of at least 60 days after the date of their entry into the Union. 2. Consignments of dogs, cats and ferrets intended for direct entry to an approved quarantine establishment as referred to in Article 77(b) shall be maintained in that establishment for a period of: PART III ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF GERMINAL PRODUCTS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 3 AND 5 TITLE 1 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR GERMINAL PRODUCTS OF UNGULATES CHAPTER 1 General animal health requirements for germinal products of ungulates Article 79 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from animals which come from third countries or territories which comply with the animal health requirements laid down in Article 22. Article 80 The residency period of donor animals Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from animals which: Article 81 Identification of donor animals Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from animals which were identified in accordance with Article 21. Article 82 The germinal product establishments 1. Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were dispatched from approved germinal product establishments which are listed by competent authorities of listed third countries or territories or zones thereof. 2. Consignments of germinal products shall only be permitted to enter the Union from approved germinal product establishments referred to in paragraph 1 that comply with the following requirements set out in Annex I to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/686: Article 83 The germinal products Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of animals of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if those germinal products comply with the following requirements: Article 84 The transport of germinal products 1. Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of animals of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if: 2. By the way of derogation from paragraph 1(b), operators may place in one container semen, oocytes and embryos of the same species provided that: 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(b), operators may place in one container semen, oocytes and embryos of ovine and caprine animals. Article 85 Additional requirements for the transport of semen Consignments of semen bovine, porcine, ovine and caprine animals which has been collected from more than one donor animal and placed in a single straw or another package for the purposes of entry into the Union shall only be permitted to enter the Union if: CHAPTER 2 Specific animal health requirements for germinal products of bovine animals Article 86 The establishment of origin of donor bovine animals Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from animals which came from establishments that comply with the following requirements and those animals have never been kept previously in any establishment of a lower health status: Article 87 Derogations from the requirements for the establishment of origin of donor bovine animals 1. By the way of derogation from Article 86(b)(iii), consignments of semen of bovine animals shall be permitted to enter the Union if a donor animal comes from an establishment which is not free from enzootic bovine leukosis and: 2. By the way of derogation from Article 86(b)(iii), consignments of oocytes and embryos of bovine animals shall be permitted to enter the Union if a donor animal comes from an establishment which is not free from enzootic bovine leukosis and is less than 2 years of age, and provided that the official veterinarian responsible for the establishment of origin has certified that there has been no clinical case of enzootic bovine leukosis during a period of at least the preceding 3 years. 3. By the way of derogation from Article 86(b)(iv), consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine animals shall be permitted to enter the Union if a donor animal comes from an establishment which is not free from infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis, provided that: Article 88 Specific animal health requirements for donor bovine animals Consignments of semen, oocytes or embryos shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from donor bovine animals that comply with the animal health requirements laid down in Part 1 and Chapters I, II and III of Part 5 of Annex II to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/686. CHAPTER 3 Specific animal health requirements for germinal products of porcine animals Article 89 The establishment of origin of donor porcine animals 1. Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of porcine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from animals which came from establishments: 2. Consignments of semen of porcine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from animals: Article 90 Specific animal health requirements for donor porcine animals Consignments of semen, oocytes or embryos shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from donor porcine animals that: CHAPTER 4 Specific animal health requirements for germinal products of ovine and caprine animals Article 91 The establishment of origin of donor ovine and caprine animals Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of ovine and caprine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from donor animals which: Article 92 Specific animal health requirements for donor ovine and caprine animals Consignments of semen, oocytes or embryos of ovine and caprine animal shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from donor animals that fulfil specific animal health requirements laid down in Part 3 and Chapters I, II and III of Part 5 of Annex II to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/686. CHAPTER 5 Specific animal health requirements for germinal products of equine animals Article 93 The establishment of origin of donor equine animals Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from donor animals which come from establishments which comply with the requirements laid down in Article 23. Article 94 Specific animal health requirements for donor equine animals Consignments of semen, oocytes or embryos of equine animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the donor animals of those germinal products comply with the requirements laid down Article 24(1)(a)(ii) and (b)(ii) and Article 24(6) of this Regulation, and the additional specific animal health requirements laid down in Part 4 of Annex II to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/686. CHAPTER 6 Special rules for germinal products of ungulates intended for confined establishments Article 95 Germinal products intended for confined establishments in the Union Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of bovine, porcine, ovine, caprine and equine animals dispatched from confined establishments in third countries or territories listed in accordance with Article 29 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they are dispatched to a confined establishment in the Union subject to compliance with the following requirements: Article 96 Specific animal health requirements for donor animals kept in confined establishment Consignments of the germinal products referred to in Article 95 shall be only permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from donor animals that comply with the following requirements: Article 97 The requirements for germinal products obtained in confined establishments Consignments of germinal products referred to in Article 95 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they are: TITLE 2 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR HATCHING EGGS OF POULTRY AND CAPTIVE BIRDS CHAPTER 1 Animal health requirements for hatching eggs Article 98 The residency period Consignments of hatching eggs shall only be permitted to enter the Union if, immediately prior to the date of loading of the hatching eggs for dispatch to the Union the flock of origin of the hatching eggs has complied, for a continuous period of time, with the residency periods requirements set out in Annex XXII, and during that time the flock of origin has: Article 99 Handling of hatching eggs during transport to the Union Consignments of hatching eggs shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the germinal products of the consignment comply with the following requirements: Article 100 Derogation and additional requirements for transhipment of hatching eggs in case of an incident in the means of transport by waterway or by air By way of derogation from point (b) of Article 99, consignments of hatching eggs which have been transhipped from the means of transport of dispatch into another means of transport for onward travel in a third country or territory or zone thereof which is not listed for entry of hatching eggs into the Union, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the transhipment took place because of the occurrence of a technical problem or another unforeseen incident causing logistic problems during the transport of the hatching eggs to the Union by sea or by air, in order to complete the transport to the point of entry into Union, and provided that: Article 101 Transport by vessel of hatching eggs 1. Consignments of hatching eggs transported by ship, even for part of the journey, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the germinal products of the consignment comply with the following requirements: 2. The operator responsible for the consignment of hatching eggs shall ensure that the declaration provided for in paragraph 1, is attached to the animal health certificate and signed by the master of the vessel at the port of arrival on the day of arrival of the vessel. Article 102 Preventive measures for the means of transport and the containers of hatching eggs Consignments of hatching eggs shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the germinal products of the consignment comply with the following requirements: Article 103 Movement and handling of hatching eggs after the entry Following their entry into the Union, operators, including transporters, shall ensure that consignments of hatching eggs are: CHAPTER 2 Specific animal health requirements for hatching eggs of poultry Article 104 Hatching eggs originating from poultry imported into the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof Consignments of hatching eggs of poultry, which originate from flocks which were imported into the third country, or territory of origin or zone thereof from another third country or territory or zone thereof, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the competent authority of the third country or territory of origin of the hatching eggs has provided guarantees that: Article 105 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof of the hatching eggs Consignments of hatching eggs of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof which complies with the following requirements: Article 106 The establishment of origin of the hatching eggs Consignments of hatching eggs of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they originate from: Article 107 The flock of origin of the hatching eggs Consignments of hatching eggs of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they originate from flocks which comply with the following requirements: Article 108 The hatching eggs of the consignment Consignments of hatching eggs of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they comply with the following requirements: Article 109 Entry of hatching eggs into Member States with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination Consignments of hatching eggs intended for a Member State with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they: CHAPTER 3 Specific animal health requirements for consignments of less than 20 hatching eggs of poultry other than ratites Article 110 Derogations and special requirements for consignments of less than 20 hatching eggs of poultry other than ratites By way of derogation from Articles 101, 102, 106, 107 and 108, consignments of less than 20 hatching eggs of poultry other than ratites shall be permitted to enter the Union if they comply with the following requirements: CHAPTER 4 Specific animal health requirements for specified pathogen-free eggs Article 111 Derogation and special requirements for specified pathogen-free eggs By way of derogation from the residency period requirements of Article 98, the specific animal health requirements of Articles 105 to 110 and Articles 112 to 114, consignments of specified pathogen-free eggs which do not comply with the animal health requirements laid down in those provisions, shall be permitted to enter the Union if they comply instead with the following animal health requirements: CHAPTER 5 Specific animal health requirements for movement and handling of hatching eggs of poultry after entry into the Union and of poultry hatched from those eggs Article 112 Obligations on operators as regards handling of hatching eggs following their entry into the Union and of poultry hatched from those hatching eggs 1. Operators at the establishment of destination shall place hatching eggs of poultry which have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof either in: 2. Operators, as referred to in paragraph 1, shall ensure that breeding poultry and productive poultry which have been hatched from hatching eggs referred to in that paragraph, are kept for a continuous period of time: 3. During the periods provided for in paragraph 2, operators shall keep poultry, which have been hatched from hatching eggs that have entered into the Union, separate from other flocks of poultry. 4. Where breeding poultry and productive poultry, which have been hatched from hatching eggs that have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof, were introduced into premises or enclosures where other poultry are present, the relevant periods provided for in paragraph 2 shall commence from the date of introduction of the last bird and no poultry shall be moved from the premises or enclosures before the end of those periods. 5. Where hatching eggs of poultry, which have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof, were introduced in incubators, including hatchers, where other hatching eggs were already present: Article 113 Sampling and testing following the entry into the Union The competent authority of the Member State of destination shall ensure that breeding poultry and productive poultry which have been hatched from hatching eggs that have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof undergo a clinical examination carried out by an official veterinarian on the establishment of destination no later than the date of expiry of the relevant periods as provided for Article 112(2), and, where necessary, shall be sampled for testing to monitor their state of health. Article 114 Obligation on the competent authorities as regards sampling and testing of ratites from hatching eggs originating from a third country or territory or zone thereof not free from infection with Newcastle disease virus The competent authority of the Member State of destination shall ensure that ratites which have hatched from hatching eggs that have entered into the Union from a third country or territory or zone thereof that is not free from infection with Newcastle disease virus, during the periods provided for in Article 112(2): CHAPTER 6 Specific animal health requirements for hatching eggs of captive birds Article 115 The hatching eggs of the consignment Consignments of hatching eggs of captive birds shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were obtained from captive birds which comply with the requirements for entry into the Union set out in Articles 55 to 58. CHAPTER 7 Specific animal health requirements for movement and handling of hatching eggs of captive birds after entry into the Union and of captive birds hatched from those eggs Article 116 Handling of hatching eggs of captive birds following their entry into the Union and of captive birds hatched from those hatching eggs Operators at the establishment of destination shall: TITLE 3 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR GERMINAL PRODUCTS OF ANIMALS OTHER THAN UNGULATES AND OTHER THAN HATCHING EGGS OF POULTRY AND CAPTIVE BIRDS INTENDED FOR CONFINED ESTABLISHMENTS Article 117 Requirements for entry into the Union of consignments of germinal products of animals other than those referred to in point (a) and (b) of Article 1(4) dispatched from confined establishments Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos of animals other than those referred to in point (a) and (b) of Article 1(4) dispatched from confined establishments listed in accordance with Article 29 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they are dispatched to a confined establishment located in the Union and provided that: Article 118 Specific animal health requirements for donor animals Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos referred to in Article 117 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they were collected from donor animals which comply with the following requirements: Article 119 The requirements for germinal products Consignments of semen, oocytes and embryos referred to in Article 117 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they comply with the following requirements: PART IV ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 3 AND 5 TITLE 1 GENERAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN Article 120 Time constraints for the date of production Consignments of products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the products of the consignment were not obtained during a period where: Article 121 Treatment requirements for products of animal origin 1. Consignments of products of animal origin, other than fresh or raw, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the products of the consignment have been treated in accordance with Titles 3 to 6 of this Part. The treatment referred to in the first subparagraph must have been: 2. After the completion of the treatment provided for in paragraph 1, products of animal origin must be handled until packaged in a way to prevent any cross contamination that could introduce an animal health risk. Article 122 Requirements concerning the means of transport of the products of animal origin Consignments of products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments were transported in a means of transport designed, constructed and maintained in such a way that the health status of the products of animal origin was not jeopardised during the transport from their place of origin to the Union. Article 123 Dispatch of products of animal origin to the Union Consignments of products of animal origin shall only be permitted to enter the Union if such consignments have been dispatched to their destination in the Union separated from animals and products of animal origin not complying with the relevant animal health requirements for entry into the Union provided for in this Regulation. TITLE 2 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF FRESH MEAT CHAPTER 1 General animal health requirements for fresh meat Article 124 Dispatch of kept animals of origin of the fresh meat to a slaughterhouse Consignments of fresh meat of kept animals, except those kept as farmed game that have been killed on-the-spot, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained from kept animals which comply with the following requirements: Article 125 Dispatch of carcasses of wild animals or animals kept as farmed game killed on the spot Consignments of fresh meat of wild animals or animals kept as farmed game that have been killed on-the-spot shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained from carcasses which comply with the following requirements: Article 126 The ante-mortem and post-mortem inspections Consignments of fresh meat of kept and wild animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained from animals which have undergone the following inspections: The inspections referred to in the first paragraph must have been carried out by an official veterinarian in the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof in order to exclude the presence of the relevant diseases referred to in Annex I and of emerging diseases. Article 127 Handling of the animals of origin of the fresh meat during killing or slaughter Consignments of fresh meat shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from animals which had no contact with animals of a lower health status during their killing or slaughter. Article 128 Handling and preparation of fresh meat in the establishment of origin of the fresh meat Consignments of fresh meat must be kept strictly segregated from fresh meat not complying with the relevant animal health requirements for entry into the Union of fresh meat, provided for in Articles 124 to 146, throughout the operations of slaughter, cutting and until either: CHAPTER 2 Animal health requirements for fresh meat of ungulates SECTION 1 GENERAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR FRESH MEAT OF KEPT AND WILD UNGULATES Article 129 The species of animals of origin of the fresh meat of ungulates Consignments of fresh meat from ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from the following species: Article 130 Prohibition as regards the entry of fresh blood Consignments of fresh blood of ungulates for human consumption shall not be permitted to enter the Union. SECTION 2 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR FRESH MEAT OF KEPT UNGULATES Article 131 The residency period prior to slaughter or killing of the kept ungulates of origin of the fresh meat 1. The kept ungulates of origin of the fresh meat intended for entry into the Union shall not be required to comply with a residency period prior to the date of slaughter or killing provided that they were introduced into the third country or territory or zone thereof from: 2. The kept ungulates of origin of the fresh meat intended for entry into the Union other than those referred to in paragraph 1, must comply, immediately prior to the date of slaughter or killing, with a residency period for a continuous period of time in accordance with Annex XXIII where they: Article 132 Derogation from direct dispatch of the kept animals of origin of the fresh meat to a slaughterhouse By way of derogation from Article 124(b), consignments of fresh meat of kept ungulates not complying with those requirements shall be permitted to enter the Union provided that the fresh meat of the consignment was obtained from bovine animals, ovine animals or caprine animals, and: Article 133 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof of the fresh meat of kept ungulates 1. Consignments of fresh meat of kept ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from a third country or territory or zone thereof which complies with the minimum periods of disease freedom set out in the table in Part A of Annex XXIV, for the referred listed diseases, for which the species of ungulates from which the fresh meat has been obtained are listed. The minimum periods referred to in the first subparagraph may be reduced for the diseases listed in Part B of Annex XXIV subject to compliance with the specific conditions provided for therein; these specific conditions must be specifically assigned by the Union in the list, to that third country or territory or zone thereof and to the particular species of origin of the fresh meat. 2. Consignments of fresh meat of ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from a third country or territory or zone thereof in which vaccination against listed diseases referred to in paragraph 1 has not been carried out according to the table in Part A of Annex XXV. 3. By way of derogation of paragraph 2, vaccination against foot and mouth disease may have been carried out subject to compliance with the specific conditions to be provided by the competent authority set out in points 1(b) or 3.1(a) of Part B of Annex XXV which must be specifically assigned by the Union in the list, to that third country or territory or zone thereof and to the particular species of origin of the fresh meat. Article 134 The establishment of origin of the kept ungulates from which the fresh meat has been obtained 1. Consignments of fresh meat of kept ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained from ungulates which come from an establishment: 2. Consignments of fresh meat of kept ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained from ungulates which come from an establishment: Article 135 Specific requirement for fresh meat obtained from kept ungulates of the species Sus scrofa Consignments of fresh meat of kept ungulates of the species Sus scrofa shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from animals which have been kept separated from wild ungulates since birth. Article 136 The establishment of origin of the fresh meat of kept ungulates Consignments of fresh meat of kept ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment was obtained in a slaughterhouse, or in a game handling establishment, in and around which none of the listed diseases referred to in Part A of Annex XXIV has been reported in an area of 10 km radius, including, where appropriate, the territory of a neighbouring country, for a period of 30 days prior to the date of slaughter or to the date of killing. SECTION 3 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR FRESH MEAT OF WILD UNGULATES Article 137 The country or territory of origin or zone thereof of the fresh meat of wild ungulates Consignments of fresh meat of wild ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from a third country or territory or zone thereof which complies with the animal health requirements laid down in Article 133. Article 138 The wild ungulates of origin of the fresh meat Consignments of fresh meat of wild ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment was obtained from animals which comply with the following requirements: Article 139 The game handling establishment of origin of fresh meat of wild ungulates Consignments of fresh meat of wild ungulates shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained in a game handling establishment in and around which none of the listed diseases referred to in Part A of Annex XXIV has been reported in an area of 10 km radius, including where appropriate the territory of a neighbouring country, for a period of 30 days prior to the date of killing. CHAPTER 3 Animal health requirements for fresh meat of poultry and game birds SECTION 1 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR FRESH MEAT OF POULTRY Article 140 The residency period of poultry Consignments of fresh meat of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained from poultry which: Article 141 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof of the fresh meat of poultry Consignments of fresh meat of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from a third country or territory or zone thereof which complies with the following requirements: Article 142 The establishment of origin of the poultry Consignments of fresh meat of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from poultry which come from an establishment: Article 143 The poultry of origin of the fresh meat 1. Consignments of fresh meat of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment has been obtained from poultry which have not been vaccinated against highly pathogenic avian influenza or infection with Newcastle disease virus, or they comply with the following requirements: 2. Consignments of fresh meat of poultry which is destined to a Member State or territory with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from poultry which have not been vaccinated against Newcastle disease with a live vaccine during the period of 30 days prior to the date of slaughter. Article 144 The establishment of origin for the fresh meat of poultry Consignments of fresh meat of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from a slaughterhouse which: SECTION 2 SPECIFIC ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR FRESH MEAT OF GAME BIRDS Article 145 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof of the fresh meat of game birds Consignments of fresh meat of game birds shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from a third country or territory or zone thereof which complies with the following requirements: Article 146 The establishment of origin of the fresh meat of game birds Consignments of fresh meat of game birds shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the fresh meat of the consignment originates from a game handling establishment: TITLE 3 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF MEAT PRODUCTS AND CASINGS Article 147 Treatment of meat products Consignments of meat products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the meat products of the consignment have been treated in accordance with Article 121 as required in Articles 148 or 149. Article 148 Meat products not subject to a risk-mitigating treatment Consignments of meat products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the meat products of the consignment have not undergone a risk-mitigating treatment in accordance with Annex XXVI where: Article 149 Meat products subject to a risk-mitigating treatment 1. Consignments of meat products that do not fulfil the requirements provided for in Article 148, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they have undergone at least the risk-mitigating treatment set out in Annex XXVI specifically assigned by the Union in the list to the third country or territory or zone thereof of origin of the meat product in accordance with Article 121, where the fresh meat used for processing of the meat products originates from: 2. Consignments of meat products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they have undergone at least the risk-mitigating treatment ‘B’, in accordance with Annex XXVI, where the fresh meat used for the processing of the meat products originates from a third country or territory or zone thereof: 3. Consignments of meat products processed from fresh meat of poultry shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they have undergone at least the risk-mitigating treatment ‘D’, in accordance with Annex XXVI, where the fresh meat used for the processing of the meat products originates from a third country or territory or zone thereof: 4. Consignments of meat products which have been processed from fresh meat of more than one species of animal from the third country or territory or zone thereof where the meat product was processed, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they comply with the following requirements: 5. Consignments of meat products which have been processed from fresh meat of more than one species of animal originating from a third country or territory or zone thereof other than the third country or territory or zone thereof where the meat product has been processed, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they have undergone a risk-mitigating treatment in accordance with paragraphs 1 or 2. Article 150 The establishment of origin of the animals from which the fresh meat was obtained Consignments of meat products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they that have been processed from fresh meat which originate from animals coming from an establishment, or, in the case of wild animals, from a place in and around which, in an area of 10 km radius, including where appropriate the territory of a neighbouring country, none of the listed diseases, relevant for the species of origin of the meat products in accordance with Annex I, has been reported during the period of 30 days prior to the date of dispatch of the consignment to the Union. Article 151 The entry into Member States with status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination Consignments of meat products of poultry intended for a Member State or territory thereof with a status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination shall only be permitted to enter into the Union if they have obtained from poultry which have not been vaccinated with a live vaccine against infection with Newcastle disease virus, during the period of 30 days prior to the date of slaughter. Article 152 Specific requirements for entry into the Union of casings Consignments of casings that do not fulfil the requirements provided for in Article 148 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if they have undergone the following risk-mitigating treatments set out in Part 2 of Annex XXVI: TITLE 4 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF MILK, DAIRY PRODUCTS, COLOSTRUM AND COLOSTRUM-BASED PRODUCTS CHAPTER 1 Specific animal health requirements for raw milk, colostrum and colostrum-based products Article 153 The country of origin of the raw milk, colostrum and colostrum-based products Consignments of raw milk, colostrum or colostrum-based products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the raw milk, colostrum and colostrum-based products of the consignment originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof which has been free from foot and mouth disease and infection with rinderpest virus for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of milking and, during that period, no vaccination against those diseases has been carried out. Article 154 The animals of origin of the raw milk, colostrum and colostrum-based products 1. Consignments of raw milk, colostrum or colostrum-based products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the raw milk, colostrum or colostrum-based products of the consignment were obtained from animals of the species Bos taurus, Ovis aries, Capra hircus, Bubalus bubalis or Camelus dromedarius. 2. Consignments of raw milk, colostrum or colostrum-based products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the raw milk, colostrum or colostrum-based products of the consignment were obtained from animals that complied with a continuous residency period of at least 3 months prior to the date of milking in the third country or territory of milking or zone thereof. CHAPTER 2 Specific animal health requirements for dairy products Article 155 Treatment of dairy products Consignments of dairy products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the dairy products of the consignment have been treated in accordance with Article 156 or 157. Article 156 Dairy products not subject to a risk-mitigating treatment Consignments of dairy products originating from a third country or territory or zone thereof which is listed for entry into the Union of raw milk shall be permitted to enter the Union without having undergone a specific risk-mitigating treatment if the dairy products of the consignment comply with following requirements: Article 157 Dairy products subject to a risk-mitigating treatment 1. Consignments of dairy products not complying with the requirements set out in Article 156 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the dairy products of the consignment have undergone at least one of the risk-mitigating treatments provided for in column A of Annex XXVII, where: 2. Consignments of dairy products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the dairy products of the consignment have undergone at least one of the risk-mitigating treatments provided for in column B of Annex XXVII where they were processed from milk obtained from species of animals other than those referred to in paragraph 1(a). 3. Consignments of dairy products that have been processed from raw milk or from dairy products obtained from more than one species of animal shall only be permitted to enter the Union if those dairy products have undergone either: TITLE 5 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF EGGS AND EGG PRODUCTS CHAPTER 1 Specific animal health requirements for eggs Article 158 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof of the eggs Consignments of eggs shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the eggs of the consignment originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof which applies a disease surveillance programme for highly pathogenic avian influenza that complies with the requirements established in either: Article 159 The establishment of origin of the eggs Consignments of eggs shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the eggs of the consignment originate from an establishment that complies with the following requirements: CHAPTER 2 Specific animal health requirements for egg products Article 160 The third country or territory of origin or zone thereof of the egg products Consignments of egg products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the egg products of the consignment originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof which applies a disease surveillance programme for highly pathogenic avian influenza that complies with the requirements established in either: Article 161 The establishment of origin of the eggs Consignments of egg products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the egg products of the consignment have been processed from eggs that originated in an establishment: TITLE 6 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF PROCESSED PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN CONTAINED IN COMPOSITE PRODUCTS Article 162 Composite products containing meat products and non-shelf stable composite products containing dairy and/or egg products 1. Consignments of the following composite products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the composite products of the consignment come from a third country or territory or zone thereof listed for entry into the Union of the specific product of animal origin contained in those composite products: 2. Consignments of composite products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the processed products of animal origin contained in the composite products referred to in paragraph 1: Article 163 Shelf stable composite products containing dairy and/or egg products Consignments of composite products containing only dairy or egg products shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the dairy products and the egg products contained in the composite products have been treated to become shelf stable at ambient temperature and they: TITLE 7 SPECIAL RULES FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN INTENDED FOR PERSONAL USE Article 164 Derogation from animal health requirements and additional requirements for entry of infant milk, infant food and special foods intended for personal use By way of derogation from the requirements laid down in Articles 3 to 10 of Part I and Articles 120 to 163, consignments of powdered infant milk, infant food and special foods required for medical reasons, containing products of animal origin which do not comply with those requirements shall be permitted to enter the Union if those products: Article 165 Derogation from animal health requirements for products of animal origin intended for personal use originating from certain third countries or territories or zones thereof 1. By way of derogation from requirements laid down in Articles 3 to 10 of Part I, except point (a)(i) of Article 3, and Articles 120 to 163, consignments of products of animal origin which do not comply with those requirements shall be permitted to enter the Union if those products are intended for personal use and originate from third countries or territories listed for entry into the Union of specific quantities of products of animal origin intended for personal use based on specific agreements with the Union on trade in agricultural products. 2. The combined specific quantity allowed to enter the Union accompanying a person shall not exceed the maximum specified for the third country or territory in the list. PART V ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 3 AND 5 OF AQUATIC ANIMALS OF LISTED SPECIES AND THEIR PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN, AND FOR THEIR MOVEMENT AND HANDLING AFTER THE ENTRY TITLE 1 GENERAL ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF THE AQUATIC ANIMALS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 1(6) AND THEIR PRODUCTS Article 166 Inspection of aquatic animals prior to dispatch Consignments of aquatic animals other than those referred to in points (d), (e) and (f) of Article 172 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if those aquatic animals have been subjected to a clinical inspection by an official veterinarian in the exporting third country or territory, zone or compartment thereof within a period of 72 hours prior to the time of loading for dispatch of the consignment to the Union for the purpose of detection of symptoms of disease and abnormal mortalities. Article 167 Dispatch to the Union of aquatic animals Consignments of aquatic animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the aquatic animals of the consignment comply with the following requirements: Article 168 Transport by vessel of aquatic animals When dispatch to the Union of consignments of aquatic animals, includes transport by vessel or well-boat even for part of the journey, those consignments of aquatic animals transported in accordance with Article 167 shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the aquatic animals of the consignment are accompanied by a declaration, attached to the animal health certificate and signed by the master of the vessel on the day of arrival of the vessel at its port of destination, providing the following information: Article 169 Specific transport and labelling requirements 1. Consignments of aquatic animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the aquatic animals of the consignment are identified by a legible label on the exterior of the container, or when transported by well-boat, an entry in the vessel’s manifest which refers to the animal health certificate that has been issued for that consignment. 2. The legible label referred to in paragraph 1 shall also contain at least the following information: 3. Products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals, intended for entry into the Union shall comply with the following requirements: Article 170 Requirements regarding the third country or territory of origin or zone or compartment thereof and the establishment of origin 1. Consignments of aquatic animals and products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the aquatic animals and products of animal origin of the consignment come from a third country or territory or zone or compartment thereof which complies with the following requirements: 2. Consignments of aquaculture animals and products of animal origin from aquaculture animals other than live aquaculture animals, shall only be permitted to enter the Union if the aquaculture animals and products of animal origin of the consignment come from an establishment which is: Article 171 Vector species 1. Aquatic animals of the species listed in column 4 of the table in the Annex to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882, shall only be regarded as vectors of those diseases under the conditions set out in Annex XXX. 2. Products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals of the species listed in column 4 of the table in the Annex to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882, shall not be regarded as vectors of the diseases listed in that Annex when they enter the Union. Article 172 Derogations for certain categories of aquatic animals of listed species By way of derogation from Article 170, the requirements laid down in that Article shall not apply to the following categories of aquatic animals: Article 173 Derogations for certain products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals By way of derogation from Article 170(1), the requirements laid down in that Article shall not apply to the following products of animal origin from aquatic animals, other than live aquatic animals: Article 174 Handling of aquatic animals and products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals after entry into the Union 1. After their entry into the Union, consignments of aquatic animals and products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals must be: 2. Aquatic animals and products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals which have entered the Union shall not be released by the operator or otherwise immersed in natural waters within the Union, unless authorised by the competent authority of the Member State in which that release or immersion takes place. 3. The competent authority of the Member State may only grant the authorisation referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article where the release or immersion in natural waters does not jeopardise the health status of the aquatic animals at the place of release and in all cases, release into the wild shall comply with Article 170(a)(iii). 4. Transport water from consignments of aquatic animals shall be handled appropriately by the operator to prevent contamination of natural waters in the Union. TITLE 2 ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS TO LIMIT THE IMPACT OF CERTAIN NON-LISTED DISEASES Article 175 Additional animal health requirements to limit the impact of non-listed diseases for which Member States have national measures 1. The competent authority of Member States that have taken national measures against diseases other than listed diseases as provided for in Article 226 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, shall take measures to prevent the introduction of those non-listed diseases through the application of additional animal health requirements for entry of the aquatic animals and products of animal origin from aquatic animals other than live aquatic animals into those Member States, zones or compartments of the Union. 2. The competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 shall only permit the entry into their Member State of consignments of aquatic animals of species which are susceptible to the diseases referred to in paragraph 1 when vaccination against those diseases has not been carried out in the third country or territory of origin. 3. The competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that aquatic animals of the species referred to in paragraph 2 which are introduced into a third country or territory of origin or zone or compartment thereof shall originate from another third country, zone or compartment which is also free of the relevant disease. 4. The derogations provided for in Articles 172 and 173 shall apply to those aquatic animals and products of animal origin from aquatic animals which are referred to in paragraph 2 and which are destined for Member States which have national measures against the diseases referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. 5. Handling after entry into the Union of the aquatic animals referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article and products from those animals, shall comply with the conditions set out in Article 174. PART VI SPECIAL RULES FOR ENTRY OF CERTAIN COMMODITIES AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 3 AND 5 FOR WHICH THE UNION IS NOT THE FINAL DESTINATION AND FOR ENTRY OF CERTAIN COMMODITIES ORIGINATING FROM AND RETURNING TO THE UNION Article 176 Requirements for transit through the Union 1. Consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin falling within the scope of this Regulation not originating from but transiting through the Union and intended for a destination outside the Union shall only be permitted to transit through the Union if, either: 2. Consignments of animals, germinal products and products of animal origin falling within the scope of this Regulation originating and returning to the Union after transiting through a third country or territory or zone thereof shall only be permitted to re-enter the Union if they comply with all the relevant requirements for the particular category of animals, germinal products or products of animal origin in question for entry into the Union laid down in Parts I to V, unless they fall within the scope of either: 3. The specific conditions referred to in paragraph 1(b) and paragraph 2(b) shall be set out and assigned to the third country or territory of or zone thereof based on a risk assessment and taking into account the following: Article 177 Additional requirements for entry of registered horses originating from, and returning to the Union after temporary export to a third country or territory or zone thereof to participate in competitions, races or equestrian cultural events 1. Consignments of registered horses temporarily exported from a Member State to third countries or territories or zones thereof listed for entry of equine animals into the Union shall be permitted to enter the Union provided they comply with the following additional requirements: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(c), the entry into the Union of registered horses after temporary export to third countries or territories or zones thereof belonging to more than one sanitary group shall be authorised for registered horses which have participated exclusively in specified high level competitions or races. Article 178 Special requirements for entry of ungulates, poultry and aquatic animals originating from, and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by a third country 1. Consignments of ungulates, poultry and aquatic animals originating from and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by the competent authority of a third country or territory shall only be permitted to re-enter the Union if the following requirements are fulfilled: 2. The transport to and arrival at the place of the destination of the consignment shall be monitored in accordance with Article 2 and 3 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1666. Article 179 Special requirements for entry of animals other than ungulates, poultry and aquatic animals originating from, and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by a third country or territory 1. Consignments of animals other than ungulates, poultry and aquatic animals originating from and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by the competent authority of a third country or territory shall only be permitted to re-enter the Union if the animals of the consignment are accompanied by the following documents: 2. The transport to and arrival at the place of the destination of the consignment shall be monitored in accordance with Article 2 and 3 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1666. Article 180 Special requirements for entry of germinal products and packaged products of animal origin, originating from, and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by a third country or territory 1. Consignments of germinal products and packaged products of animal origin, originating from and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by the competent authority of a third country or territory shall only be permitted to re-enter the Union if the following requirements are fulfilled: 2. The transport to and arrival at the place of the destination of the consignment shall be monitored in accordance with Article 2 and 3 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1666. Article 181 Special requirements for entry of unpackaged or in bulk products of animal origin, originating from, and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by a listed third country or territory 1. Consignments of unpackaged or in bulk products of animal origin originating from and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by the competent authority of a listed third country or territory shall only be permitted to re-enter the Union if the following requirements are fulfilled: 2. The transport to and arrival at the place of the destination of the consignment shall be monitored in accordance with Article 2 and 3 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1666. Article 182 Special requirements for entry of unpackaged or in bulk products of animal origin, originating from, and returning to, the Union following a refusal of entry by a non-listed third country 1. Consignments of unpackaged or in bulk products of animal origin originating from and returning to the Union following a refusal of entry by the competent authority of a third country or territory which is not listed for entry into the Union of the particular species and category of products of animal origin which are being returned, shall only be permitted to re-enter the Union if the following requirements are fulfilled: 2. The transport to and arrival at the place of the destination of the consignment shall be monitored in accordance with Article 2 and 3 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1666. PART VII FINAL PROVISIONS Article 183 Repeals The following acts are repealed as from 21 April 2021: Article 184 This Regulation shall enter into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 21 April 2021. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 30 January 2020. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 84, 31.3.2016, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin ( OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 55 ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 of 3 December 2018 on the application of certain disease prevention and control rules to categories of listed diseases and establishing a list of species and groups of species posing a considerable risk for the spread of those listed diseases ( OJ L 308, 4.12.2018, p. 21 ). ( 4 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for surveillance, eradication programmes, and disease-free status for certain listed and emerging diseases (see page 211 of this Official Journal). ( 5 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/687 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and the Council, as regards rules for the prevention and control of certain listed diseases (see page 64 of this Official Journal). ( 6 ) EFSA Panel on Animal Health and Welfare (AHAW); Scientific Opinion on animal health risk mitigation treatments as regards imports of animal casings. EFSA Journal 2012; 10(7):2820. [32pp.] doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2012.2820. Available online: www.efsa.europa.eu/efsajournal ( 7 ) Council Directive 2006/88/EC of 24 October 2006 on animal health requirements for aquaculture animals and products thereof, and on the prevention and control of certain diseases in aquatic animals ( OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 14 ). ( 8 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 206/2010 of 12 March 2010 laying down lists of third countries, territories or parts thereof authorised for the introduction into the European Union of certain animals and fresh meat and the veterinary certification requirements ( OJ L 73, 20.3.2010, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 139/2013 of 7 January 2013 laying down animal health conditions for imports of certain birds into the Union and the quarantine conditions thereof ( OJ L 47, 20.2.2013, p. 1 ). ( 10 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 605/2010 of 2 July 2010 laying down animal and public health and veterinary certification conditions for the introduction into the European Union of raw milk and dairy products intended for human consumption ( OJ L 175, 10.7.2010, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 798/2008 of 8 August 2008 laying down a list of third countries, territories, zones or compartments from which poultry and poultry products may be imported into and transit through the Community and the veterinary certification requirements ( OJ L 226, 23.8.2008, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Commission Decision 2007/777/EC of 29 November 2007 laying down the animal and public health conditions and model certificates for imports of certain meat products and treated stomachs, bladders and intestines for human consumption from third countries and repealing Decision 2005/432/EC ( OJ L 312, 30.11.2007, p. 49 ). ( 13 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 119/2009 of 9 February 2009 laying down a list of third countries or parts thereof, for imports into, or transit through, the Community of meat of wild leporidae, of certain wild land mammals and of farmed rabbits and the veterinary certification requirements ( OJ L 39, 10.2.2009, p. 12 ). ( 14 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 28/2012 of 11 January 2012 laying down requirements for the certification for imports into and transit through the Union of certain composite products and amending Decision 2007/275/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1162/2009 ( OJ L 12, 14.1.2012, p. 1 ). ( 15 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/759 of 28 April 2016 drawing up lists of third countries, parts of third countries and territories from which Member States are to authorise the introduction into the Union of certain products of animal origin intended for human consumption, laying down certificate requirements, amending Regulation (EC) No 2074/2005 and repealing Decision 2003/812/EC ( OJ L 126, 14.5.2016, p. 13 ). ( 16 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on official controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products, amending Regulations (EC) No 999/2001, (EC) No 396/2005, (EC) No 1069/2009, (EC) No 1107/2009, (EU) No 1151/2012, (EU) No 652/2014, (EU) 2016/429 and (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Regulations (EC) No 1/2005 and (EC) No 1099/2009 and Council Directives 98/58/EC, 1999/74/EC, 2007/43/EC, 2008/119/EC and 2008/120/EC, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 854/2004 and (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 89/608/EEC, 89/662/EEC, 90/425/EEC, 91/496/EEC, 96/23/EC, 96/93/EC and 97/78/EC and Council Decision 92/438/EEC (Official Controls Regulation) ( OJ L 95, 7.4.2017, p. 1 ). ( 17 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/688 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council, as regards animal health requirements for movements within the Union of terrestrial animals and hatching eggs (see page 140 of this Official Journal). ( 18 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/686 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the approval of germinal product establishments and the traceability and animal health requirements for movements within the Union of germinal products of certain kept terrestrial animals (see page 1 of this Official Journal). ( 19 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1666 of 24 June 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of European Parliament and the Council as regards conditions for monitoring the transport and arrival of consignments of certain goods from the border control post of arrival to the establishment at the place of destination in the Union ( OJ L 255, 4.10.2019, p. 1 ). ( 20 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/2035 of 28 June 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for establishments keeping terrestrial animals and hatcheries, and the traceability of certain kept terrestrial animals and hatching eggs ( OJ L 314, 5.12.2019, p. 115 ). ( 21 ) Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals and repealing Regulation (EC) No 998/2003 ( OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1 ). ( 22 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013 of 28 June 2013 on the model identification documents for the non-commercial movement of dogs, cats and ferrets, the establishment of lists of territories and third countries and the format, layout and language requirements of the declarations attesting compliance with certain conditions provided for in Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 109 ). ( 23 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/691 of 30 January 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for aquaculture establishments and transporters of aquatic animals (see page 345 of this Official Journal). ANNEX I LIST OF DISEASES REQUIRED TO BE NOTIFIED AND REPORTED IN THE EXPORTING THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY 1. TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS All the listed diseases referred to in Article 5 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 and listed in Annex II thereto for the listed species of terrestrial animals in the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882. 2. GERMINAL PRODUCTS 2.1. From ungulates 2.2. From poultry and captive birds All the listed diseases referred to in Article 5 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 and listed in Annex II thereto that are relevant for the listed species of poultry and captive birds in the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882, from which germinal products authorised to enter the Union are obtained. 3. PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN FROM UNGULATES, POULTRY AND WILD GAME BIRDS 3.1. Fresh meat from ungulates 3.2. Fresh meat from poultry and wild game birds 3.3. Meat products from ungulates 3.4. Meat products from poultry and wild game birds 3.5. Milk, colostrum, dairy products and colostrum-based products 4. AQUATIC ANIMALS AND PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN FROM AQUATIC ANIMALS ANNEX II MINIMUM INFORMATION FOR DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMMES (referred to in Article 10) The submission of a disease surveillance programme must include at least the following information: ANNEX III Table 1 Requirements as regards the residency periods for ungulates, honeybees and bumblebees before their entry into the Union Table 2 Requirements as regards the residency periods of poultry and captive birds before their entry into the Union ANNEX IV PART A PART B Specific conditions to be provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory where the third country or territory or zone thereof has been free from certain diseases for less than the period set out in the table in Part A of this Annex as referred to in Article 22(3): PART C ( *1 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *2 ) or specific conditions are provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory in accordance with Part B as provided for in Article 22(3) ( *3 ) or specific conditions are provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory in accordance with Part B as provided for in Article 22(3) ( *4 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ANNEX V REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION AS REGARDS THE DISEASE FREEDOM OF THE THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OF ORIGIN OR ZONE THEREOF FROM INFECTION WITH MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS COMPLEX ( M. BOVIS, M.CAPRAE, M. TUBERCULOSIS ) AND INFECTION WITH BRUCELLA ABORTUS, B. MELITENSIS AND B. SUIS 1. INFECTION WITH MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS COMPLEX ( M. BOVIS, M.CAPRAE AND M. TUBERCULOSIS ) (AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 22(5)) 1.1. Bovine animals Where bovine animals do not originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof free of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex ( M. bovis, M.caprae, M. tuberculosis ) as regards bovine animals, they must comply with one of the following requirements: 2. INFECTION WITH BRUCELLA ABORTUS, B. MELITENSIS AND B. SUIS (AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 22(6)) 2.1. Bovine animals Where bovine animals do not originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof free of Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis without vaccination as regards bovine animals, they must comply with one of the following requirements: 2.2. Ovine and caprine animals Where ovine and caprine animals do not originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof free of Brucella abortus , B. melitensis and B. suis without vaccination as regards ovine and caprine animals, they must comply with one of the following requirements: ANNEX VI PART A SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR THE ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF UNGULATES AS REGARDS THE DISEASE FREEDOM OF THE THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OF ORIGIN OR ZONE THEREOF FROM INFECTION WITH BLUETONGUE VIRUS (SEROTYPES 1-24) FOR A PERIOD OF 2 YEARS (AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 22(7)) Where ungulates of listed species do not originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof free from infection with bluetongue virus (serotypes 1-24), they must originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof which complies with at least one of the following requirements: PART B SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR THE ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF CONSIGNMENTS OF BOVINE ANIMALS AS REGARDS THE DISEASE FREEDOM OF THE THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OF ORIGIN OR ZONE THEREOF FOR ENZOOTIC BOVINE LEUKOSIS (AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 22(8)) Where bovine animals do not originate from a third country or territory or zone thereof free of enzootic bovine leukosis, they must come from an establishment where that disease has not been reported during the period of 24 months prior to the date of dispatch to the Union, and: ANNEX VII ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF UNGULATES AS REGARDS CERTAIN CATEGORY C DISEASES (AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 22(9)) 1. INFECTIOUS BOVINE RHINOTRACHEITIS/INFECTIOUS PUSTULAR VULVOVAGINITIS 1.1. Bovine animals The animals must have not been vaccinated and they must have been kept in quarantine for a period of at least 30 days prior to the date of dispatch to the Union and have undergone a serological test for the detection of antibodies against whole BoHV-1. One of the diagnostic methods provided for in Part 5 of Annex I to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/688 must have been used, and a negative result obtained. In addition, the test must have been carried out on a sample collected in the establishment of origin within the period of 15 days prior to the date of dispatch for the Union. 1.2. Camelid and cervid animals Camelid and cervid animals intended for entry into a Member State or zone thereof with disease-free status or with an approved eradication programme regarding infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis in bovine animals, must come from an establishment in which infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis has not been reported on animals of the same species as the animals of the consignment during the last 30 days prior to dispatch to the Union. 2. BOVINE VIRAL DIARRHOEA The animals have not been vaccinated against bovine viral diarrhoea and must have been tested for bovine viral diarrhoea virus antigen or genome using one of the diagnostic methods provided for in Part 6 of Annex I to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/688, with negative results, and either: 3. INFECTION WITH AUJESZKY’S DISEASE VIRUS The animals have not been vaccinated against infection with Aujeszky’s disease virus and must have been: ANNEX VIII ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS AS REGARDS THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ORIGIN OF UNGULATES ( *1 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *2 ) not applicable if the animals originate from a third country, territory or zone thereof seasonally free of the disease in accordance with the relevant Chapter of the Terrestrial Animal Health Code of the World Animal Health Organisation (OIE) ( *3 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *4 ) if the disease was reported in the establishment of origin during the period of 2 years prior to the date of dispatch to the Union, following the last outbreak the affected establishment must have remained under restriction until: ANNEX IX 1. INFECTION WITH MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS COMPLEX ( M. BOVIS, M.CAPRAE AND M. TUBERCULOSIS ) (AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 23(2)) 2. INFECTION WITH BRUCELLA ABORTUS, B. MELITENSIS AND B. SUIS (AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 23(3)) ANNEX X SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION OF CERTAIN SPECIES AND CATEGORIES OF UNGULATES AS REGARDS INFECTION WITH BRUCELLA AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 24(5) 1. OVINE ANIMALS Uncastrated males of ovine animals, others than those intended for slaughter in the Union, must comply with the following requirements: 2. UNGULATES OF THE FAMILY TAYASSUIDAE Ungulates of the family Tayassuidae must have undergone a test for the detection of Brucella suis using one of the diagnostic methods provided for in point 2 of Part 1 of Annex I of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/688, with negative results, during the period of 30 days prior to the date of dispatch to the Union. ANNEX XI SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUINE ANIMALS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 24(6) 1. SANITARY GROUPS TO WHICH THIRD COUNTRIES, TERRITORIES OR ZONES THEREOF ARE ASSIGNED 2. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 2.1. Specific requirements for African horse sickness Equine animals must comply with the set of requirements laid down in one of the points set out below. 2.2. Specific requirements for Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis Equine animals must comply with at least one of the following requirements: 2.3. Specific requirements for infection with Burkholderia mallei (Glanders) Equine animals must have undergone a complement fixation test for glanders, as described in point 3.1 of Chapter 2.5.11 of the OIE Terrestrial Manual (Version adopted 2015). The test must have been carried out, with negative results, at a serum dilution of 1 in 5 on a blood sample taken within a period of 30 days prior to the date of dispatch to the Union. 2.4. Specific requirements for dourine Equine animals must have undergone a complement fixation test for dourine, as described in point 3.1 of Chapter 2.5.3 of the OIE Terrestrial Manual (Version adopted 2013). The test must have been carried out, with negative results, at a serum dilution of 1 in 5 on a blood sample taken within a period of 30 days prior to the date of dispatch to the Union. In addition, the tested animals must not have been used for breeding during the period of at least 30 days prior to and after the date the sample was taken. 2.5. Specific conditions for surra ( Trypanosoma evansi ) Equine animals must have undergone a card agglutination test for trypanosomiasis (CATT), as described in point 2.3 of Chapter 2.1.21 of the OIE Terrestrial Manual (Version adopted 2012). The test must have been carried out, with negative results, at a serum dilution of 1 in 4 on a blood sample taken within a period of 30 days prior to the date of dispatch to the Union. 2.6. Specific conditions for equine infectious anaemia Equine animals must have undergone an agar gel immunodiffusion test (AGID test) or to an enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) for equine infectious anaemia, as described in points 2.1 and 2.2 of Chapter 2.5.6 of the OIE Terrestrial Manual (Version adopted 2013). The test must have been carried out, with negative results, on a blood sample taken within a period not exceeding 90 days prior to the date of dispatch to the Union. ANNEX XII UNGULATES INTENDED FOR CONFINED ESTABLISHMENTS PART A Minimum periods without reported disease in the confined establishment of origin of the ungulates intended for confined establishments in the Union : PART B Minimum areas (radius) and periods without reported disease in the area around the confined establishment of origin of the ungulates intended for confined establishments in the Union : PART C Minimum periods of disease freedom of the third country or territory or zone thereof where the confined establishment of origin is located for ungulates intended for confined establishments in the Union : PART D Alternative guarantees to be provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory as regards certain listed diseases PART E Requirements as regards the absence of vaccination against certain diseases for the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof and for the ungulates intended for confined establishments : PART F Requirements for the vector-protected facility in confined establishments in third countries Where required in Part D of this Annex, the vector-protected facility in the confined establishments in third countries or territories must comply with the following requirements: ( *1 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *2 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *3 ) in addition, a virology and serology test must be carried out to rule out the presence of the disease 30 days prior to dispatch to the Union ( *4 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *5 ) or alternative guarantees are provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory according to Part D ( *6 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *7 ) or alternative guarantees are provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory according to Part D of this Annex ANNEX XIII MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR VACCINATION PROGRAMMES AND ADDITIONAL SURVEILLANCE CARRIED OUT IN A THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF VACCINATING AGAINST HIGHLY PATHOGENIC AVIAN INFLUENZA 1. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR VACCINATION PROGRAMMES CARRIED OUT IN A THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF Vaccination programmes against highly pathogenic avian influenza submitted by a third country or territory must include at least the following information: 2. ADDITIONAL SURVEILLANCE IN THIRD COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES OR ZONES THEREOF THAT CARRY OUT VACCINATION AGAINST HIGHLY PATHOGENIC AVIAN INFLUENZA Where vaccination is carried out in a third country or territory or zone thereof, all establishments where vaccination against highly pathogenic avian influenza is carried out must be required to undergo laboratory testing and the following information must be submitted to the Commission, in addition to the information referred to in Annex II: ANNEX XIV ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR RATITES, HATCHING EGGS THEREOF AND FRESH MEAT OF RATITES ORIGINATING IN A THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF NOT FREE FROM INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS ANNEX XV CRITERIA FOR VACCINES AGAINST INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSIGNMENTS OF POULTRY, HATCHING EGGS AND FRESH MEAT OF POULTRY ORIGINATING FROM A THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF VACCINATING AGAINST INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS 1. CRITERIA FOR VACCINES AGAINST INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS 1.1. General criteria 1.2. Specific criteria Live attenuated vaccines against infection with Newcastle disease virus must be prepared from a Newcastle disease virus strain for which the master seed has been tested and shown to have an ICPI of either: 2. ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR POULTRY AND HATCHING EGGS ORIGINATING FROM A THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF WHERE VACCINES USED AGAINST INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS DO NOT MEET THE SPECIFIC CRITERIA SET OUT IN POINT 1 Poultry and hatching eggs originating from a third country or territory or zone thereof where vaccines used against infection with Newcastle disease virus do not meet the specific criteria set out in point 1.2 must meet the requirements set out below: 3. ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR FRESH MEAT OF POULTRY ORIGINATING FROM A THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF WHERE VACCINES USED AGAINST INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS DO NOT MEET THE SPECIFIC CRITERIA SET OUT IN POINT 1 Fresh meat of poultry originating from a third country or territory or zone thereof where vaccines used against infection with Newcastle disease virus do not meet the specific criteria set out in point 1.2 must originate from poultry that meet the following health requirements: 4. INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED WHEN FLOCKS OF ORIGIN OF POULTRY, FLOCKS OF ORIGIN OF HATCHING EGGS AND HATCHING EGGS ARE VACCINATED AGAINST INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS Where the flocks of origin of poultry, the flocks of origin of hatching eggs or hatching eggs are vaccinated against infection with Newcastle disease virus, the following information must be provided for the consignment: ANNEX XVI REQUIREMENTS AS REGARDS THE INFORMATION TO BE MENTIONED ON THE CONTAINERS OF POULTRY, CAPTIVE BIRDS AND HATCHING EGGS ANNEX XVII REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING OF CONSIGNMENTS OF LESS THAN 20 HEADS OF POULTRY OTHER THAN RATITES AND LESS THAN 20 HATCHING EGGS THEREOF BEFORE THEIR ENTRY INTO THE UNION Consignments of less than 20 heads of poultry other than ratites or less than 20 hatching eggs of poultry other than ratites must have been tested negative for the diseases referred to in point (e) of Article 49 and point (e)(ii) of Article 110 as follows: ANNEX XVIII SAMPLING AND TESTING OF POULTRY OTHER THAN RATITES AFTER THE ENTRY INTO THE UNION ANNEX XIX ANIMAL HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTING APPROVAL OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ORIGIN OF CAPTIVE BIRDS ANNEX XX EXAMINATION, SAMPLING AND TESTING PROCEDURES OF CAPTIVE BIRDS FOR HIGHLY PATHOGENIC AVIAN INFLUENZA AND NEWCASTLE DISEASE ANNEX XXI SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AS REGARDS DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS INTENDED FOR ENTRY INTO THE UNION 1. ANTIBODY RABIES TITRATION TEST REQUIREMENTS: 2. TREATMENT AGAINST INFESTATION WITH ECHINOCCOCUS MULTILOCULARIS Prior to entry into the Union, dogs must be treated against infestation with Echinococcus multilocularis , as follows: ANNEX XXII REQUIREMENTS AS REGARDS THE RESIDENCY PERIODS OF HATCHING EGGS BEFORE THE ENTRY INTO THE UNION ANNEX XXIII REQUIREMENTS AS REGARDS THE RESIDENCY PERIOD BEFORE SLAUGHTER OR KILLING OF THE KEPT UNGULATES OF ORIGIN OF THE FRESH MEAT ANNEX XXIV DISEASE FREEDOM IN THE THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OF ORIGIN OF THE PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN PART A Minimum periods (in months) of disease freedom of the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof in accordance with Article 133(1). PART B Specific conditions to be provided by the competent authority where the third country or territory or zone thereof has been free of the disease for a period of less than 12 months as provided for in the derogation laid down in Article 133(1): ( *1 ) only applicable to listed species in accordance with Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *2 ) this period may be reduced where specific conditions, in accordance with Part B, are provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory ANNEX XXV VACCINATION IN THE THIRD COUNTRY OR TERRITORY OF ORIGIN OR ZONE THEREOF AND IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ORIGIN OF THE ANIMALS FROM WHICH THE FRESH MEAT IS OBTAINED PART A Animal health requirements regarding the absence of vaccination in the third country or territory of origin or zone thereof and in the establishment of origin of the ungulates from which the fresh meat is obtained: PART B Specific conditions to be provided by the competent authorities where vaccination against foot and mouth disease has been carried out in the third country or territory or zone thereof for a period of less than 12 months as referred to in Article 133(3) 1. FROM A THIRD COUNTRY, TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF WHICH IS FREE FROM FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE AND WHERE VACCINATION AGAINST FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE STRAINS A, O OR C IS PRACTISED The competent authority of the third country or territory of origin must provide supplementary information to guarantee the absence of foot and mouth disease virus in fresh meat and compliance with the following requirements: 2. FROM A THIRD COUNTRY, TERRITORY OR ZONE THEREOF WHICH IS FREE FROM FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE AND WHERE VACCINATION AGAINST FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE STRAINS A, O OR C IS PRACTISED AND IS SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL SPECIFIC CONDITIONS In addition to the requirements set out in point 1, the competent authority of the third country or territory must comply with additional specific conditions in relation to the vaccination programme which support the absence of foot and mouth disease virus in fresh meat from the zone. 3. FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE-FREE ZONES WHERE VACCINATION IS NOT PRACTISED 3.1. Foot and mouth disease strains SAT or ASIA 1 Where fresh meat originates from a foot and mouth disease-free zone where vaccination is not practised, but that zone is in a third country or territory in which vaccination against foot and mouth disease (FMD) strains SAT or ASIA 1 is practised in other zones or where those strains are endemic in part(s) of the third country or territory or in the neighbouring Member State or third countries, the competent authorities of a third country or territory of origin of such meat must provide the necessary supplementary information to guarantee the absence of the foot and mouth disease virus in the fresh meat and to guarantee compliance with the following animal health requirements: 3.2. Foot and mouth disease strains A, O or C Where fresh meat originates in a foot and mouth free zone where vaccination against foot and mouth disease is not practised, but that zone is in a third country or territory in which vaccination against foot and mouth disease strains A, O or C is practised, and where the competent authorities of the third country or territory have provided additional guarantees on conditions specific for the third country or territory or zone and which support the absence of foot and mouth disease virus in the fresh meat from the zone, the competent authorities of the third country or territory of origin must provide the following supplementary information: ( *1 ) only applicable for listed species in accordance with Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 ( *2 ) or specific conditions, in accordance with Part B, are provided by the competent authority of the third country or territory ANNEX XXVI RISK MITIGATING TREATMENTS FOR MEAT PRODUCTS 1. RISK MITIGATING TREATMENTS FOR MEAT PRODUCTS LISTED IN DESCENDING ORDER OF SEVERITY 2. RISK MITIGATING TREATMENTS FOR CASINGS ANNEX XXVII RISK MITIGATING TREATMENTS FOR MILK AND DAIRY PRODUCTS ANNEX XXVIII RISK MITIGATION TREATMENTS FOR EGG PRODUCTS 1. TREATMENTS OF EGG PRODUCTS FOR THE INACTIVATION OF HIGHLY PATHOGENIC AVIAN INFLUENZA The following treatments are suitable for the inactivation of highly pathogenic avian influenza in the following egg products: 2. TREATMENTS OF EGG PRODUCTS FOR THE INACTIVATION OF INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS The following treatments are suitable for the inactivation of infection with Newcastle disease virus in the following egg products: ANNEX XXIX LIST OF SPECIES SUSCEPTIBLE TO DISEASES FOR WHICH MEMBER STATES HAVE NATIONAL MEASURES IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 226 OF REGULATION (EU) 2016/429 ANNEX XXX CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH SPECIES LISTED IN COLUMN 4 OF THE TABLE IN THE ANNEX TO COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2018/1882 ARE REGARDED AS VECTORS