COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2020/687 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and the Council, as regards rules for the prevention and control of certain listed diseases (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health (the ‘Animal Health Law’) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 47(1), Article 53(2), Article 54(3), Article 55(2), Article 58(2), the first paragraph of Article 63, Article 64(4), the first paragraph of Article 67, Article 68(3), Article 70(3), Article 72(2), Article 73(3), Article 74(4), Article 76(5), Article 77(2) and Article 272(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: PART I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter and scope This Regulation supplements the rules on disease awareness, preparedness and control to be applied with regard to the listed diseases referred to in Article 9(1)(a), (b) and (c) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. Those rules cover the following: Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, definitions laid down in Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 and Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 12 ) shall apply, except where those definitions cover terms that are defined in the second paragraph of this Article. In addition, the following definitions shall also apply: Article 3 Clinical examinations, sampling procedures and diagnostic methods 1. Where clinical examinations of animals are required pursuant to this Regulation in order to confirm or rule out the presence of a category A disease, the competent authority shall ensure that: 2. Where laboratory examinations are required pursuant to this Regulation in order to confirm or rule out the presence of a category A disease, the competent authority shall ensure that: Article 4 Contingency plans The competent authority shall implement the measures laid down in this Regulation in accordance with the contingency plan referred to in Article 43 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. PART II TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS CHAPTER I Disease control measures for category A diseases in kept terrestrial animals Section 1 Preliminary disease control measures in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals Article 5 Obligations on operators in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals in an establishment In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals, operators shall take the following disease control measures in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease from the affected animals and establishments under their responsibility to other unaffected animals or to humans until the competent authority rules out the presence of the category A disease: Article 6 Investigation by the competent authority in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals in an establishment 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals in an establishment, in accordance with Article 9(1), (3) and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, the competent authority shall immediately conduct an investigation to confirm or rule out the presence of the suspected listed disease. 2. In the course of the investigation referred to in paragraph 1 the competent authority shall ensure that official veterinarians perform at least: Article 7 Preliminary restriction and biosecurity measures in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals in an establishment 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in an establishment, the competent authority shall place the establishment under official surveillance and immediately impose the following preliminary restriction and biosecurity measures, in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease from the affected animals and the establishment to other unaffected animals or to humans: 2. By way of derogation from point 1(a), (b) and (c) the competent authority may authorise movements of animals and products from the establishment where a category A disease is suspected, after carrying out a risk assessment and provided that: 3. Where derogations provided for in paragraph 2 are granted, the competent authority may impose the disease control measures provided for in paragraph 1 in the establishment of destination. 4. The competent authority may order preventive killing, in accordance with Article 12(1) and (2), of animals of listed species in the establishment where a category A disease is suspected when the epidemiological situation so requires. 5. All animal by-products from dead animals, which have died or have been killed in the establishment where a category A disease is suspected shall be processed or disposed of in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 to ensure that the suspected disease agent is inactivated and to prevent the spread of the disease to unaffected animals or to humans. Article 8 Inventory and records analysis in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals in an establishment 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease, the competent authority shall order and verify that, without delay, operators of the establishments where a category A disease is suspected compile and maintain an up-to-date inventory of the following: 2. Where the establishment consists of several epidemiological units, the information in paragraph 1 shall be specified for each epidemiological unit. 3. In the framework of the epidemiological enquiry, as referred to in Article 57 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, the competent authority shall analyse at least the following records of the establishment where a category A disease is suspected: 4. The records analysis referred to in paragraph 3 shall cover, at least, the monitoring period set out in Annex II for the relevant disease, calculated backwards from the date on which the suspicion was notified. Article 9 Temporary restricted zones in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept terrestrial animals in an establishment 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in kept animals in an establishment, the competent authority may establish a temporary restricted zone taking into account the following circumstances: 2. In the establishments within the temporary restricted zone the competent authority shall apply at least the measures provided for in Article 7. 3. The competent authority may maintain the temporary restricted zone until the moment that the presence of the category A disease has been ruled out in the establishment where it was suspected or the presence of that disease has been confirmed and a restricted zone is established pursuant to Article 21. 4. The competent authority may order preventive killing, in accordance with Article 12(1) and (2), or slaughtering of animals of listed species, in the temporary restricted zones when the epidemiological situation so requires. Article 10 Measures to apply in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance, including means of transport 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in accordance with Article 9(1), (3) and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance, including means of transport, the competent authority shall apply: 2. The competent authority shall also apply provisions laid down in Articles 5 to 9 in the establishments of origin of the animals or products present in the establishments and locations referred to in paragraph 1 which are suspected to be infected. Section 2 Disease control measures in the event of the official confirmation of a category A disease in kept animals Article 11 Official confirmation of a category A disease in kept terrestrial animals The competent authority shall officially confirm an outbreak of a category A disease in kept terrestrial animals when a case is confirmed in accordance with Article 9(2), (3) and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689. Article 12 Disease control measures in the event of official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease in kept animals in an establishment 1. Following the official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease in an establishment in accordance with Article 11, the competent authority shall order that, in addition to measures provided for in Article 7, the following disease control measures are immediately applied under the supervision of official veterinarians: 2. The competent authority shall order and supervise that: 3. The competent authority shall collect samples for laboratory examination from kept animals of listed species, before or when they are killed or dead, for the purposes of the epidemiological enquiry referred to in Article 57 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 4. By way of derogation of point (a) of paragraph 1, the competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment and taking into account the possibility of applying other risk-mitigating measures, decide: Article 13 Specific derogations from Article 12(1)(a) 1. In the event of an outbreak of a category A disease in establishments keeping animals of listed species in two or more epidemiological units, the competent authority may grant derogation from Article 12(1)(a) to the epidemiological units in which the disease has not been confirmed, after carrying out a risk assessment, and, when necessary, after obtaining favourable results in laboratory examinations, and provided that: 2. The competent authority may grant derogation from Article 12(1)(a) to the following categories of animals provided that the conditions in paragraph 3 are fulfilled: 3. The competent authority shall ensure that the following conditions are fulfilled when granting the derogation provided for in paragraph 2: 4. The competent authority may grant specific derogations from Article 12(1)(a) to equine animals kept in establishments where an outbreak of the category A diseases referred to in Annex III has been confirmed under the conditions set out in that Annex. Article 14 Additional disease control measures in the event of an outbreak of a category A disease in kept terrestrial animals in an establishment 1. The competent authority may establish, in addition to the measures provided for in Article 12, sampling procedures for kept animals of non-listed species and wild animals of listed species, based on the information obtained from the epidemiological enquiry referred to in Article 57 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 2. The competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment of the further spread of the relevant category A disease and taking into account the possibility of applying other risk-mitigating measures, order the killing of kept animals of non-listed species and wild animals in such a way as to avoid any risk of spreading the category A disease during killing, transport and until disposal of the entire bodies or parts of the dead animals. Article 15 Preliminary cleaning and disinfection and control of insects and rodents in the affected establishment 1. Immediately after the completion of the measures provided for in Article 12, and when relevant in Article 14, the competent authority shall order and supervise a preliminary cleaning and disinfection and, when relevant, control of insects and rodents, in the affected establishment in order to avoid spreading of the category A disease. 2. The preliminary cleaning, disinfection and control referred to in paragraph 1 shall be: 3. When the competent authority grants one of the derogations provided for in Article 13(2) and (4), it shall order the preliminary cleaning, disinfection and the control referred to in paragraph 1 adapting the procedures referred to in point 2(a) to the specific situation without detriment to the control of spreading of the category A disease from the affected animals and affected establishments and locations to other unaffected animals or to humans. 4. In addition to the measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the competent authority shall order and supervise that the means of transport used for the transport of animals to and from the affected establishment are properly cleaned and disinfected and, where relevant, subjected to measures ensuring the control of insects and rodents. Article 16 Derogations and special rules for the preliminary cleaning and disinfection and control of vectors The competent authority may grant derogation to the requirement regarding cleaning and disinfection and control of insects and rodents set out in Article 15 in the case of: Article 17 Identification of epidemiologically linked establishments and other locations of relevance, including means of transport 1. In the frame of the epidemiological enquiry, as referred to in Article 57 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/429, and in order to identify all the epidemiologically linked establishments and other locations of relevance, including means of transport, the competent authority shall trace all kept animals present in the establishment where an outbreak of a category A disease has been confirmed and any products, materials, substances, means of transport or people likely to spread the relevant category A disease including: 2. The tracing referred to in paragraph 1 shall cover at least the monitoring period, set out in Annex II for the relevant disease, calculated backwards from the date the suspicion was notified. 3. After carrying out a risk assessment, the competent authority may exclude from the tracing referred to in paragraph 1 those products considered as safe commodities, as provided for in Annex VII. Article 18 Measures to be applied in the epidemiologically linked establishments and other locations of relevance, including means of transport 1. When the tracing provided for in Article 17(1) demonstrates that animals of listed species were dispatched from or to the affected establishment during the period referred to in paragraph 2 of that Article, the competent authority shall: 2. The competent authority shall apply the measures referred to in paragraph 1 in other establishments and locations of relevance, including means of transport, likely to be contaminated as a result of contact with animals, products, materials, substances, persons or means of transport from the affected establishment identified in the frame of the tracing referred to in Article 17 or based on any other relevant information from the epidemiological enquiry, as referred to in Article 57 of the Regulation (EU) 2016/429. Article 19 Measures to be applied to the products identified by the tracing 1. The competent authority shall order and supervise that semen, oocytes and embryos identified as contaminated by the tracing referred to in Article 17 are disposed of in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1069/2009. 2. The competent authority shall order and supervise the treatment, processing or disposing of the products identified by the tracing referred to in Article 17, at least up to: 3. The competent authority shall establish official surveillance on poultry hatched during the tracing period referred to in Article 17(2) from hatching eggs originating from the affected establishment; this surveillance shall be established in all the establishments of destination of the hatching eggs and shall be maintained for a period of time of 21 days after hatching. 4. The competent authority shall order and supervise that the transport from the establishments of animal by-products is subject to the provisions laid down in Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009. 5. The competent authority shall order and supervise that materials or substances likely to be contaminated or likely to transmit the relevant category A disease comply with its instructions regarding biosecurity and biosafety conditions to prevent the spread of category A disease agent. Article 20 Measures to be applied in the event of official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments and any other location of relevance, including means of transport 1. In the event of official confirmation of an outbreak in accordance with Article 11 in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other locations of relevance, including means of transport, the competent authority shall apply: 2. The competent authority shall apply provisions laid down in Articles 12 to 19 also in the establishments of origin of the affected animals or products present in the establishments and locations referred to in paragraph 1. CHAPTER II Disease control measures for category A diseases of kept terrestrial animals in the restricted zones Section 1 General disease control measures in the restricted zone Article 21 Establishment of a restricted zone 1. In the event of an outbreak of a category A disease in an establishment, food and feed business, animal by–products establishment or other locations, including means of transport, the competent authority shall immediately establish around the affected establishment or location a restricted zone, which comprises: 2. The competent authority shall adapt the boundaries of the initial restricted zone, including the boundaries of the protection, surveillance and the further restricted zones, in the case of the overlapping of two or more restricted zones due to further outbreaks of the category A disease. 3. By way of derogation of paragraph 1, and after carrying out a risk assessment taking into account the disease profile, the competent authority may not establish a restricted zone when an outbreak of a category A disease occurs in the following locations: Article 22 Measures to be applied in the restricted zone 1. The competent authority shall without delay compile and keep up to date an inventory of all establishments keeping animals of listed species located in the restricted zone including the species, categories and number of animals in each establishment; for poultry, the number of animals may be estimated. 2. The competent authority may, in order to prevent the spreading of the disease and based on epidemiological information or other evidence, implement preventive killing, in accordance with Article 12(1) and (2), or slaughtering of kept animals of listed species in the establishments located in the restricted zone. 3. The competent authority shall order and supervise that all movements of entire bodies or parts of dead wild and kept animals of listed species from the restricted zone are destined for processing or disposal in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 in a plant approved for those purposes: 4. The competent authority shall impose specific conditions for the transport of animals and products through the restricted zone in order to ensure that they are performed: 5. Animal by-products originating from and moved outside the restricted zone shall be accompanied by an animal health certificate issued by an official veterinarian stating that they are allowed to be moved from the restricted zone under the conditions established by the competent authority in accordance with this Chapter. 6. The competent authority may decide that the certificate referred to in paragraph 5 shall not be issued for movements of animal by-products within the Member State concerned when that authority considers that an alternative system is in place ensuring that consignments of such products are traceable and that products fulfil the animal health requirements for such movements. 7. Any collection of samples in the establishments in the restricted zone keeping animals of listed species for purposes other than to confirm or rule out the presence of the relevant category A diseases must be authorised by the competent authority. Article 23 Derogations from measures to be applied in the restricted zone The competent authority may grant derogations from the provisions set out in this Chapter concerning the measures to be applied in restricted zones, to the extent necessary and after carrying out a risk assessment: Article 24 Requirements for the means of transport of kept animals of listed species and products thereof 1. The competent authority shall ensure that the means of transport used for movements of kept animals of listed species and products thereof within, from, to and through the restricted zone have been: 2. The cleaning and disinfection of the means of transport referred to in paragraph 1 shall be performed: Section 2 Disease control measures in the protection zone Article 25 Measures to be applied in establishments keeping animals of listed species in the protection zone 1. The competent authority shall order without delay the application of the following measures in establishments in the protection zone keeping animals of listed species, other than the establishment in which the category A disease has been confirmed: 2. By way of derogation of point (f) of paragraph 1 the records on visitors are not required in establishments where animals referred to in Article 13(2) are kept, if visitors have no access to the areas where the animals are kept. Article 26 Visits by official veterinarians in establishments in the protection zone 1. The competent authority shall ensure that official veterinarians carry out at least one visit to all the establishments referred to in Article 25, as soon as possible and without unjustified delay, after the official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease. 2. When carrying out the visits referred to in paragraph 1, official veterinarians shall perform at least the following activities: 3. The competent authority may require further veterinary visits to the establishments in the protection zone to follow up on the situation. 4. The competent authority shall keep a record of activities and visits referred to in paragraph 1, 2 and 3 and the findings thereof. 5. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, where the radius of the protection zone set in Annex V is larger than 3 km, the competent authority may decide to require not the visit to all the establishments referred to in Article 25 but the visit of a representative number of those establishments in accordance with point A.3 of Annex I. Article 27 Prohibitions in relation to activities, including movements, concerning animals, products and other material within, from or to the protection zone 1. The competent authority shall prohibit the activities, including movements, concerning animals of listed species and their products and other materials within, from and to the protection zone in accordance with the table in Annex VI. 2. The competent authority may extend the prohibitions provided for in paragraph 1 to: 3. The following products are exempted from prohibitions provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2: 4. Prohibitions provided for in paragraph 1 and 2 shall apply to products referred to in paragraph 3 if: Article 28 General conditions to grant derogations from prohibitions in the protection zone 1. By way of derogation from prohibitions provided for in Article 27, the competent authority may authorise movements of animals and products in the cases covered by Articles 29 to 38 and under the specific conditions provided for in those Articles and the general conditions laid down in paragraphs 2 to 7 of this Article. Prior to granting the authorisation, the competent authority shall assess the risks deriving from that authorisation and the assessment must indicate that the risk of spreading the category A disease is negligible. 2. All authorised movements must be performed: 3. The competent authority of the establishment of origin shall designate the establishment of destination for movements from or to the protection zone. If the competent authority of the establishment of origin is different from the competent authority of the establishment of destination, it shall inform the competent authority of the establishment of destination about such designation. 4. The competent authority of the establishment of origin shall verify that the establishment of destination agrees to be designated and to receive each consignment of animals or products. 5. When authorising movements of animals from the protection zone, the competent authority shall ensure that such movements do not pose a risk of spreading of the category A disease based on: 6. When authorising the transport of products from the protection zone, the competent authority shall order and supervise that: 7. When granting an authorisation pursuant to paragraph 1, the competent authority shall ensure that supplementary biosecurity measures are applied from the moment of loading, during all transport operations and until the unloading in the designated establishment of destination in accordance with its instructions. Article 29 Specific conditions for authorising movements for slaughter of kept animals of listed species in the protection zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of kept animals of listed species from establishments located in the protection zone to a slaughterhouse located: 2. The competent authority shall only grant authorisations provided for in paragraph 1 under the following conditions: 3. The competent authority may authorise movements of kept animals of listed species from establishments located outside the protection zone to a slaughterhouse located in the protection zone if: 4. By way of derogation of Article 9 of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 the competent authority may authorise the processing and use of animal by-products, obtained from animals slaughtered in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 as category 3 material in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 in a plant approved for processing or disposal of animal by-products, located on its territory, or in another Member State, where it is not feasible to process or dispose them in an approved plant in the territory of the Member State where the outbreak occurred. In case the animal by-products referred to in the first subparagraph are moved to a plant located in another Member State, the Member State of destination and the Member States of passage shall authorise such dispatch and the competent authority of destination shall authorise the processing and use of those animal by-products as category 3 material in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009. Article 30 Specific conditions for authorising certain movements of poultry from establishments located in the protection zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of day-old-chicks from an establishment located in the protection zone to an establishment located in the same Member State but, if possible, outside the restricted zone, provided that: 2. The competent authority may authorise movements of ready-to-lay poultry from establishments located in the protection zone to establishments located in the same Member State and, if possible, within the restricted zone, provided that: Article 31 Specific conditions for authorising certain movements of hatching eggs in the protection zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of hatching eggs either: 2. The authorisation provided for in paragraph 1(a) shall be subject to the following conditions: 3. The competent authority may authorise movements of hatching eggs from an establishment located in the protection zone to an establishment for in-house hatching located in the same Member State, if: Article 32 Specific conditions for authorising movements of semen from approved germinal product establishments in the protection zone The competent authority may authorise movements of semen collected from animals of listed species kept in approved germinal product establishments, excluding hatcheries, located in the protection zone after the estimated date of earliest infection of the affected establishment subject to the following conditions: Article 33 Specific conditions for authorising movements of fresh meat and raw milk obtained from kept animals of listed species from establishments in the protection zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of fresh meat and raw milk obtained from animals of listed species kept in establishments located in the protection zone if: 2. The competent authority shall ensure that movements to a processing establishment referred to in paragraph 1(a) comply with the following conditions: Article 34 Specific conditions for authorising movements of eggs for human consumption from establishments located in the protection zone The competent authority may authorise the movement of eggs for human consumption from establishments located in the protection zone to the following destinations within the same Member State: Article 35 Specific conditions for authorising movements of manure, including litter and used bedding from establishments located in the protection zone to a landfill The competent authority may authorise movements of manure, including litter and used bedding, from establishments located in the protection zone for the purpose of their disposal in a designated landfill located within the same Member State only after processing in accordance with Article 13(c) of Regulation (EU) No 1069/2009. Article 36 Specific conditions for authorising the movement of feed materials of plant origin and straw from the protection zone The competent authority may authorise movements of feed materials of plant origin and straw produced in the protection zone provided that: Article 37 Specific conditions for authorising movements of kept animals of listed species and products to an animal by-products approved plant 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of kept animals of listed species from establishments located in the protection zone to a plant approved for processing or disposal of animal by-products in which: 2. The competent authority may authorise movements of products from establishments and locations in the protection zone to a plant approved for processing or disposal of animal by-products, in which the products are disposed of or processed in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009. Article 38 Measures to be applied in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the protection zone, including means of transport 1. The competent authority shall apply the relevant measures referred to in Article 25, and Articles 27 to 38 in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the protection zone, including means of transport. 2. In the establishments and locations referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority may apply additional measures adapted to the specific situation in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease within and from the protection zone. Article 39 Duration of the disease control measures in the protection zone 1. The competent authority may lift the measures provided for in Section 1 and 2 of this Chapter only if the minimum period set out in Annex X has elapsed and the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. Where the relevant category A disease is transmitted by a listed vector, as referred to in Regulation (EU) 2018/1882, the competent authority may: 3. After the lifting of the measures referred to in paragraph 1, the measures provided for in Section 3 of this Chapter shall apply in the protection zone for at least the additional period set out in Annex X. Section 3 Disease control measures in the surveillance zone Article 40 Measures to be applied in establishments in the surveillance zone The competent authority shall order the application, without delay, of the measures provided for in Article 25 in all the establishments in the surveillance zone keeping animals of listed species. Article 41 Visits by the official veterinarians in establishments in the surveillance zone The competent authority shall ensure that official veterinarians carry out visits to a sample of establishments keeping animals of listed species in the surveillance zone in accordance with Article 26 and point A.3 of Annex I. Article 42 Prohibitions in relation to activities, including movements, concerning animals, products and other material within, from or to the surveillance zone The competent authority shall apply prohibitions, exemptions and derogations to activities, including movements concerning animals of listed species, the products thereof and other material, from and to the surveillance zone in accordance with Article 27. Article 43 General conditions for granting derogations from prohibitions provided for in Article 42 1. By way of derogation from Article 42, the competent authority may authorise movements of animals and products only in the cases covered by Articles 44 to 52, under the specific conditions provided for in those Articles and the general conditions laid down in paragraphs 2 to 7 of this Article. Prior to granting the authorisation, the competent authority shall assess the risks deriving from that authorisation. The assessment must indicate that the risk of spreading the category A disease is negligible. 2. All authorised movements shall be performed: 3. The competent authority of the establishment of origin shall designate the establishment of destination for movements from or to the surveillance zone. If the competent authority is not the same as in the establishment of destination, it shall inform the competent authority of the establishment of destination about such designation. 4. The competent authority of the establishment of origin shall verify that the establishment of destination agrees to be designated and to receive each consignment of animals or products. 5. When authorising movements of animals from the surveillance zone, the competent authority shall ensure that such movements do not pose a risk of spreading the category A disease based on: 6. When authorising the transport of products from the surveillance zone, the competent authority must ensure that: 7. When granting derogations provided for in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall ensure that supplementary biosecurity measures are applied from the moment of loading, during all transport operations and until the unloading in the designated establishment of destination in accordance with its instructions. Article 44 Specific conditions for authorising movements for slaughter of kept animals of listed species within, from and to the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of kept animals of listed species originating in the surveillance zone to a slaughterhouse located: 2. The meat obtained from animals referred to in paragraph 1 shall be subject to the measures provided for in Article 49. 3. The competent authority may authorise movements of kept animals of listed species originating outside the surveillance zone to a slaughterhouse situated in the surveillance zone. 4. The competent authority may authorise the processing and use of animal by-products, obtained from animals slaughtered in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 as category 3 material in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 in a plant approved for processing or disposal of animal by-products, located on their territory, or in another Member State, where it is not feasible to process or dispose them in an approved plant in the territory of the Member State where the outbreak occurred. In case the animal by-products referred to in the first subparagraph are moved to a plant located in another Member State, the Member State of destination and the Member States of passage shall authorise such dispatch and the competent authority of destination shall authorise the processing and use of those animal by-products as category 3 material in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009. Article 45 Specific conditions for authorising certain movements of kept ungulates of listed species from establishments in the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority may authorise the movement of kept ungulates of listed species to pastures situated within the surveillance zone, provided that: 2. The competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment, authorise the movement of kept animals of listed species of ungulates to an establishment belonging to the same supply chain, located in or outside the surveillance zone, to complete the production cycle before slaughter. If the establishment of destination is located outside the surveillance zone, the competent authority shall apply in that establishment the measures provided for in Articles 40, Article 41 and Article 42 as long as the disease control measures in the surveillance zone of origin are maintained as provided for in Article 55. Article 46 Specific conditions for authorising certain movements of poultry from establishments located in the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of day-old chicks originating in the surveillance zone: 2. The competent authority may authorise movements of ready-to-lay poultry from establishments in the surveillance zone to establishments in the same Member State, if: Article 47 Specific conditions for authorising certain movements of hatching eggs to and from establishments in the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of hatching eggs from an establishment located in the same Member State to: 2. The competent authority may authorise movements of hatching eggs from an establishment located in the surveillance zone to a hatchery in the same Member State or to an establishment for in-house hatching located in the same Member State, only if the hatching eggs and their packaging are disinfected before dispatch and the tracing back of these eggs can be ensured. Article 48 Specific conditions for authorising movements of semen from approved germinal product establishments in the surveillance zone The competent authority may authorise movements of semen collected from animals of listed species kept in approved germinal product establishments, excluding hatcheries, located in the surveillance zone after the estimated date of earliest infection of the affected establishment provided that: Article 49 Specific conditions for authorising movements of fresh meat and raw milk obtained from kept animals of listed species from establishments located in the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of fresh meat and raw milk obtained from animals of listed species kept in establishments located in the surveillance zone if, either: 2. The competent authority shall ensure that fresh meat and the raw milk moved pursuant paragraph 1(a), comply with the following: Article 50 Specific conditions for authorising movements of eggs for human consumption from establishments in the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of eggs for human consumption from establishments in the surveillance zone to a packing centre located in the same Member State provided that they are packed in: 2. The competent authority may authorise movements of eggs for human consumption from establishments located in the surveillance zone to an establishment for the manufacture of egg products located in the same Member State if: Article 51 Specific conditions for authorising movements of manure, including litter and used bedding, from establishments in the surveillance zone The competent authority may authorise the movement of manure, including litter and used bedding, from establishments located in the surveillance zone: Article 52 Specific conditions for authorising the movement of feed materials of plant origin and straw from the surveillance zone The competent authority may authorise movements of feed materials of plant origin or straw produced in the surveillance zone provided that the feed materials or the straw: Article 53 Specific conditions for authorising movements of kept animals of listed species and products to an approved plant 1. The competent authority may authorise movements of kept animals of listed species from establishments located in the surveillance zone to a plant approved for processing or disposal of animal by-products where: 2. The competent authority may authorise movements of products from establishments and other locations in the surveillance zone to a plant approved for processing or disposal of animal by-products where they are disposed of or processed in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009. Article 54 Measures to be applied in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the surveillance zone, including means of transport 1. The competent authority shall apply the relevant measures referred to in Article 40, and Articles 42 to 53 in food and feed businesses, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the surveillance zone, including means of transport. 2. In the establishments and locations referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority may apply additional measures adapted to the specific situation in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease within and from the surveillance zone. Article 55 Duration of the disease control measures in the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority may lift the disease control measures applied in the surveillance zone pursuant to Sections 1 and 3 of this Chapter only if the period set out in Annex XI has elapsed and the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. Where the relevant category A disease is transmitted by a listed vector, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2018/1882, the competent authority may: Section 4 Derogations applicable in the restricted zone in the case of further disease outbreaks Article 56 Derogations from prohibitions of movements of animals within the restricted zones when restriction measures are maintained 1. Where prohibitions of movement of animals provided for in Articles 27 and Article 42 are maintained beyond the period set out in Annex XI because of the official confirmation of further outbreaks of the category A disease, the competent authority may, under exceptional circumstances, authorise the movement of kept animals of listed species from an establishment within the restricted zone in cases not covered by derogations provided for in Articles 27 and Article 42, if: 2. Where movements of animals are authorised pursuant paragraph 1, the competent authority shall ensure that the transport complies with the requirements laid down in Article 24. CHAPTER III Repopulation with terrestrial animals of establishments in restricted zones Article 57 Conditions to authorise the repopulation of the affected establishment 1. The competent authority shall only authorise the repopulation of the affected establishment if the following requirements are met: 2. The competent authority shall supervise that the final cleaning and disinfection and, when relevant, control of insects and rodents in the affected establishment is carried out in compliance with the requirements in paragraph 1(a). 3. The competent authority shall not allow access to a pasture of kept animals of listed species during the period of time during which it is considered contaminated; this period of time shall be established after carrying out a risk assessment. 4. Where for duly justified reasons the final cleaning and disinfection and, when relevant, the control of insects and rodents referred to in paragraph 1, have not been entirely accomplished in the affected establishment, the competent authority may authorise the repopulation by way of derogation from paragraph 1, provided that: Article 58 Derogation from the requirement provided for in Article 55(1)(b) In the event of the official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease in food and feed businesses, assembly centres, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance, including means of transport, the competent authority may authorise the reintroduction of kept animals of listed species for slaughter, assembly operations, inspection or transport, 24 hours after completion of: Article 59 Requirements for the repopulation of the affected establishment with kept animals of listed species 1. The competent authority shall supervise the repopulation with kept animals of listed species of the affected establishment complying with the provisions of this Article. 2. Kept animals of listed species intended for repopulation shall: 3. For the purposes of paragraph 2(b), samples shall be collected from: 4. Kept animals of listed species intended for repopulation shall be introduced in the establishments as follows: 5. Official veterinarians shall carry out at least a visit to the affected establishment on the last day of the monitoring period set out in Annex II for the relevant disease, calculated forwards from the date on which the animals were placed in the establishment, and in any case before 30 days have elapsed since that day, performing at least: 6. Any person entering or leaving the establishment shall comply with appropriate biosecurity measures aimed at preventing the spread of the relevant category A disease. 7. Kept animals of listed species shall only leave the establishment under the authorisation of the competent authority and only after obtaining favourable results from the laboratory examination referred to in paragraph 5(c). 8. From the date that the animals were placed in the establishment until the end of the repopulation, in accordance with Article 61, the operator shall: 9. If unusual mortalities or clinical signs of the relevant category A disease are notified to the competent authority during the period referred to in paragraph 8, the official veterinarians shall without delay collect samples for laboratory examination to rule out the presence of the relevant category A disease. 10. The competent authority may exempt confined establishments from one or more of the provisions laid down in paragraphs 1 to 9 after assessing the risks deriving from that exemption and the assessment indicates that the risk of spreading the category A disease is negligible. Article 60 Additional requirements for the repopulation of the affected establishment 1. The competent authority shall authorise the repopulation of the affected establishment with animals other than kept listed species taking into account the risk of spreading the relevant category A disease and the risk of vector persistence. 2. The competent authority may extend some or all the provisions provided for in Articles 57 and 59 if preventive killing as provided for in paragraph 4 of Articles 7 and 9 is applied. Article 61 End of the repopulation of the affected establishment and lifting of disease control measures in the affected establishment 1. The repopulation of the affected establishment shall be considered finalised when the measures provided in Articles 57 and 59, and when relevant in Article 60, have been successfully completed. 2. The competent authority shall lift all the disease control measures applied in the affected establishment in accordance with this Regulation when the repopulation is considered finalised as provided for in paragraph 1. CHAPTER IV Disease control measures in wild animals of listed species Article 62 Measures in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in wild animals of listed species 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in wild animals of listed species in accordance with Article 9(1), (3), and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, the competent authority shall immediately conduct an investigation to confirm or rule out the presence of the suspected listed disease. 2. In the course of the investigation referred to in paragraph 1 the competent authority shall at least organise post-mortem examinations and the collection of samples for laboratory examination of wild animals of listed species shot dead or found dead to confirm or rule out the presence of the category A disease. 3. As regards the bodies of dead wild animals in which the relevant category A disease is suspected, whether the wild animals were killed or found dead, the competent authority shall ensure that: Article 63 Measures in the event of an outbreak of a category A disease in wild animals of listed species 1. In the event of an official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease in wild animals of listed species in accordance with Article 9(2), (3) and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, the competent authority may determine an infected zone in order to prevent the further spread of the disease based on: 2. As regards the bodies of wild animals in which the relevant category A disease has been confirmed, whether the wild animals were killed or found dead, the competent authority shall ensure that: 3. The competent authority may adapt the boundaries of the initial infected zone: 4. The competent authority shall immediately inform operators, clinical veterinarians, hunters, other relevant competent authorities and any other natural or legal person concerned about the outbreak of the disease and the control measures adopted. Article 64 Measures to be applied in the infected zone 1. In the infected zone determined in accordance with Article 63, the competent authority shall organise post-mortem examinations of wild animals of listed species shot dead or found dead, including when necessary sampling for laboratory examination. 2. In the infected zone the competent authority shall at least: Article 65 Additional measures to apply in the infected zone In order to avoid the spreading of the category A disease, in the infected zone the competent authority may: Article 66 Operational expert group In the event of an officially confirmed outbreak of a category A disease in wild animals of listed species and in the case that the competent authority determines an infected zone in accordance with Article 63, the competent authority shall establish an operational expert group as referred to in Article 43 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 to assist the competent authority in: Article 67 Duration of measures in the infected zone The competent authority shall maintain the measures applied in the infected zone in accordance with this Chapter until the epidemiological information indicates that the relevant wild population no longer poses a risk of introduction of a category A disease into establishments keeping animals of listed species and the operational group recommends lifting of the measures. CHAPTER V Disease control measures for category B and C diseases of terrestrial animals Article 68 Preliminary disease control measures to be applied when a category B or C disease is suspected by the competent authority in Member States or zones that have been granted with the disease free status In the event of suspicion of a category B or C disease in accordance with Article 9(1), (3) or (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, in Member States or zones that have been granted the disease free status pursuant to Article 36(4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 or Article 84(1) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, the competent authority shall apply the measures laid down in: Article 69 Disease control measures to be applied when a category B or C disease is confirmed In the event of confirmation of a category B or C disease in accordance with point (2) of Article 9 of of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 in Member States or zones that have been granted the disease free status in with paragraph 4 of Article 36 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 or paragraph 1 Article 84 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, the competent authority shall apply the measures laid down in: PART III AQUATIC ANIMALS CHAPTER I Disease control measures for category A diseases in aquaculture animals Section 1 Preliminary disease control measures in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in aquaculture animals Article 70 Obligations on operators in the event of suspicion of category A disease in aquaculture animals in establishments In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in aquaculture animals of listed species, operators shall take the following disease control measures in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease from the affected animals and aquaculture establishments under their responsibility to other unaffected aquatic animals until the competent authority rules out the presence of the category A disease: Article 71 Investigation by the competent authority of the suspicion of a category A disease in aquaculture animals in an establishment 1. In the event of the suspicion of a category A disease in aquaculture animals in an establishment in accordance with Article 9(1), (3) and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, the competent authority shall immediately conduct an investigation to confirm or rule out the presence of the suspected listed disease. 2. In the course of the investigation referred to in paragraph 1 the competent authority shall ensure that the official veterinarians perform at least: Article 72 Preliminary restriction and biosecurity measures to be applied in the event of the suspicion of a category A disease in aquaculture animals 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in an establishment, the competent authority shall place the establishment under official surveillance and immediately impose the following preliminary restriction and biosecurity measures, in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease from the affected aquaculture animals and the establishment to unaffected aquatic animals: 2. The competent authority may order preventive killing of listed species at the affected establishment where a category A disease is suspected provided that all necessary biosecurity and other risk-mitigating measures are applied to prevent the spread of the category A disease from the establishment. 3. The competent authority shall by way of derogation from Article 10(i) of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 and after carrying out a risk assessment, authorise movements of aquaculture animals for the sole purpose of immediate killing in a disease control aquatic food establishment or a plant approved for processing or disposal of as animal-by-products of category 1 or category 2 in accordance with that Regulation. The authorisation may only be granted when the necessary biosecurity and other risk-mitigating measures are applied to prevent the spread of the category A disease. 4. All animal by-products from dead aquaculture animals which have died or have been killed in accordance with this Article, including molluscs shells with meat, shall by way of derogation from Article 10(i) of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 be processed or disposed of as category 1 or category 2 material in accordance with that Regulation to ensure that the relevant disease agent is inactivated and to prevent the transmission of the disease to other aquatic animals. Article 73 Inventory and record analysis in the event of the suspicion of a category A disease in aquaculture animals 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease, the competent authority shall order and verify that, without delay, operators of the establishments where a category A disease is suspected compile and maintain an up-to-date inventory of the following: 2. In the framework of the epidemiological enquiry, as referred to in Article 57 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 and carried out in establishments where the disease is suspected, the official veterinarians shall analyse at least the records listed in paragraph 1 of Article 186 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. Article 74 Extension of disease control measures in the event of the suspicion of a category A disease to other establishments In order to prevent the spread of a category A disease the competent authority shall conduct an investigation as provided for in Article 71 and, after carrying out a risk assessment, extend the relevant measures provided for in Articles 72 and 73 to: Article 75 Temporary restricted zones around the establishment The competent authority may establish a temporary restricted zone around the establishment where there is a suspicion of category A disease and where preliminary disease control measures are applied as referred to in Article 72 and Article 73 taking into account the following circumstances: Article 76 Measures to apply in the event of suspicion of a category A disease in food and feed businesses, purification centre, dispatch centre, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance, including means of transport 1. In the event of suspicion of a category A disease in accordance with Article 9(1), (3) and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 in food and feed businesses, purification centres, dispatch centres, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance, including means of transport, the competent authority shall apply: 2. The competent authority shall apply provisions laid down in Articles 71 to 75 also in the establishments of origin of the animals or products present in the establishments and locations referred to in paragraph 1. Section 2 Disease control measures in the event of official confirmation of A category A disease in aquaculture animals Article 77 Official confirmation of a category A disease in aquaculture animals The competent authority shall officially confirm an outbreak of a category A disease in aquaculture animals when the conditions set out in Article 9(2), (3) and (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 are met. Article 78 Disease control measures in the event of official confirmation of an outbreak of category A disease in an establishment 1. Following the official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease in accordance with Article 77, the competent authority shall in addition to the measures provided for Article 72 and Article 73, order that the following disease control measures are immediately applied under the supervision of the official veterinarians, to the establishment where the official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease has occurred: 2. The competent authority shall order and supervise: 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a), the competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment, allow slaughter of fish or crustaceans or in case of molluscs removal from water, for human consumption, at the establishment or in a disease aquatic control food establishment, provided that appropriate biosecurity and other necessary risk-mitigating measures to prevent the spread of the category A disease are taken. All animal by-products resulting from that derogation shall, by way of derogation from Article 10(i) of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009, be processed or disposed of as category 1 or category 2 material in accordance with that Regulation. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(d), the competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment, decide not to kill, slaughter or remove from water aquaculture animals of non-listed species provided that appropriate risk-mitigating measures are applied to prevent any risk of spreading of the relevant category A disease from the establishment. 5. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(f)(ii), the competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment, allow the placing on the market of products of animal origin in accordance with Article 83. Article 79 Specific derogations from control measures in establishments where listed species are kept for scientific purposes or purposes related to conservation of endangered species 1. The competent authority may grant derogations from the measures provided for in Article 78(1)(a) and (c) in the event of an official confirmation of a category A disease in establishments where listed species are kept for scientific purposes or purposes related to conservation of endangered species, provided that: 2. Where a derogation is granted pursuant to paragraph 1, the competent authority shall ensure that aquaculture animals of listed species covered by the derogation are: Article 80 Cleaning and disinfection 1. The competent authority shall order the operators to carry out, immediately after the completion of the disease control measures provided for in Article 78, the cleaning and disinfection of: 2. The cleaning and disinfection as provided for in paragraph 1 shall be carried out: Article 81 Fallowing of the affected establishment The competent authority shall order operators to carry out, after the completion of the cleaning and disinfection provided for in in Article 80, the fallowing of the affected establishment for the period of time laid down in Annex XIII. Article 82 Extension of disease control measures in the event of confirmation of a category A disease In order to prevent the spread of a category A disease the competent authority shall conduct an investigation provided for in Article 71 and after carrying out a risk assessment, extend some or all of the measures provided for in Articles 78, 80 and 81 to: Article 83 Placing on the market of products of animal origin from aquaculture animals of listed species produced in infected establishments 1. When granting a derogation pursuant Article 78(5), the competent authority may allow the placing on the market of products of animal origin only if the following conditions are fulfilled: When purification is required before processing and placing on the market, it shall be conducted at a disease control aquatic food establishment or in a bio-secure purification centre. 2. The products of animal origin referred to in paragraph 1 shall be intended for: Article 84 Measures to be applied in the event of confirmation of category A diseases in, food and feed businesses, purification centre, dispatch centre, border control posts or any other location of relevance, including means of transport 1. In the event of confirmation of a category A disease in food and feed businesses, purification centre, dispatch centre, border control posts or any other location of relevance, including means of transport, in accordance with Article 77, the competent authority shall apply: 2. The competent authority shall apply provisions laid down in Articles 78, Article 80 and Article 81 also in the establishments of origin of the animals or products present in the establishments and locations referred to in paragraph 1. CHAPTER II Disease control measures for category A diseases of aquaculture animals in the restricted zone Section 1 General disease control measures in the restricted zone Article 85 Establishment of a restricted zone 1. In the event of the official confirmation of an outbreak of a category A disease in an establishment, food and feed business, animal by–products establishment or any other location of relevance, including means of transport, the competent authority shall immediately establish a restricted zone around the affected establishment or location, including: 2. The extent of the zones shall be set on a case-to-case basis, taking into account factors influencing the risk of spreading the disease. To that end, the the competent authority shall consider the following data and criteria: 3. The competent authority shall adapt the boundaries of the initial restricted zone, including the boundaries of the protection, surveillance and the further restricted zones, in the case of the overlapping of two or more restricted zones due to further outbreaks of the category A disease. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the competent authority may due to specific geographical, hydrodynamic and epidemiological circumstances, and after carrying out a risk assessment taking into account the disease profile: 5. The competent authority may derogate, to the extent necessary and after carrying out a risk assessment taking into account geographical, hydrodynamic, epidemiological circumstances and the disease profile, from the provisions of this Chapter: Article 86 Measures to be applied in the restricted zone 1. The competent authority shall without delay compile and keep an up-to-date inventory of all establishments keeping aquaculture animals of listed species located in the restricted zone, including the species, categories and the estimated number of animals in each establishment. 2. In the establishments located within the restricted zone, the competent authority may, on the basis of epidemiological information or other relevant evidence and after carrying out a risk assessment, implement preventive killing or, slaughtering for human consumption or, in the case of molluscs, removal from water, of aquaculture animals of listed species pursuant to Article 78(1)(a) and (2). 3. Any collection of samples, in establishments in the restricted zone keeping aquaculture animals of listed species, for purposes other than to confirm or rule out the presence of the relevant category A disease, shall be authorised by the competent authority. Section 2 Disease control measures in the protection zone Article 87 Measures to be applied in establishments keeping aquaculture animals in the protection zone 1. The competent authority shall order operators of establishments keeping aquaculture animals of any species in the protection zone, other than the establishment in which the category A disease has been confirmed, to carry out at least the following measures in order to prevent and control the spread of the disease: 2. The competent authority shall order and supervise that the operator has processed or disposed of as the relevant category material in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 animal by-products from aquaculture animals of listed species that have died or have been killed, including molluscs shells with meat, in establishments keeping listed species within the protection zone. 3. The competent authority may decide after carrying out a risk assessment that Articles 87 and 88 only apply to aquaculture animals of listed species. Article 88 Visits by official veterinarians in establishments in the protection zone 1. The competent authority shall ensure that official veterinarians carry out at least one visit to all the establishments referred to in Article 87 as soon as possible and without delay after the official confirmation of an outbreak of category A disease, with priority directed to establishments that the competent authority has assessed as posing a high risk as regards contracting or spreading disease. 2. When carrying out the visits referred to in paragraph 1, official veterinarians shall perform at least the following activities: 3. The competent authority may require further veterinary visits to the establishments to follow up on the situation. 4. The competent authority shall keep a record of activities and visits referred to in paragraph 1, 2 and 3, and the findings thereof. Article 89 Prohibitions in relation to movements of aquaculture animals, products from aquaculture animals, other substances and material within, from or to the protection zone 1. The competent authority shall prohibit the following movements within the protection zone: 2. The competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment, extend the prohibitions provided for in paragraph 1(a) to 1(d) to animals of non-listed species and their products. Article 90 General conditions to grant derogations from prohibitions of movement and transport concerning aquatic animals and products in the protection zone 1. By way of derogation from prohibitions provided for in Article 89(1), the competent authority may authorise the movement and transport of aquatic animals and products in the cases covered by Articles 91 to 94 under the specific conditions provided for in those Articles and the general conditions laid down in paragraph 2 of this Article. 2. When granting the authorisations provided for in pargraph 1, the competent authority shall ensure that the following conditions are met: Article 91 Specific conditions for slaughter, and movements for slaughter or processing of aquaculture animals from listed species from establishments in the protection zone 1. Aquaculture animals from establishments keeping listed species in the protection zone may be: 2. The competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment based on relevant epidemiological data, limit the application of the measures provided for in paragraph 1 to establishments keeping solely aquaculture animals of species listed in the third column of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882. 3. When authorising the movements of aquaculture animals referred to in paragraph 1(b), the competent authority responsible for the disease control aquatic food establishment shall: Article 92 Specific conditions for placing on the market of products of animal origin from aquaculture animals of listed species produced in non-affected establishments in the protection zone 1. The competent authority may authorise placing on the market of products of animal origin obtained from aquaculture animals of listed species in non-affected establishments in the protection zone, provided that the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. The products of animal origin referred to in paragraph 1 shall be intended: Article 93 Special conditions for authorising transport of unprocessed animal by-products from establishments located in the protection zone The competent authority may authorise the transport of unprocessed animal by-products of aquaculture animals of listed species from establishments in the protection zone to a plant for further processing in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009. Article 94 Risk-mitigating measures concerning certain activities related to aquatic animals within the protection zone 1. The competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment, implement risk- mitigating measures as regards: 2. In the framework of the measures provided for in paragraph 1, the competent authority may, as relevant, order the cleaning and disinfection of equipment, which has been used in waters covered by the protection zone. Article 95 Measures to be applied in food and feed businesses, purification centre, dispatch centres, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the protection zone, including means of transport 1. The competent authority shall apply the measures provided for in Articles 87 to 93 in food and feed businesses, purification centre, dispatch centres, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the protection zone, including means of transport. 2. In the establishments and locations referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority may apply additional measures adapted to the specific situation in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease within and from the protection zone. Article 96 Removal of aquaculture animals from affected establishments and subsequent risk- mitigating measures 1. The competent authority shall determine a point in time by which aquaculture animals in all infected establishments shall be removed. 2. The competent authority may decide, after carrying out a risk assessment, that paragraph 1 also applies to establishments in the protection zone in which the category A disease has not been confirmed in order to control and prevent the possible spread of the diseases. 3. After the removal of aquaculture animals as provided for in paragraph 1, cleaning, disinfection and fallowing shall be carried out in accordance with Articles 80 and 81. 4. The competent authority shall order synchronous fallowing of the affected establishments and the establishments selected in accordance with paragraph 2. 5. The synchronous fallowing referred to in paragraph 4 shall last for the period of time laid down in Annex XIII. Article 97 Duration of disease control measures in the protection zone, repopulation of establishments covered by the protection zone 1. The competent authority shall maintain the disease control measures in the protection zone provided for in Section 2 of this Chapter until: 2. When the conditions set out in paragraph 1 are met: Section 3 Disease control measures in the surveillance zone Article 98 Measures to be applied in establishments in the surveillance zone 1. In the surveillance zone, the competent authority shall order that the measures provided for in Article 87 are applied in all establishments keeping aquaculture animals of listed species. 2. Official veterinarians shall visit the establishments referred to in paragraph 1 and carry out the activities provided for in Article 88(2) as appropriate. 3. The establishments within the surveillance zone shall undergo surveillance comprising visits and samplings as described in point 1 of Annex XV. 4. The surveillance provided for in paragraph 3 shall be carried out by the competent authority. Article 99 Measures in relation to the movement and transport of aquaculture animals within from or to the surveillance zone 1. The competent authority shall prohibit any movements of aquaculture animals from establishments within the surveillance zone for slaughter, further farming or release into the wild outside the surveillance zone. 2. The competent authority shall ensure that any transport of aquaculture animals of listed species within or into the surveillance zone shall be conducted under conditions as set out in Article 90(a) to (e) and in Article 91. 3. The competent authority may order appropriate supplementary biosecurity measures to be applied to transport operations, including the unloading in the designated establishment of destination in order to control and prevent the possible spread of the diseases. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, and in agreement with the competent authority of the place of destination, the competent authority may authorise movements of aquaculture animals provided that appropriate biosecurity measures to prevent the spreading of the category A disease are applied. Article 100 Measures to be applied in food and feed businesses, purification centre, dispatch centres, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the surveillance zone, including means of transport 1. The competent authority shall order without delay that the measures provided for in Articles 98 and 99 be applied in food and feed businesses, purification centre, dispatch centres, border control posts, animal by-products establishments or any other location of relevance in the surveillance zone, including means of transport. 2. In the locations referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority may apply additional measures adapted to the specific situation in order to prevent the spread of the category A disease within and from the surveillance zone. Article 101 Duration of disease control measures in the surveillance zone The competent authority shall lift the disease control measures provided for in this Section when the period of surveillance, set out in point 2 of Annex XV, for the relevant category A disease has elapsed with favourable results. CHAPTER III Disease control measures in wild aquatic animals Article 102 Measures in the event of a suspect case of a category A disease in wild aquatic animals of listed species In the event of a suspect case of a category A disease in wild aquatic animals of listed species in accordance with Article 9(1), (3) and (4) in Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, the competent authority shall: Article 103 Measures in the event of an outbreak of a category A disease in wild aquatic animals of listed species 1. In the event of an officially confirmed case of a category A disease in wild aquatic animals of listed species, the competent authority shall determine an infected zone on the basis of: 2. The competent authority may adapt the boundaries of the initial infected zone: 3. The competent authority shall immediately inform operators, other relevant competent authorities, relevant veterinarians, and any other natural or legal person concerned, about the outbreak of the diseases and the control measures adopted. Article 104 Measures to be applied in the infected zone 1. In the infected zone established in accordance with Article 103 the competent authority shall: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(b) and for the purpose of preserving valuable genetic material, the competent authority may authorise movements of wild aquatic animals of listed species from the infected zone to an establishment authorised by the competent authority for that purpose, provided that appropriate biosecurity measures to prevent the spread of the category A disease are applied. The establishment of destination shall be considered as an establishment located in the infected zone for the purposes of Article 108. Article 105 Additional measures to be applied in the infected zone 1. After carrying out a risk assessment, the competent authority shall determine the additional measures necessary to control or eradicate the relevant category A disease. 2. As part of the control or eradication of the relevant category A disease the competent authority may: 3. The measures provided for in paragraph 1 shall be implemented after consultations and in cooperation with the operational expert group referred to in Article 107 and other authorities and stakeholders. Article 106 Extension of measures The competent authority may decide that relevant measures in Articles 102 to 105 also apply to aquatic animals of non-listed species. Article 107 Operational expert group 1. In the event of a confirmed case of a category A disease in wild aquatic animals of listed species, the competent authority shall establish an operational expert group as referred to in Article 43(2)(d)(iii) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 2. The operational expert group shall assist the competent authority in: Article 108 Measures in the establishments within the infected zone 1. In the establishments keeping aquaculture animals of listed species within the infected zone, the competent authority shall apply the measures provided for in Article 87. 2. In addition to the measures provided for in Article 87, the competent authority shall prohibit the movement of aquaculture animals kept in establishments within the infected zone: 3. The competent authority may, after carrying out a risk assessment, limit the prohibition in paragraph 2 to aquaculture animals of listed species. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, the competent authority may authorise after carrying out a risk assessment and in agreement with the competent authority of the place of destination, the movement of animals of of listed species out of the infected zone or to other establishments in the infected zone. Article 109 Duration of the measures in the infected zone The competent authority shall maintain the measures provided for in this Chapter until the epidemiological information indicates that the relevant wild population no longer poses a risk of spreading the disease and the operational group recommends lifting the measures. CHAPTER IV Disease control measures for category B and C diseases of aquatic animals Article 110 Preliminary disease control measures to be applied when a category B or C disease is suspected by the competent authority in Member States, zones or compartments that have been granted a disease free status The competent authority shall apply the measures laid down in Articles 55, Article 56 and Article 57 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 in the event of suspicion of a category B or C disease in accordance with Article 9(1), (3) or (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689, in Member States, zones or compartments that have been granted a disease free status as provided for in Article 36(4) and Article 37(4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, or Article 83, Article 84(1)(h) to (m) or Article 84(2)(b) to (g) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689. Article 111 Disease control measures to be applied when a category B or C disease is confirmed The competent authority shall apply the measures laid down in the Articles 58 to 65 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 in the event of confirmation of a category B or C disease in accordance with Article 9(2), (3) or (4) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 in Member States or zones or compartments that have been granted the disease free status as provided for in Article 36(4) and Article 37(4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, or Article 83, Article 84(1)(h) to (m) or Article 84(2)(b) to (g) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689: PART IV FINAL PROVISIONS Article 112 Repeals Directive 92/66/EEC, Directive 2001/89/EC, Directive 2003/85/EC and Directive 2005/94/EC as well as the acts adopted on the basis thereof, shall cease to apply with effect from 21 April 2021. Article 113 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 21 April 2021. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 17 December 2019. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 84, 31.3.2016, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 of 3 December 2018 on the application of certain disease prevention and control rules to categories of listed diseases and establishing a list of species and groups of species posing a considerable risk for the spread of those listed diseases ( OJ L 308, 4.12.2018, p. 21 ). ( 3 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for surveillance, eradication programmes, and disease-free status for certain listed and emerging diseases (see page 211 of this Official Journal). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (‘Animal by-products Regulation’) ( OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Directive 2008/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on the inland transport of dangerous goods ( OJ L 260, 30.9.2008, p. 13 ). ( 6 ) Council Directive 2006/88/EC of 24 October 2006 on animal health requirements for aquaculture animals and products thereof, and on prevention and control of certain diseases in aquatic animals ( OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 14 ). ( 7 ) Council Directive 92/66/EEC of 14 July 1992 introducing Community measures for the control of Newcastle disease ( OJ L 260, 5.9.1992, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Council Directive 2001/89/EC of 23 October 2001 on Community measures for the control of classical swine fever ( OJ L 316, 1.12.2001, p. 5 ). ( 9 ) Council Directive 2002/60/EC of 27 June 2002 laying down specific provisions for the control of African swine fever and amending Directive 92/119/EEC as regards Teschen disease and African swine fever ( OJ L 192, 20.7.2002, p. 27 ). ( 10 ) Council Directive 2003/85/EC of 29 of September 2003 on Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease repealing Directive 85/511/EEC and Decisions 89/531/EEC and 91/665/EEC and amending Directive 92/46/EEC ( OJ L 306, 22.11.2003, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Council Directive 2005/94/EC of 20 December 2005 on Community measures for the control of avian influenza and repealing Directive 92/40/EEC ( OJ L 10, 14.1.2006, p. 16 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin ( OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 55 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on official controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products ( OJ L 95, 7.4.2017, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/2035 of 28 June 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for establishments keeping terrestrial animals and hatcheries, and the traceability of certain kept terrestrial animals and hatching eggs ( OJ L 314, 5.12.2019, p. 115 ). ( 15 ) Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs ( OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 1 ). ( 16 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/688 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council, as regards animal health requirements for movements within the Union of terrestrial animals and hatching eggs (see page 140 of this Official Journal). ANNEX I CLINICAL EXAMINATIONS, SAMPLING PROCEDURES, DIAGNOSTIC METHODS OF CATEGORY A DISEASES AND TRANSPORT OF SAMPLES (as referred to in Article 3 of this Regulation) A. Sampling procedures A.1 SAMPLING OF ANIMALS FOR CLINICAL EXAMINATIONS A.2 SAMPLING OF ANIMALS FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATIONS A.3 SAMPLING OF ESTABLISHMENTS FOR VISITS B. Diagnostic methods The techniques, reference materials, their standardisation and the interpretation of the results of tests carried out using the relevant diagnostic methods for category A diseases must comply with Article 6 and Part III of Annex VI to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/689. The diagnostic methodology must aim to maximise the sensitivity of the surveillance. In certain circumstances this surveillance may include the use of laboratory examinations in order to assess previous exposure to disease. C. Transport of samples ANNEX II MONITORING PERIOD (as referred to in Articles 8, 17, 27, 32, 48, 57 and 59 of this Regulation) ANNEX III CONDITIONS FOR CERTAIN DEROGATIONS FROM ARTICLE 12(1)(a) IN EQUINE ANIMALS (as referred to in Article 13(4)) ANNEX IV PROCEDURES FOR CLEANING, DISINFECTION AND WHEN NECESSARY CONTROL OF INSECTS AND RODENTS (as referred to in Articles 12, 15, 16, 39, 45 and 57 of this Regulation) A. General requirements B. Preliminary cleaning and disinfection For preliminary cleaning and disinfection under Article 15, to avoid spreading the category A disease: C. Final cleaning and disinfection: For final cleaning and disinfection for the purpose of Article 57: ANNEX V MINIMUM RADIUS OF PROTECTION AND SURVEILLANCE ZONES (as referred to in Article 21 of this Regulation) Indicated as radius of a circle centred on the establishment ANNEX VI PROHIBITIONS IN THE RESTRICTED ZONE (as referred to in Article 27 of this Regulation) Table: Prohibitions of activities concerning animals of listed species and products from those animals ( *1 ) only oocytes and embryo. ( *2 ) only oocytes and embryo. ( 1 ) Disease abbreviations in accordance with Annex II. NA = Not applicable. X = prohibition. NP = Not prohibited. ANNEX VII RISK-MITIGATING TREATMENTS FOR PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN FROM THE RESTRICTED ZONE (as referred to in Articles 27, 33 and 49 of this Regulation) ( 1 ) Safe commodity. ( 2 ) Not for bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine casings. ( 3 ) Not for bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine casings. ( 4 ) Safe commodity. ( 5 ) Only for porcine animals. ( 6 ) Only for poultry meat. ( 7 ) F 0 is the calculated killing effect on bacterial spores. An F 0 value of 3 means that the coldest point in the product has been heated sufficiently to achieve the same killing effect as 121 °C (250 °F) in three minutes with instantaneous heating and chilling. ( 8 ) Disease abbreviations in accordance with Annex II. ANNEX VIII RISK-MITIGATING TREATMENTS FOR PRODUCTS NOT OF ANIMAL ORIGIN FROM THE PROTECTION ZONE (as referred to in Articles 36 and 52 of this Regulation) ( 1 ) Disease abbreviations in accordance with Annex II. ANNEX IX MARKING OF FRESH MEAT FROM THE PROTECTION ZONE (as referred to in Articles 33 and 49 of this Regulation) ANNEX X DURATION OF THE MEASURES IN THE PROTECTION ZONE (as referred to in Article 39 of this Regulation) ANNEX XI DURATION OF THE MEASURES IN THE SURVEILLANCE ZONE (as referred to in Articles 55 and 56 of this Regulation) ANNEX XII SAMPLING PROCEDURES AND DIAGNOSTIC METHODS FOR CATEGORY A DISEASES IN AQUATIC ANIMALS ANNEX XIII MINIMUM PERIODS OF FALLOWING OF AFFECTED AQUACULTURE ESTABLISHMENTS Periods for the fallowing provided for in Article 81 and for the synchronous fallowing provided for in Article 96(4) and (5) of this Regulation ANNEX XIV CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHING RESTRICTED ZONES AS REGARDS CATEGORY A DISEASES IN AQUATIC ANIMALS ANNEX XV SURVEILLANCE SCHEME AND DURATION OF CONTROL MEASURES IN THE SURVEILLANCE ZONE FOR CATEGORY ADISEASES IN AQUACULTURE ANIMALS (as referred to in Articles 98 and 101 of this Regulation) 1. Surveillance scheme The establishments and groups of aquaculture establishments keeping listed species within a surveillance zone must undergo surveillance as provided for in Article 98 to check for infection with the relevant category A disease. The surveillance must include health visits, including sampling from production units. Those visits must be carried out by the competent authority in accordance with Tables 1 and 2. The criteria set out in point 1 of Annex XII, as appropriate for the species, apply to sampling. Table 1 Scheme for surveillance comprising health visits and samplings in establishments and groups of establishments for category A diseases in aquatic animals, except epizootic hematopoietic necrosis Table 2 Specific scheme for surveillance comprising health visits and samplings in establishments for epizootic haematopoietic necrosis (EHN) in aquatic animals ( 1 ) 2. Duration of the control measures in the surveillance zone When the period of surveillance has elapsed and there has been no new detection of infection with the relevant category A disease, the measures in the surveillance zone must be lifted as provided for in Article 101 of this Regulation. ( 1 ) The sampling of fish for laboratory examination must be carried out whenever the water temperature is between 11 and 20 °C. The water temperature requirement must also apply to health inspections. In establishments where the water temperature does not reach 11 °C during the year, sampling and health visits must be carried out when the water temperature is at its highest level. ( 2 ) Samples from broodstock must not include gonadal fluids, milt or ova as there is no evidence of EHN causing reproductive tract infection.