COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/89 of 21 January 2022 laying down rules for the application of Directive (EU) 2019/883 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the method to be used for the calculation of sufficient dedicated storage capacity (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive (EU) 2019/883 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on port reception facilities for the delivery of waste from ships, amending Directive 2010/65/EU and repealing Directive 2000/59/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 7(4), second subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 1. Member States shall calculate the sufficient dedicated storage capacity for the application of Article 7(4), points (a) and (b), and Article 9 of Directive (EU) 2019/883 by using the method set out in Annex I to this Regulation. 2. For the purpose of verifying the information provided in accordance with Annex 2 to Directive (EU) 2019/883, by estimating the on-board generation of different waste types, Member States shall take into account the waste generation rates set out in Annex II to this Regulation. 3. In addition to the waste generation rates set out in Annex II to this Regulation, Member States may use one or both of the following criteria to determine estimates for the on-board generation of different waste types: Article 2 The method for calculating the sufficient dedicated storage capacity, set out in Annex I to this Regulation, shall not be applicable to the following waste types: Article 3 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 21 January 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 151, 7.6.2019, p. 116 . ANNEX I Calculation method for sufficient dedicated waste storage capacity UWC (%) < Threshold Where: A is the estimated amount of waste type to be retained on board at the time of departure from the port of call (expressed in m 3 ); M is the Maximum dedicated storage capacity (expressed in m 3 ); Threshold is the value set out in Table 1, for the corresponding type of waste and next port of call. Table 1 Thresholds ANNEX II Table 1 Waste Generation Rates for Annexes I, IV and V to the MARPOL Convention ( 1 ) Table 2 Waste Generation Rates for Annex VI to the MARPOL Convention on waste (exhaust gas cleaning systems, ‘EGCS’) NB : The amount of exhaust gas cleaning system sludge generated depends ultimately also on the individual installation specifics: the exhaust gas cleaning system manual provided by the manufacturer should therefore be consulted. Information in the tables provided by stakeholder companies. ( 1 ) Extracted from EMSA’s study ‘The Management of Ship-Generated Waste On-board Ships’, January 2017. ( 2 ) Evaporation of the water fraction in oil sludge is a process that must be carefully managed and should only be done to the extent to allow combustibility of the sludge intended for incineration.