COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2019/2035 of 28 June 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for establishments keeping terrestrial animals and hatcheries, and the traceability of certain kept terrestrial animals and hatching eggs (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health (‘Animal Health Law’) ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 3(5), 87(3), 94(3), 97(2), 101(3), 106(1), 118(1) and (2), 119(1) and 122(2), Articles 271(2) and 279(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: PART I SUBJECT MATTER, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation supplements the rules laid down in Regulation (EU) 2016/429 as regards: 2. Chapter 1 of Title I of Part II lays down the requirements for the registration of transporters of kept dogs, cats and ferrets, and poultry engaged in the transportation of those animals between Member States or between a Member State and a third country. 3. Chapter 2 of Title I of Part II provides for derogations for operators of establishments for assembly operations of certain equine animals and of hatcheries of captive birds, from the requirement to apply to the competent authority for approval. That Chapter also lays down the requirements for the approval of the following types of establishments: Those requirements concern isolation and other biosecurity measures, surveillance measures, facilities and equipment, personnel and supervision by the competent authority. 4. Chapter 3 of Title I of Part II lays down the requirements for the approval of the following types of establishments: Those requirements concern quarantine, isolation and other biosecurity measures, surveillance and control measures, facilities and equipment, and supervision by the veterinarian. 5. Chapter 4 of Title I of Part II lays down the requirements for the approval of confined establishments from which kept terrestrial animals are to be moved within the same Member State or to another Member State in relation to quarantine, isolation and other biosecurity measures, surveillance and control measures, facilities and equipment and supervision by the veterinarian. 6. Chapter 1 of Title II of Part II lays down the information obligations of the competent authority as regards its registers of: 7. Chapter 2 of Title II of Part II lays down the information obligation of the competent authority as regards registers of approved establishments referred to in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of Title I of Part II. 8. Chapter 1 of Title III of Part II lays down the record-keeping obligations of operators, in addition to those provided for in Article 102(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, for the following types of registered or approved establishments: 9. Chapter 2 of Title III of Part II lays down the record-keeping obligations of operators of registered or approved hatcheries, in addition to those provided for in Article 103(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 10. Chapter 3 of Title III of Part II lays down the record-keeping obligations of registered transporters, in addition to those provided for in Article 104(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 11. Chapter 4 of Title III of Part II lays down the record-keeping obligations of operators conducting assembly operations, in addition to those provided for in Article 105(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, for 12. Titles I to IV of Part III lay down traceability requirements for kept animals of the bovine, ovine and caprine, porcine and equine species, including the means of identification, documentation and computer databases. 13. Chapter 1 of Title V of Part III lays down traceability requirements for kept dogs, cats and ferrets, including those for pet animals when they are moved to another Member State for other than non-commercial purposes. 14. Chapter 2 of Title V of Part III lays down traceability requirements for kept camelid and cervid animals. 15. Chapter 3 of Title V of Part III lays down traceability requirements for kept captive birds. 16. Chapter 4 of Title V of Part III lays down traceability requirements for kept terrestrial animals in travelling circuses and animal acts. 17. Title VI of Part III lays down traceability requirements for hatching eggs. 18. Title VII of Part III lays down traceability requirements for kept bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, equine, cervid and camelid animals after their entry into the Union. 19. Part IV lays down certain transitional measures with regard to Directives 64/432/EEC and 92/65/EEC, Regulations (EC) No 1760/2000, (EC) No 21/2004 and (EC) No 1739/2005, Directives 2008/71/EC, 2009/156/EC and 2009/158/EC, and Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/262 in relation to: Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: PART II REGISTRATION, APPROVAL, REGISTERS AND RECORD-KEEPING TITLE I REGISTRATION AND APPROVAL OF TRANSPORTERS AND OPERATORS OF ESTABLISHMENTS BY THE COMPETENT AUTHORITY CHAPTER 1 Registration of transporters of kept terrestrial animals other than ungulates for transport between Member States and for transport to third countries Article 3 Registration obligations of transporters of kept dogs, cats and ferrets, and poultry 1. Transporters engaged in the transportation of kept dogs, cats and ferrets, and poultry between Member States or between a Member State and a third country shall, in order to be registered in accordance with Article 93 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, before they commence such activities provide the competent authority with information on: 2. Transporters of kept dogs, cats and ferrets, as referred to in paragraph 1, shall inform the competent authority of the numbers of animals for which transportation is planned. 3. Transporters of poultry, as referred to in paragraph 1, shall inform the competent authority of the categories of poultry for which transportation is planned. 4. Transporters as referred to in paragraph 1 shall inform the competent authority of any: CHAPTER 2 Approval of establishments for assembly operations of ungulates and poultry, hatcheries and establishments keeping poultry Article 4 Derogations from the requirement to apply to the competent authority for approval for operators of establishments for assembly operations of certain equine animals and of hatcheries of captive birds Operators of the following establishments shall not apply to the competent authority for approval of their establishments in accordance with Article 96(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429: Article 5 Requirements for granting approval of establishments for assembly operations of ungulates When granting approval of establishments for assembly operations of ungulates, from which those animals are to be moved to another Member State or which receive those animals from another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in Part 1 of Annex I hereto: Article 6 Requirements for granting approval of establishments for assembly operations of poultry When granting approval of establishments for assembly operations of poultry from which those animals are to be moved to another Member State or which receive those animals from another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in Part 2 of Annex I hereto: Article 7 Requirements for granting approval of hatcheries When granting approval of hatcheries from which hatching eggs of poultry or day-old chicks are to be moved to another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in: Article 8 Requirements for granting approval of establishments keeping poultry When granting approval of establishments keeping poultry from which poultry intended for purposes other than slaughter or hatching eggs are to be moved to another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in: CHAPTER 3 Approval of establishments keeping terrestrial animals Article 9 Obligation on operators of certain type of establishments keeping terrestrial animals to apply to the competent authority for approval Operators of the following types of establishments shall apply to the competent authority for approval in accordance with Article 96(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 and shall not commence their activities until their establishment has been approved: Article 10 Requirements for granting approval of assembly centres of dogs, cats and ferrets When granting approval of assembly centres of dogs, cats and ferrets from which those animals are to be moved to another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in Part 5 of Annex I hereto: Article 11 Requirements for granting approval of animal shelters of dogs, cats and ferrets When granting approval of animal shelters from which dogs, cats and ferrets are to be moved to another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in Part 5 of Annex I hereto: Article 12 Requirements for granting approval of control posts When granting approval of control posts, the competent authority shall ensure that such control posts comply with the following requirements set out in Part 6 of Annex I hereto: Article 13 Requirements for granting approval of environmentally isolated production establishments for bumble bees When granting approval for environmentally isolated production establishments for bumble bees from which bumble bees are to be moved to another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in Part 7 of Annex I hereto: Article 14 Requirements for granting approval of quarantine establishments for kept terrestrial animals other than primates When granting approval for quarantine establishments for kept terrestrial animals other than primates from which those animals are to be moved within the same Member State or to another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishment comply with the following requirements set out in Part 8 of Annex I hereto: Article 15 Obligations on operators of quarantine establishments for kept terrestrial animals other than primates Operators of quarantine establishments for kept terrestrial animals other than primates referred to in Article 14 shall: CHAPTER 4 Approval of confined establishments from which terrestrial animals are to be moved within a Member State or to another Member State Article 16 Requirements for granting approval of status of confined establishments for terrestrial animals When granting approval of a confined establishment for terrestrial animals which are to be moved within the same Member State or to another Member State, the competent authority shall ensure that such establishments comply with the following requirements set out in Part 9 of Annex I hereto: Article 17 Obligations on operators of confined establishments for terrestrial animals Operators of confined establishments for terrestrial animals referred to in Article 16 shall: TITLE II REGISTERS TO BE KEPT BY THE COMPETENT AUTHORITY OF REGISTERED AND APPROVED TRANSPORTERS AND OPERATORS OF ESTABLISHMENTS CHAPTER 1 Registers of establishments, transporters and operators registered with the competent authority Article 18 Information obligation of the competent authority as regards registers of establishments of kept terrestrial animals and hatcheries The competent authority shall include in its register of establishments of kept terrestrial animals and of hatcheries registered with it the following information for each establishment: Article 19 Information obligation of the competent authority as regards registers of transporters of kept ungulates, dogs, cats and ferrets, and poultry 1. The competent authority shall include, in its register of transporters engaged in the transportation between Member States or between a Member State and a third country of kept ungulates, dogs cats and ferrets, and poultry, registered with it, the following information for each transporter: 2. For each transporter of kept ungulates, dogs cats and ferrets, as referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall include information in its register of transporters on the number of animals for which transportation is planned. 3. For each transporter of poultry as referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall include information in its register of transporters on the categories of poultry for which transportation is planned. Article 20 Information obligation of the competent authority as regards registers of operators conducting assembly operations for kept ungulates and poultry independently of an establishment The competent authority shall include in its register of operators conducting assembly operations for kept ungulates and poultry registered with it, independently of an establishment, including those who buy and sell those animals, the following information for each operator: CHAPTER 2 Registers of establishments approved by the competent authority Article 21 Information obligation of the competent authority as regards registers of approved establishments The competent authority shall include in its register of approved establishments referred to in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of Title I of Part II, the following information for each establishment: TITLE III RECORD-KEEPING OBLIGATIONS OF OPERATORS IN ADDITION TO THOSE PROVIDED FOR IN REGULATION (EU) 2016/429 CHAPTER 1 Operators of establishments registered or approved with the competent authority Article 22 Record-keeping obligations of operators of all establishments keeping terrestrial animals Operators of all registered or approved establishments keeping terrestrial animals shall record the following information: Article 23 Record-keeping obligations of operators of establishments keeping bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine animals 1. Operators of registered establishments keeping bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine animals shall record the following information concerning those animals: 2. Operators of establishments keeping ovine and caprine animals, shall record the information referred to in paragraph 1(a) in a format of the year of the birth of each such animal kept on the establishment. 3. Operators of establishments keeping porcine animals shall be exempted from recording the information referred to in paragraph 1(a). 4. Where ovine, caprine or porcine animals kept on the establishment are only identified by the unique identification number of their establishment of birth, the operators of establishments shall record the information referred to in paragraph 1 for each group of animals having the same unique identification number of their establishment of birth and the total number of animals in that group. 5. Where porcine animals kept on the establishment are not identified in accordance with Article 53, the operators of establishments shall: Article 24 Record-keeping obligations of operators of establishments keeping equine animals Operators of registered establishments keeping equine animals shall record the following information for each kept equine animal: Article 25 Record-keeping obligations of operators of establishments keeping poultry and captive birds Operators of registered or approved establishments keeping poultry and operators of establishments keeping captive birds shall record the following information: Article 26 Record-keeping obligations of operators of establishments keeping dogs, cats and ferrets Operators of registered establishments keeping dogs, cats and ferrets shall record the following information for each such animal: Article 27 Record-keeping obligations of operators of establishments keeping honeybees Operators of registered establishments keeping honeybees shall record for each apiary the details of temporary transhumance, if any, of the kept beehives, comprising information covering at least the place of each transhumance, its date of start and finish, and the number of the beehives moved. Article 28 Record-keeping obligations of operators of travelling circuses and animal acts Operators of registered travelling circuses and animal acts shall record the following information for each animal: Article 29 Record-keeping obligations of operators of animal shelters for dogs, cats and ferrets Operators of approved animal shelters for dogs, cats and ferrets shall record the following information for each such animal: Article 30 Record-keeping obligations of operators of control posts Operators of approved control posts shall record the licence plate number or registration number of the means of transport unloading animals and the unique registration number of the transporter where available. Article 31 Record-keeping obligations of operators of quarantine establishments for kept terrestrial animals other than primates Operators of approved quarantine establishments for kept terrestrial animals other than primates shall record the following information: Article 32 Record-keeping obligations of operators of confined establishments Operators of approved confined establishments shall record the following additional information: CHAPTER 2 Hatcheries Article 33 Record-keeping obligations of operators of hatcheries Operators of registered or approved hatcheries shall record the following information for each flock: CHAPTER 3 Transporters registered with the competent authority Article 34 Record-keeping obligations of registered transporters of kept terrestrial animals Registered transporters shall record the following additional information for each means of transport used for the transport of kept terrestrial animals: CHAPTER 4 Operators conducting assembly operations Article 35 Record-keeping obligations of operators of establishments of assembly operations of kept ungulates and poultry Operators of registered or approved establishments for assembly operations of kept ungulates and poultry shall record the following information: Article 36 Record-keeping obligations of operators conducting assembly operations of kept ungulates and poultry independently of an establishment Registered operators conducting assembly operations for kept ungulates and poultry independently of an establishment shall record the following information for each animal subject to purchase: Article 37 Record-keeping obligations of operators of assembly centres of dogs, cats and ferrets Operators of approved assembly centres of dogs, cats and ferrets shall record the licence plate number or registration number of the means of transport loading or unloading the animals and the unique registration number of the transporter, where available. PART III TRACEABILITY OF KEPT TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS AND HATCHING EGGS TITLE I TRACEABILITY OF KEPT BOVINE ANIMALS CHAPTER 1 Means and methods of identification Article 38 Obligations on operators keeping bovine animals as regards the means and methods of identification of kept bovine animals, their application and use 1. Operators keeping bovine animals shall ensure that bovine animals are individually identified by means of a conventional ear tag as referred to in point (a) of Annex III which must: 2. Operators keeping bovine animals may replace: Article 39 Exemptions granted by the competent authority for operators of confined establishments and for operators to identify bovine animals kept for cultural, historical, recreational, scientific or sporting purposes 1. The competent authority may exempt operators of confined establishments and operators keeping bovine animals for cultural, historical, recreational, scientific or sporting purposes from the identification requirements for bovine animals provided for in Article 38(1)(a). 2. When granting exemptions as provided in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall ensure that at least one of the means of identification listed in points (d) and (e) of Annex III is approved by the competent authority for the application of the means of identification of bovine animals kept by operators exempted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article. The competent authority shall establish procedures for application by operators when requesting such an exemption as provided in paragraph 1 of this Article. Article 40 Special provisions for the identification of bovine animals of breeds reared specifically for traditional cultural and sporting events The competent authority may authorise operators keeping bovine animals of breeds reared specifically for traditional cultural and sporting events to identify those animals individually by an alternative means of identification authorised by the competent authority after the removal of conventional ear tag referred to in Article 38(1)(a) provided that an unequivocal link between the identified animal and its identification code is maintained. Article 41 Replacement of the conventional ear tag for kept bovine animals as referred to in Article 38(1) 1. Member States may authorise one of the conventional ear tags referred to in Article 38(1)(a) to be replaced by one of the means of identification listed in points (c), (d) and (e) of Annex III for all or specific categories of bovine animals kept in their territory. 2. Member States shall ensure that the means of identification listed in points (a), (c), (d) and (e) of Annex III comply with the following requirements: 3. Member States shall establish procedures for the following: 4. Member State shall establish and make available to the public of the list of breeds of bovine animals reared specifically for traditional cultural and sporting events kept in its territory. CHAPTER 2 Computer database Article 42 Rules for information in computer database of kept bovine animals The competent authority shall store the information referred to in Article 109(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 for each kept bovine animal in a computer database in accordance with the following rules: Article 43 Rules on the exchange of electronic data between computer databases of Member States in respect of bovine animals 1. Member States shall ensure that their computer databases in respect of bovine animals complies with the following requirements: 2. Member States shall ensure that their computer databases is managed by an information system capable of applying and managing qualified electronic signatures for data exchange messages to guarantee non-repudiation concerning: 3. Member State shall, without any undue delay but in any event within a period of 24 hours of becoming aware of it, notify the Member State with whom electronic data exchange has been established, of any breach of security or loss of integrity that has a significant impact on the data validity or on the personal data maintained therein. CHAPTER 3 Identification document Article 44 Identification document of kept bovine animals Identification document of kept bovine animals provided for in Article 112(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 shall contain the following information: TITLE II TRACEABILITY OF KEPT OVINE AND CAPRINE ANIMALS CHAPTER 1 Means and methods of identification Article 45 Obligations on operators of kept ovine and caprine animals as regards the means and methods of identification of those animals, their application and use 1. Operators keeping ovine and caprine animals intended to be moved directly to a slaughterhouse before the age of 12 months shall ensure that each such animal is identified by at least a conventional ear tag attached to an ear flap of the animal or a conventional pastern band as listed in point (a) or (b) of Annex III with a visible, legible and indelible display of, either: 2. Operators keeping ovine and caprine animals not intended to be moved directly to slaughterhouse before the age of 12 months shall ensure that each such animal is individually identified as follows: 3. Operators keeping ovine and caprine animals shall ensure that: 4. Operators keeping ovine and caprine animals may replace: Article 46 Derogations from the requirements laid down in Article 45 as regards the means and methods of identification of kept ovine and caprine animals, their application and use 1. By way of derogation from the requirement laid down in Article 45(2)(a), operators keeping ovine and caprine animals belonging to a population of animals that are born with ears that are too small to attach a conventional ear tag as listed in point (a) of Annex III, shall ensure that such animals are individually identified by a conventional pastern band as listed in point (b) of that Annex with a visible, legible and indelible display of the identification code of the animal. 2. By way of derogation from the requirement laid down in Article 45(2)(a), operators keeping ovine and caprine animals not intended to be moved to another Member State may replace the a conventional ear tag as listed in point (a) of Annex III by a tattoo listed in point (g) of that Annex with a visible, legible and indelible display of the identification code of the animal provided that the competent authority has authorised the use of a ruminal bolus as listed in point (d) of that Annex. 3. By way of derogation from Article 45(2)(b), operators keeping ovine and caprine animals not intended to be moved to another Member State and the operators keeping ovine or caprine animals exempted from the application of an electronic identifier in accordance with Article 48, may replace the electronic identifier by a tattoo as listed in point (g) of Annex III with visible, legible and indelible display of the identification code of the animal. 4. By way of derogation from Article 45(2), operators keeping ovine and caprine animals intended to be transported to the slaughterhouse either after undergoing an assembly operation or after undergoing a fattening operation in another establishment may identify each animal at least by an electronic ear tag as listed in point (c) of Annex III attached to an ear flap of the animal with visible, legible and indelible display of the unique registration number of the establishment of birth of animal and with legible and indelible display of the identification code of that animal provided that those animals: Article 47 Exemptions from the requirements of Article 45(2) for operators of confined establishments and those keeping animals for cultural, recreational or scientific purposes 1. The competent authority may exempt operators of confined establishments and operators keeping ovine and caprine animals for cultural, recreational or scientific purposes from identification requirements of Article 45(2) subject the conditions laid down in paragraph 2 of this Article. 2. The competent authority shall ensure that either a ruminal bolus as listed in points (d) of Annex III, or an injectable transponder as listed in point (e) of that Annex III, has been authorised by it for the identification of the ovine and caprine animals referred to in paragraph 1, and that such authorised means of identification complies with the requirements laid down in Article 48(3). The competent authority shall establish procedures for application by operators when requesting such an exemption as provided in paragraph 1 of this Article. Article 48 Derogation by the Member States from the requirements of Article 45(2) and obligations of the Member States regarding the means of identification 1. By way of derogation from Article 45(2)(b), Member States may authorise operators keeping ovine or caprine animals to replace the means of identification listed in points (c) to (f) of Annex III, by a conventional ear tag or a conventional pastern band as listed in points (a) or (b) of that Annex subject to compliance with the following conditions: 2. By way of derogation from Article 45(2)(b), Member States may authorise operators keeping caprine animals to replace the means of identification listed in points (c) to (f) of Annex III, by a conventional ear tag or a conventional pastern band as listed in in points (a) or (b) of that Annex subject to compliance with the following conditions: 3. Member State shall ensure that the means of identification listed in points (a) to (f) of Annex III comply with the following requirements: 4. Member States shall establish procedures for application by: CHAPTER 2 Computer database Article 49 Rules for information in computer database of kept ovine and caprine animals The competent authority shall store the information referred to in Article 109(1)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 in respect of kept ovine and caprine animals in a computer database in accordance with the following rules: CHAPTER 3 Movement document Article 50 Movement document of kept ovine and caprine animals to be moved within the territory of a Member State Movement document, as provided for in Article 113(1)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, for kept ovine and caprine animals to be moved within the territory of single Member State shall contain the following information: Article 51 Derogation from certain requirements of Article 50 for movement document of kept ovine and caprine animals intended to be assembled within the territory of a Member State The competent authority may grant derogations from the requirements in Article 50(a) for operators of establishments from which kept ovine and caprine animals are to be moved to an establishment where they are intended to be assembled, provided the following conditions are fulfilled: TITLE III TRACEABILITY OF KEPT PORCINE ANIMALS CHAPTER 1 Means and methods of identification Article 52 Obligations on operators keeping porcine animals as regards the means and methods of identification of kept porcine animals, their application and use 1. Operators of establishments keeping porcine animals shall ensure that each porcine animal is identified by the following means of identification: 2. Operators of establishments keeping porcine animals shall ensure that: 3. Operators of establishments keeping porcine animals may replace the means of identification referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article by an electronic identifier approved by the competent authority of the Member State where the porcine animals are kept in accordance with the exemptions provided for in Article 54(1). Article 53 Derogations from the requirements of Article 52 as regards the means and methods of identification of kept porcine animals of the supply chain By way of derogation from Article 52, the competent authority may allow the operators of establishments of the supply chain to derogate from the obligation to identify porcine animals when those animals are intended to be moved within that supply chain within its Member State territory provided that the practical application of traceability measures in that Member State ensures the full traceability of those animals. Article 54 Exemptions granted by the competent authority for operators of confined establishments and for operators to identify porcine animals kept for cultural, recreational or scientific purposes 1. The competent authority may exempt operators of confined establishments and operators keeping porcine animals for cultural, recreational or scientific purposes from the identification requirements for porcine animals provided for in Article 52(1). 2. When granting exemptions as provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, the competent authority shall ensure that an injectable transponder as listed in point (e) of Annex III, has been authorised by it for the identifications of porcine animals referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, and that such authorised means of identification complies with the requirements of Article 55(1). 3. The competent authority shall establish procedures for application by operators when requesting such an exemption as provided in paragraph 1 of this Article. Article 55 Member States obligations as regards the means and methods of identification of kept porcine animals, their application and use 1. Member States shall ensure that the means of identification listed in points (a), (c), (e) and (g) of Annex III comply with the following requirements: 2. Member States shall establish procedures for application by: 3. Member States shall establish and make available to the public of the list of establishments of the supply chain referred to in Article 53 in their territory. CHAPTER 2 Computer database Article 56 Rules for information in computer database of kept porcine animals The competent authority shall store the information referred to in Article 109(1)(c) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 in respect of kept porcine animals in a computer database in accordance with the following rules: CHAPTER 3 Movement document Article 57 Movement documents of kept porcine animals to be moved within its Member State territory Movement documents as provided for in Article 115(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 for kept animals of the porcine species to be moved within the territory of a single Member State shall contain the following information: TITLE IV TRACEABILITY OF KEPT EQUINE ANIMALS CHAPTER 1 Means and methods of identification Article 58 Obligations on operators keeping equine animals as regards the means and methods of identification of those animals, their application and use 1. Operators of kept equine animals shall ensure that each animal is individually identified by the following means of identification: 2. Operators of kept equine animals shall ensure that: 3. Operators of kept equine animals, and if such operators are not the owner of the animals, acting on behalf of and in agreement with the owner of the animal, shall submit an application for the issuing of a single lifetime identification document, referred to in Article 65 or 66, to the competent authority of the establishment where the animals are habitually kept, and shall provide the competent authority with the necessary information to complete that identification document and the records in the database referred to in Article 64. Article 59 Member States obligations for means and methods of identification of kept equine animals, their application and use 1. Member States may authorise the injectable transponder referred to in Article 58(1)(a) to be replaced by: 2. Member States shall ensure that the means of identification referred to in Article 58(1)(a) and in paragraph 1(a) of this Article comply with the following requirements: 3. Member States shall: Article 60 Derogations for the identification of kept equine animals living under semi-wild conditions 1. By way of derogation from Article 58(2)(a), Member States may specify populations of kept equine animals living under semi-wild conditions in certain areas of their territory, which shall only be required to be identified in accordance with Article 58(1) when they are: 2. Prior to making use of the derogation provided for in paragraph 1, Member States shall notify the Commission of the populations of equine animals and the areas where those animals live under semi-wild conditions. 3. By way of derogation from Article 58(1), Member States may authorise the application of an injectable transponder as listed in point (e) of Annex III more than 12 months prior to the issuing of an identification document in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, provided that the identification code of the animal displayed on the injectable transponder is recorded by the operator at the time of implantation of the injectable transponder and transmitted to the competent authority. Article 61 Derogations for the identification of kept equine animals moved to a slaughterhouse or accompanied by a temporary identification document 1. By way of derogation from Article 58(2)(a), the competent authority may authorise the use of a simplified method of identification of equine animals intended to be moved to the slaughterhouse for which no single lifetime identification document was issued in accordance with Article 67(1), provided that The equine animals must be transported directly to the slaughterhouse and during that transport they must be individually identified by injectable transponder, conventional or electronic ear tag, or conventional or electronic pastern band as listed in points (a), (b), (c), (e) or (f) of Annex III respectively. 2. By way of derogation from Article 58(2)(a), the competent authority shall, on request by the operator of the equine animal, issue a temporary identification document for the period of time when the identification document issued in accordance with Article 67(1) is surrendered to that competent authority in order to update identification details in that document. Article 62 Authorisation of alternative methods of identification of kept equine animals 1. Member States may authorise suitable alternative methods of identification of kept equine animals, including the recording of marks, which ensure an unequivocal link between the equine animal and the single lifetime identification document and show that the equine animal has undergone the process of identification. 2. Member States authorising alternative methods of identification as provided for in paragraph 1shall ensure that: Article 63 Obligation on operators using the alternative methods of identification 1. Operators making use of an authorised alternative method of identification, as provided for in Article 62(1), shall provide to the competent authority and where necessary to other operators the means of accessing that identification information or have the onus of verifying the identity of the equine animal by those authorities or operators. 2. Where alternative methods of identification are based on characteristics of the equine animal which may change over time, the operator shall provide the necessary information to the competent authority for them to update the identification document referred to in Article 62 and the database referred to in Article 64. 3. Breed societies and international associations or organisations which manage horses for competition or races may require that equine animals which were identified by use of an alternative method of identification provided for in Article 62 are to be identified by implantation of an injectable transponder for the purpose of the entry or registration of purebred breeding animals of the equine species in breeding books or the registration of horses for competition or race purposes. CHAPTER 2 Computer database Article 64 Rules for information in computer database of kept equine animals The competent authority shall store the information referred to in Article 109(1)(d) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 in respect of kept equine animals in a computer database in accordance with the following rules: CHAPTER 3 Identification document Article 65 Single lifetime identification document of kept equine animals 1. The single lifetime identification document shall contain at least the following information: 2. Single lifetime identification documents for registered equine animals and for equidae identified in accordance with Article 62 shall, in addition to the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, contain at least the following information: Article 66 Obligations on operators of kept equine animals as regards the single lifetime identification documents 1. Operators of kept equine animals shall ensure that those animals are at all times accompanied by their single lifetime identification document. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, operators shall not be required to ensure that kept equine animals are accompanied by their single lifetime identification document when those animals are: 3. Operators of kept equine animals shall not move an equine animal accompanied by the temporary document referred to in Article 61(2) to the slaughterhouse. 4. Operators of kept equine animals shall return the single lifetime identification document to the issuing competent authority, or the issuing body to which the task was delegated, as decoded from the unique code after the death or loss of the equine animal. Article 67 Obligations on the competent authority as regards the issue of duplicate and replacement single lifetime identification documents 1. On application by the operator, the competent authority, or the issuing body to which the task was assigned shall issue a duplicate single lifetime identification document where the identity of the kept equine animal can be established and the operator either 2. On application by the operator or on its own initiative, the competent authority shall issue a replacement single identification document where the identity of the animal cannot be established and the operator either Article 68 Obligations on the competent authority as regards the issue of new single lifetime documents for registered equine animal Where an identified equine animal becomes a registered equine animal and the single lifetime identification document issued in respect of that animal cannot be adapted to meet the requirements laid down in Article 65(2), the competent authority, or the issuing body to which the task was assigned, on application of the operator of the equine animal, shall issue a new single lifetime identification document to replace the former one containing the information required in accordance with Article 65(1) and (2). Article 69 Obligations on the competent authority as regards the concerning duplicate, replacement and new identification documents 1. The competent authority, or the issuing body to which the task was assigned shall enter information concerning the issuing of a duplicate or replacement identification document in accordance with Article 67 or the issuing of a new identification document in accordance with Article 68 in the computer database referred to in Article 64. 2. The competent authority, or the issuing body to which the task was assigned shall enter TITLE V TRACEABILITY OF KEPT DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS, CAMELID AND CERVID ANIMALS, CAPTIVE BIRDS AND TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS IN TRAVELLING CIRCUSES AND ANIMAL ACTS CHAPTER 1 Traceability of kept dogs, cats and ferrets Section 1 Means of identification Article 70 Obligations on operators keeping dogs, cats and ferrets as regards the means and methods of identification of those animals, their application and use Operators keeping dogs, cats and ferrets shall ensure that: Section 2 Identification document Article 71 Identification document of kept dog, cats and ferrets Operators keeping dogs, cats and ferrets shall ensure that each of those animals where it is moved to another Member State is accompanied by an identification document referred to in Article 6(d) of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013, duly completed and issued in accordance with Article 22 of that Regulation. Section 3 Traceability of pet animals Article 72 Traceability requirements for other than non-commercial movements of pet animals Operators shall ensure that pet animals moved to another Member State for purposes other than non-commercial movement comply with the rules laid down in Articles 70 and 71. CHAPTER 2 Traceability of kept camelid and cervid animals Article 73 Obligations on operators keeping camelid and cervid animals as regards the means and methods of identification of those animals, their application and use 1. Operators keeping camelid animals shall ensure that those animals are individually identified by either: 2. Operators keeping cervid animals shall ensure that those animals are individually identified by one of the following means of identification: 3. Operators of establishments keeping camelid and cervid animals shall ensure that: Article 74 Exemption for operators keeping reindeer By way of exemption from the requirements of Article 73(2), operators keeping reindeer shall ensure that those animals kept on their establishments are each identified by an alternative method authorised by the competent authority of Member State. Article 75 Member States’ obligations for the means of identification of kept camelid and cervid animals 1. Member States shall ensure that the means of identification listed in points (a), (e) and (g) of Annex III comply with the following requirements: 2. Member States shall establish procedures for the following: CHAPTER 3 Traceability of captive birds Article 76 Obligations on operators keeping psittacidae as regards the means and methods of identification of those animals, their application and use 1. Operators keeping psittacidae shall ensure that those animals are individually identified where they are moved to another Member State by one of the following means of identification: 2. Operators keeping psittacidae shall: CHAPTER 4 Traceability of kept terrestrial animals in travelling circuses and animal acts Section 1 Movement and identification documents of kept terrestrial animals in travelling circuses and animal acts Article 77 Obligations on competent authority as regards the movement document of kept terrestrial animals in travelling circuses and animal acts 1. The competent authority shall issue a movement document as provided for in Article 117(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 for all kept terrestrial animals in travelling circuses or animal acts intended to be moved to another Member State, except lagomorphs, rodents, honeybees and bumble bees. 2. The competent authority shall ensure that the movement document provided for in paragraph 1 contains at least the following information: Article 78 Obligations on the competent authority as regards the identification document of kept terrestrial animals in travelling circuses and animal acts 1. The competent authority shall issue an identification document as provided for in Article 117(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 for each kept terrestrial animal in travelling circuses or animal acts intended to be moved to another Member State, except for animals of the equine species, birds, dogs, cats and ferrets, lagomorphs and rodents. 2. The competent authority shall ensure that the identification document provided for in paragraph 1 contains the following information: Article 79 Obligations on the competent authority as regards the identification document of kept birds in travelling circuses and animal acts 1. The competent authority shall issue an identification document as provided for in Article 117(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 for group of kept birds in travelling circuses or animal acts intended to be moved to another Member State. 2. The competent authority shall ensure that the identification document provided for in paragraph 1 contains the following information: TITLE VI TRACEABILITY OF HATCHING EGGS Article 80 Obligation on operators as regards the traceability of hatching eggs Operators of establishments keeping poultry and operators of hatcheries shall ensure that each hatching egg is marked with the unique approval number of the establishment of origin of the hatching eggs. TITLE VII TRACEABILITY OF KEPT TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS AFTER THEIR ENTRY INTO UNION Article 81 Obligations on operators as regards the means and methods of identification of kept bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, cervid or camelid animals after their entry into the Union 1. In case the means of identification have been applied to kept bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, cervid or camelid animals in third countries or territories, after their entry into the Union and where they remain in the Union, operators of the establishments of the first arrival of those animals shall ensure that the animals are identified by the means of identification provided for in Articles 38, 39, 45, 47, 52, 54, 73 and 74, as appropriate. 2. In case of kept bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, cervid or camelid animals originating from Member States and identified in accordance with the Union rules, after their entry from third countries or territories into the Union and where they remain in the Union, operators of the establishments of the first arrival of those animals shall ensure that animals are identified by the means of identification provided for in 38, 39, 45, 47, 52, 54, 73 and 74, as appropriate. 3. Operators shall not apply the rules referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 to kept bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, cervid or camelid animals intended to move to a slaughterhouse situated in a Member State, provided the animals are slaughtered within 5 days after their entry into Union. Article 82 Member States’ obligations as regards the means and methods of identification of kept bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine, cervid or camelid animals after their entry into Union Member States shall establish procedures for operators of establishments keeping animals referred to in Article 81(2) to follow when requesting the means of identification to be allocated to their establishment. Article 83 Obligations on operators as regards the means and methods of identification of kept animals of the equine species after their entry into Union Operators of kept animals of the equine species shall ensure that after the entry of equine animals into the Union and where they remain in the Union, they are identified in accordance with Article 58 after the date of completion of the customs procedure, as defined in Article 5(16)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013. PART IV TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS Article 84 Repeal The following acts are repealed as from 21 April 2021: Article 85 Transitional measures related to the repeal of Regulation (EC) No 1739/2005 Notwithstanding Article 84 of this Regulation, Article 5 and Article 7(1) and (2) of Regulation (EC) No 1739/2005 concerning the register of animals and animal passports and Annexes I, III and IV thereto shall remain applicable until a date to be determined by the Commission in an implementing act adopted in accordance with Article 120(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. Article 86 Transitional measures related to the repeal of Regulation (EU) 2015/262 Notwithstanding Article 84 of this Regulation: Article 87 Transitional measures regarding identification of kept terrestrial animals 1. Articles 1 to 10 of Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000, Regulation (EC) No 21/2004, and Directive 2008/71/EC, as well as the acts adopted on the basis thereof, shall continue to apply until 21 April 2021. 2. Kept bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine animals that have been identified before 21 April 2021 in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000, Regulation (EC) No 21/2004 and Directive 2008/71/EC, as well as the acts adopted on the basis thereof, shall be considered to have been identified in accordance with this Regulation. 3. Kept equine animals that have been identified before 21 April 2021 in accordance with Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/262 shall be considered to have been identified in accordance with this Regulation. 4. Kept camelid and cervid animals that have been identified before 21 April 2021 in accordance with applicable national law shall be considered to have been identified in accordance with this Regulation. 5. Kept psittacidae that have been identified before 21 April 2021 in accordance with Directive 92/65/EEC shall be considered to have been identified in accordance with this Regulation. Article 88 Transitional measures regarding the information in the registers kept by competent authorities Member States shall ensure that information referred to in Articles 18 to 21 of this Regulation for existing establishments and operators referred to in Article 279(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 has been included for each establishment and operator in the registers for them kept by competent authorities by 21 April 2021. Article 89 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 21 April 2021. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 28 June 2019. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 84, 31.3.2016, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Council Directive 64/432/EEC of 26 June 1964 on animal health problems affecting intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine ( OJ 121, 29.7.1964, p. 1977/64 ). ( 3 ) Council Directive 92/65/EEC of 13 July 1992 laying down animal health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of animals, semen, ova and embryos not subject to animal health requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 90/425/EEC ( OJ L 268, 14.9.1992, p. 54 ). ( 4 ) Council Directive 2009/158/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in, and imports from third countries of, poultry and hatching eggs ( OJ L 343, 22.12.2009, p. 74 ). ( 5 ) Council Regulation (EC) No 1255/97 of 25 June 1997 concerning Community criteria for control posts and amending the route plan referred to in the Annex to Directive 91/628/EEC ( OJ L 174, 2.7.1997, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 139/2013 of 7 January 2013 laying down animal health conditions for imports of certain birds into the Union and the quarantine conditions thereof ( OJ L 47, 20.2.2013, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (Animal by-products Regulation) ( OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 July 2000 establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 820/97 ( OJ L 204, 11.8.2000, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Council Regulation (EC) No 21/2004 of 17 December 2003 establishing a system for the identification and registration of ovine and caprine animals and amending Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003 and Directives 92/102/EEC and 64/432/EEC ( OJ L 5, 9.1.2004, p. 8 ). ( 10 ) Council Directive 2008/71/EC of 15 July 2008 on the identification and registration of pigs ( OJ L 213, 8.8.2008, p. 31 ). ( 11 ) Council Directive 2009/156/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing the movement and importation from third countries of equidae ( OJ L 192, 23.7.2010, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals and repealing Regulation (EC) No 998/2003 ( OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 1739/2005 of 21 October 2005 laying down animal health requirements for the movement of circus animals between Member States ( OJ L 279, 22.10.2005, p. 47 ). ( 15 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 of 3 December 2018 on the application of certain disease prevention and control rules to categories of listed diseases and establishing a list of species and groups of species posing a considerable risk for the spread of those listed diseases ( OJ L 308, 4.12.2018, p. 21 ). ( 16 ) Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products ( OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 1 ). ( 17 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/262 of 17 February 2015 laying down rules pursuant to Council Directives 90/427/EEC and 2009/156/EC as regards the methods for the identification of equidae (Equine Passport Regulation) ( OJ L 59, 3.3.2015, p. 1 ). ( 18 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions for the breeding, trade in and entry into the Union of purebred breeding animals, hybrid breeding pigs and the germinal products thereof and amending Regulation (EU) No 652/2014, Council Directives 89/608/EEC and 90/425/EEC and repealing certain acts in the area of animal breeding (‘Animal Breeding Regulation’) ( OJ L 171, 29.6.2016, p. 66 ). ( 19 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/1940 of 13 July 2017 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the content and format of zootechnical certificates issued for purebred breeding animals of the equine species contained in a single lifetime identification document for equidae ( OJ L 275, 25.10.2017, p. 1 ). ( 20 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on veterinary medicinal products and repealing Directive 2001/82/EC ( OJ L 4, 7.1.2019, p. 43 ). ( 21 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 509/1999 of 8 March 1999 concerning an extension of the maximum period laid down for the application of ear-tags to bison ( Bison bison spp.) ( OJ L 60, 9.3.1999, p. 53 ). ( 22 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 2680/1999 of 17 December 1999 approving a system of identification for bulls intended for cultural and sporting events ( OJ L 326, 18.12.1999, p. 16 ). ( 23 ) Commission Decision 2000/678/EC of 23 October 2000 laying down detailed rules for registration of holdings in national databases for porcine animals as foreseen by Council Directive 64/432/EEC ( OJ L 281, 7.11.2000, p. 16 ). ( 24 ) Commission Decision 2001/672/EC of 20 August 2001 laying down special rules applicable to movements of bovine animals when put out to summer grazing in mountain areas ( OJ L 235, 4.9.2001, p. 23 ). ( 25 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 911/2004 of 29 April 2004 implementing Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards eartags, passports and holding registers ( OJ L 163, 30.4.2004, p. 65 ). ( 26 ) Commission Decision 2004/764/EC of 22 October 2004 concerning an extension of the maximum period laid down for the application of eartags to certain bovine animals kept in nature reserves in the Netherlands ( OJ L 339, 16.11.2004, p. 9 ). ( 27 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 644/2005 of 27 April 2005 authorising a special identification system for bovine animals kept for cultural and historical purposes on approved premises as provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 107, 28.4.2005, p. 18 ). ( 28 ) Commission Decision 2006/28/EC of 18 January 2006 on extension of the maximum period for applying eartags to certain bovine animals ( OJ L 19, 24.1.2006, p. 32 ). ( 29 ) Commission Decision 2006/968/EC of 15 December 2006 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 21/2004 as regards guidelines and procedures for the electronic identification of ovine and caprine animals ( OJ L 401, 30.12.2006, p. 41 ). ( 30 ) Commission Decision 2009/712/EC of 18 September 2009 implementing Council Directive 2008/73/EC as regards internet-based information pages containing lists of establishments and laboratories approved by Member States in accordance with Community veterinary and zootechnical legislation ( OJ L 247, 19.9.2009, p. 13 ). ANNEX I REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTING APPROVAL OF ESTABLISHMENTS AS REFERRED TO IN CHAPTERS 2, 3 AND 4 OF TITLE I OF PART II PART 1 Requirements for granting approval of establishments for assembly operations of ungulates referred to in Article 5 PART 2 Requirements for granting approval of establishments for assembly operations of poultry referred to in Article 6 PART 3 Requirements for granting approval of hatcheries referred to in Article 7 PART 4 Requirements for granting approval of establishments keeping poultry referred to in Article 8 PART 5 Requirements for granting approval of assembly centres of dogs, cats and ferrets and of animal shelters for those animals referred to respectively in Articles 10 and 11 PART 6 Requirements for granting approval of control posts referred to in Article 12 PART 7 Requirements for granting approval of environmentally isolated production establishments of bumble bees referred to in Article 13 PART 8 Requirements for granting approval of quarantine establishments for kept terrestrial animals other than primates referred to in Article 14 PART 9 Requirements for granting approval of confined establishments of kept terrestrial animals referred to in Article 16 ANNEX II MICROBIOLOGICAL CONTROL PROGRAMME IN HATCHERIES AND DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMMES IN ESTABLISHMENTS KEEPING POULTRY AND IN HATCHERIES PART 1 Microbiological control programme in hatcheries as referred to in Article 7 Microbiological control programme for purpose of hygienic controls shall include the following: PART 2 Diseases surveillance programmes in hatcheries as referred to in Article 7 and in establishments keeping poultry as referred to in Article 8 PART 3 Additional information on diagnostic techniques Laboratories that have been designated by the competent authority to carry out the testing as required in Parts 1 and 2 of this Annex may consult the Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals of the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), Edition 2018 for further detailed description of the diagnostic techniques. ( 1 ) Occasionally in avian species other than Galliformes serological testing results in an unacceptable proportion of false-positive reactions. ( 2 ) There is currently no test that can differentiate between the response to Salmonella Pullorum and Salmonella Gallinarum infection and vaccination for this serotype. ANNEX III MEANS OF IDENTIFICATIONS OF KEPT TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS The means of identification of kept terrestrial animals are as follows: