COMMISSION DELEGATED DIRECTIVE (EU) 2021/1226 of 21 December 2020 amending, for the purposes of adapting to scientific and technical progress, Annex II to Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards common noise assessment methods (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 12 thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Annex II to Directive 2002/49/EC is amended in accordance with the Annex to this Directive. Article 2 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 31 December 2021 at the latest. They shall immediately communicate the text of those measures to the Commission. When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. Member States shall determine how such reference is to be made. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 3 This Directive shall enter into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 4 This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 21 December 2020. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 189, 18.7.2002, p. 12 . Annex II is amended as follows: ( * ) For this purpose the total length of the ground track should always exceed that of the flight profile. This can be achieved, if necessary, by adding straight segments of suitable length to the last segment of the ground track. ( ** ) Even if engine power settings remain constant along a segment, propulsive force and acceleration can change due to variation of air density with height. However, for the purposes of noise modelling these changes are normally negligible. ( *** ) This was recommended in the previous edition of ECAC Doc 29 but is still considered provisional pending the acquisition of further corroborative experimental data. ( **** ) Defined in this simple way, the total length of the segmented path is slightly less than that of the circular path. However the consequent contour error is negligible if the angular increments are below 30°.’. ( * ) Although the notion of an infinitely long flight path is important to the definition of event sound exposure level L E , it has less relevance in the case of event maximum level L max which is governed by the noise emitted by the aircraft when at a particular position at or near its closest point of approach to the observer. For modelling purposes the NPD distance parameter is taken to be the minimum distance between the observer and segment.’. ( * ) This is known as the duration correction because it makes allowance for the effects of aircraft speed on the duration of the sound event – implementing the simple assumption that, other things being equal, duration, and thus received event sound energy, is inversely proportional to source velocity.’; ( * ) The medium value is the value separating the higher half (50 %) from the lower half (50 %) of a data set. ( ** ) The lower half of the data asset may be assimilated with the presence of relatively calm façades. In case it is known in advance, e.g. based on the location of buildings relative to the dominant noise sources, which receiver locations will give way to the highest / lowest noise levels, there is no need to calculate noise for the lower half.’.’