COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 1320/2014 of 1 December 2014 amending Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 of 9 December 1996 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 19(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 The Annex to Regulation (EC) No 338/97 is replaced by the text set out in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 1 December 2014. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 61, 3.3.1997, p. 1 . Notes on interpretation of Annexes A, B, C and D The abbreviation ‘spp.’ is used to denote all species of a higher taxon. Other Species printed in bold in Annex A are listed there in consistency with their protection as provided for by Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) or Council Directive 92/43/EEC ( 2 ) . The symbols ‘(I)’, ‘(II)’ and ‘(III)’ placed against the name of a species or higher taxon refer to the Appendices to the Convention in which the species concerned are listed as indicated in notes 7, 8 and 9. Where none of these annotations appears, the species concerned are not listed in the Appendices to the Convention. (I) against the name of a species or higher taxon indicates that the species or higher taxon concerned is included in Appendix I to the Convention. (II) against the name of a species or higher taxon indicates that the species or higher taxon concerned is included in Appendix II to the Convention. (III) against the name of a species or higher taxon indicates that it is included in Appendix III to the Convention. In this case the country with respect to which the species or higher taxon is included in Appendix III is also indicated. ‘Cultivar’ means, following the definition of the 8th edition of the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants , an assemblage of plants that (a) has been selected for a particular character or combination of characters, (b) is distinct, uniform, and stable in these characters, and (c) when propagated by appropriate means, retains those characters. No new taxon of a cultivar can be regarded as such until its category name and circumscription has been formally published in the latest edition of the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants . Hybrids may be specifically included in the Appendices but only if they form distinct and stable populations in the wild. Hybrid animals that have in their previous four generations of the lineage one or more specimens of species included in Annexes A or B shall be subject to this Regulation just as if they were full species, even if the hybrid concerned is not specifically included in the Annexes. Extract Any substance obtained directly from plant material by physical or chemical means regardless of the manufacturing process. An extract may be solid (e.g. crystals, resin, fine or coarse particles), semisolid (e.g. gums, waxes) or liquid (e.g. solutions, tinctures, oil and essential oils). Finished products packaged and ready for retail trade Products, shipped singly or in bulk, requiring no further processing, packaged, labelled for final use or the retail trade in a state fit for being sold to or used by the general public. Powder A dry, solid substance in the form of fine or coarse particles Woodchips Wood that has been reduced to small pieces As none of the species or higher taxa of flora included in Annex A is annotated to the effect that its hybrids shall be treated in accordance with Article 4(1), this means that artificially propagated hybrids produced from one or more of these species or taxa may be traded with a certificate of artificial propagation, and that seeds and pollen (including pollinia), cut flowers, seedling or tissue cultures obtained in vitro , in solid or liquid media, transported in sterile containers of these hybrids are not subject to this Regulation. Urine, faeces and ambergris which are waste products and gained without the manipulation of the animal concerned are not subject to this Regulation. ( 1 ) Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild birds ( OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7 ). ( 2 ) Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora ( OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 ). ( 3 ) Population of Argentina (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas of the populations included in Annex B, in cloth and in derived manufactured products and other handicraft artefacts. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words ‘VICUÑA-ARGENTINA’. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation ‘VICUÑA-ARGENTINA-ARTESANÍA’. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 4 ) Population of Bolivia (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas and in cloth and items made thereof, including luxury handicrafts and knitted articles. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words ‘VICUÑA-BOLIVIA’. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation ‘VICUÑA-BOLIVIA-ARTESANÍA’. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 5 ) Population of Chile (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas of the populations included in Annex B, and in cloth and items made thereof, including luxury handicrafts and knitted articles. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words ‘VICUÑA-CHILE’. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation ‘VICUÑA-CHILE-ARTESANÍA’. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 6 ) Population of Ecuador (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas and in cloth and items made thereof, including luxury handicrafts and knitted articles. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words ‘VICUÑA ECUADOR’. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation ‘VICUÑA ECUADOR-ARTESANÍA’. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 7 ) Population of Peru (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas and in the stock extant at the time of the ninth meeting of the Conference of the Parties (November 1994) of 3 249 kg of wool, and in cloth and items made thereof, including luxury handicrafts and knitted articles. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words ‘VICUÑA-PERU’. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation ‘VICUÑA-PERU-ARTESANÍA’. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 8 ) All species are listed in Appendix II to the Convention except Balaena mysticetus, Eubalaena spp., Balaenoptera acutorostrata (except population of West Greenland), Balaenoptera bonaerensis, Balaenoptera borealis, Balaenoptera edeni, Balaenoptera musculus, Balaenoptera omurai, Balaenoptera physalus, Megaptera novaeangliae, Orcaella brevirostris, Orcaella heinsohni, Sotalia spp., Sousa spp., Eschrichtius robustus, Lipotes vexillifer, Caperea marginata, Neophocaena phocaenoides, Phocoena sinus, Physeter macrocephalus, Platanista spp., Berardius spp., Hyperoodon spp., which are listed in Appendix I. Specimens of the species listed in Appendix II to the Convention, including products and derivatives other than meat products for commercial purposes, taken by the people of Greenland under licence granted by the competent authority concerned, shall be treated as belonging to Annex B. A zero annual export quota is established for live specimens from the Black Sea population of Tursiops truncatus removed from the wild and traded for primarily commercial purposes. ( 9 ) Populations of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing: (a) trade in hunting trophies for non-commercial purposes; (b) trade in live animals to appropriate and acceptable destinations as defined in Resolution Conf. 11.20 for Botswana and Zimbabwe and for in situ conservation programmes for Namibia and South Africa; (c) trade in hides; (d) trade in hair; (e) trade in leather goods for commercial or non-commercial purposes for Botswana, Namibia and South Africa and for non-commercial purposes for Zimbabwe; (f) trade in individually marked and certified Ekipas incorporated in finished jewellery for non-commercial purposes for Namibia and ivory carvings for non-commercial purposes for Zimbabwe; (g) trade in registered raw ivory (for Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe whole tusks and pieces) subject to the following: (i) only registered government-owned stocks, originating in the State (excluding seized ivory and ivory of unknown origin); (ii) only to trading partners that have been verified by the Secretariat, in consultation with the Standing Committee, to have sufficient national legislation and domestic trade controls to ensure that the imported ivory will not be re-exported and will be managed in accordance with all requirements of Resolution Conf. 10.10 (Rev. CoP14) concerning domestic manufacturing and trade; (iii) not before the Secretariat has verified the prospective importing countries and the registered government-owned stocks; (iv) raw ivory pursuant to the conditional sale of registered government-owned ivory stocks agreed at CoP12 which are 20 000 kg (Botswana), 10 000 kg (Namibia) and 30 000 kg (South Africa); (v) in addition to the quantities agreed at CoP12, government-owned ivory from Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe registered by 31 January 2007 and verified by the Secretariat may be traded and despatched, with the ivory in paragraph (g)(iv) above in a single sale per destination under strict supervision of the Secretariat; (vi) the proceeds of the trade are used exclusively for elephant conservation and community conservation and development programmes within or adjacent to the elephant range; and (vii) the additional quantities specified in paragraph (g)(v) above shall be traded only after the Standing Committee has agreed that the above conditions have been met; (h) no further proposals to allow trade in elephant ivory from populations already in Annex B shall be submitted to the Conference of the Parties for the period from CoP14 and ending nine years from the date of the single sale of ivory that is to take place in accordance with provisions in paragraphs (g)(i), (g)(ii), (g)(iii), (g)(vi), and (g)(vii). In addition, such further proposals shall be dealt with in accordance with Decisions 14.77 and 14.78 (Rev. CoP15). On a proposal from the Secretariat, the Standing Committee can decide to cause this trade to cease partially or completely in the event of non-compliance by exporting or importing countries, or in the case of proven detrimental impacts of the trade on other elephant populations. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 10 ) This listing includes the newly described taxon Scleropages inscriptus . ( 11 ) The following are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation: ( 12 ) Trade of specimens with source code A is allowed only if specimens traded possess cataphylls. ( 13 ) Artificially propagated specimens of the following hybrids and/or cultivars are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation: ( 14 ) Artificially propagated hybrids of Cymbidium , Dendrobium , Phalaenopsis and Vanda are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation, when specimens are readily recognisable as artificially propagated and do not show any signs of having been collected in the wild such as mechanical damage or strong dehydration resulting from collection, irregular growth and heterogeneous size and shape within a taxon and shipment, algae or other epiphyllous organisms adhering to leaves, or damage by insects or other pests; and Plants not clearly qualifying for the exemption must be accompanied by appropriate CITES documents. ( 15 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 865/2006 of 4 May 2006 laying down detailed rules concerning the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein ( OJ L 166, 19.6.2006, p. 1 ). ( 16 ) Artificially propagated specimens of cultivars of Cyclamen persicum are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation. However, the exemption does not apply to such specimens traded as dormant tubers. ( 17 ) Artificially propagated hybrids and cultivars of Taxus cuspidata , live, in pots or other small containers, each consignment being accompanied by a label or document stating the name of the taxon or taxa and the text ‘artificially propagated’, are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation.