Only the original UN/ECE texts have legal effect under international public law. The status and date of entry into force of this Regulation should be checked in the latest version of the UN/ECE status document TRANS/WP.29/343, available at: Regulation No 9 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UNECE) — Uniform provisions concerning the approval of category L 2 , L 4 and L 5 vehicles with regard to sound emission [2018/1704] Incorporating all valid text up to: Supplement 3 to the 07 series of amendments – Date of entry into force: 10 October 2017 CONTENTS REGULATION Annexes 1. SCOPE This Regulation applies to vehicles of category L 2 , L 4 and L 5 ( 1 ) with regard to sound emission. 2. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this Regulation, 3. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 3.1. The application for approval of a vehicle type with regard to sound shall be submitted by its manufacturer or by his duly accredited representative. 3.2. It shall be accompanied by the under mentioned documents in triplicate and the following particulars: 3.3. At the request of the Technical Service conducting approval tests, the vehicle manufacturer shall, in addition, submit a sample of the exhaust or silencing system. 3.4. A vehicle representative of the vehicle type to be approved shall be submitted to the Technical Service conducting approval tests. 4. MARKINGS 4.1. The components of the exhaust or silencing system shall bear at least the following identifications marks: 5. APPROVAL 5.1. If the vehicle type submitted for approval pursuant to this Regulation meets the requirements of paragraphs 6 and 7 below, approval of that vehicle type shall be granted. 5.2. An approval number shall be assigned to each type approved. Its first two digits (at present 07 corresponding to the 07 series of amendments which entered into force on 3 November 2013) shall indicate the series of amendments incorporating the most recent major technical amendments made to the Regulation at the time of issue of the approval. The same Contracting Party shall not assign the same number to the same vehicle type equipped with another type of exhaust or silencing system or to another vehicle type. 5.3. Notice of approval or of extension or refusal of approval of a vehicle type pursuant to this Regulation shall be communicated to the Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation by means of a form conforming to the model shown in Annex 1 to this Regulation and of drawings of the exhaust or silencing system (supplied by the applicant for approval) in a format not exceeding A4 (210 × 297 mm), or folded to that format, and on an appropriate scale. 5.4. There shall be affixed, conspicuously and in a readily accessible place specified on the approval form, to every vehicle conforming to a vehicle type approved under this Regulation an international approval mark consisting of: 5.5. If the vehicle conforms to a vehicle type approved, under one or more other Regulations annexed to the 1958 Agreement, in the country which has granted approval under this Regulation, the symbol prescribed in paragraph 5.4.1 above need not be repeated; in such a case the additional numbers and symbols of all the Regulations under which approval has been granted in the country which has granted approval under this Regulation shall be placed in vertical columns to the right of the symbol prescribed in paragraph 5.4.1 above. 5.6. The approval mark shall be clearly legible and be indelible. 5.7. The approval mark shall be placed close to or on the vehicle data plate. 5.8. Annex 2 to this Regulation gives examples of arrangements of approval marks. 6. SPECIFICATIONS 6.1. General specifications 6.1.1. The vehicle, its engine and its exhaust or silencing system shall be so designed, constructed and assembled as to enable the vehicle, in normal use, despite the vibration to which it may be subjected, to comply with the provisions of this Regulation. 6.1.2. The exhaust or silencing system shall be so designed, constructed and assembled as to be able to resist the corrosive action to which it is exposed. 6.1.3. The following information shall be provided on the motor vehicle in an easily accessible but not necessarily immediately visible location: 6.2. Specifications regarding sound levels 6.2.1. Methods of measurement 6.2.1.1. The sound emitted by the vehicle type submitted for approval shall be measured by the method(s) described in Annex 3 to this Regulation for the vehicle in motion and for the vehicle when stationary ( 5 ) ; in the case of a vehicle with an electric motor or with an internal combustion engine that does not operate when the vehicle is stationary, the emitted sound shall only be measured when the vehicle is in motion. If the vehicle has user selectable software programs or modes which affect the sound emission of the vehicle, all these modes shall be in compliance with the requirements in this paragraph. Testing shall be based on the worst case scenario. For hybrid electric vehicles, the tests shall be performed twice under the following conditions: The final result is the highest of the test results for conditions A and B. 6.2.1.2. The value(s) measured in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 6.2.1.1 above shall be entered in the test report and on a form conforming to the model in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 6.2.1.3. The sound level determined by the method described in paragraph 3.1 of Annex 3 to this Regulation when the vehicle is in motion shall not exceed the limits prescribed (for new vehicles and new exhaust or silencing systems) in Annex 4 to this Regulation for the category to which the vehicle belongs. 6.3. Additional requirements 6.3.1. Tampering protection provisions All exhaust or silencing systems shall be constructed in a way that does not permit removal of baffles, exit-cones and other parts whose primary function is as part of the silencing/expansion chambers. Where incorporation of such a part is unavoidable, its method of attachment shall be such that removal is not facilitated (e.g. with conventional threaded fixings) and shall also be attached such that removal causes permanent/irrecoverable damage to the assembly. 6.3.2. Multi-mode exhaust or silencing systems Exhaust or silencing systems with multiple, manually or electronically adjustable, rider selectable operating modes shall meet all requirements in all operating modes. The reported sound levels shall be those resulting from the mode with the highest sound levels. 6.3.3. Prohibition of defeat devices The vehicle manufacturer shall not intentionally alter, adjust or introduce any device or procedure solely for the purpose of fulfilling the sound emission requirements of this Regulation, which will not be operational during typical on-road operation. 7. MODIFICATION AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL OF A VEHICLE TYPE OR A TYPE OF EXHAUST OR SILENCING SYSTEM(S) 7.1. Every modification of the vehicle type or of the exhaust or silencing system shall be notified to the Type Approval Authority which approved the vehicle type. The said Authority may then either: 7.2. Confirmation or refusal of approval, specifying the alterations, shall be communicated to the Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation in accordance with the procedure specified in paragraph 5.3 above. 7.3. The Type Approval Authority issuing the extension of approval shall assign a series number for such an extension and inform thereof the other Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement applying this Regulation by means of a communication form conforming to the model given in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 8. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION The conformity of production procedures shall comply with those set out in the Agreement, Appendix 2 (E/ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505/Rev.2), with the following requirements: 8.1. Every vehicle bearing an approval mark as prescribed under this Regulation shall conform to the vehicle type approved, be fitted with the exhaust or silencing system(s) with which it was approved and satisfy the requirements of paragraph 6 above. 8.2. In order to verify conformity as prescribed in paragraph 8.1 above, a vehicle, bearing the approval mark required by this Regulation, shall be taken from the series. Production shall be deemed to conform to the requirements of this Regulation if the levels measured using the method described in Annex 3 do not exceed by more than 3 dB(A) the value measured on acceptance, nor by more than 1 dB(A) the limits prescribed in paragraph 6.2.1.3 above. 9. PENALTIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 9.1. The approval granted in respect of a vehicle type pursuant to this Regulation may be withdrawn if the requirements laid down in paragraph 8 above are not complied with, or if the vehicle fails to pass the tests provided for in paragraph 8.2 above. 9.2. If a Party to the Agreement which applies this Regulation withdraws an approval it has previously granted, it shall forthwith so notify the other Contracting Parties applying this Regulation by means of a communication form conforming to the model given in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 10. PRODUCTION DEFINITIVELY DISCONTINUED If the holder of the approval completely ceases to manufacture a vehicle or an exhaust or silencing system approved in accordance with this Regulation, he shall so inform the Type Approval Authority which had granted the approval. Upon receiving the relevant communication, that Authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation by means of a communication form conforming to the model given in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 11. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 11.1. As from the official date of entry into force of the 07 series of amendments, no Contracting Party applying this Regulation shall refuse to grant or refuse to accept type approvals under this Regulation as amended by the 07 series of amendments. 11.2. As from 24 months after the date of entry into force of the 07 series of amendments, Contracting Parties applying this Regulation shall grant type approvals only if the vehicle type to be approved meets the requirements of this Regulation as amended by the 07 series of amendments. 11.3. Contracting Parties applying this Regulation shall not refuse to grant extensions of type approvals for existing types which have been granted according to the preceding series of amendments to this Regulation. 11.4. Until 24 months after the date of entry into force of the 07 series of amendments to this Regulation, no Contracting Party applying this Regulation shall refuse national or regional type approval of a vehicle type-approved to the preceding series of amendments to this Regulation. 11.5. As from 24 months after the date of entry into force of the 07 series of amendments to this Regulation, Contracting Parties applying this Regulation shall not be obliged to accept, for the purpose of national or regional type approval, a vehicle type approved to the preceding series of amendments to this Regulation. 11.6. Notwithstanding the transitional provisions above, Contracting Parties whose application of this Regulation comes into force after the date of entry into force of the most recent series of amendments are not obliged to accept type approvals which were granted in accordance with any of the preceding series of amendments to this Regulation and are only obliged to accept type approval granted in accordance with the 07 series amendments. 11.7. As from the official date of entry into force of Supplement 1 to the 07 series of amendments, no Contracting Party applying this Regulation shall refuse to grant or refuse to accept type approval according to Supplement 1 to 07 series of amendments to the Regulation. 11.8. As from 60 months after the date of entry into force of Supplement 1 to the 07 series of amendments to this Regulation, Contracting Parties applying this Regulation shall grant type approvals only if the vehicle type to be approved meets the requirements of this Regulation as amended by Supplement 1 to the 07 series of amendments to this Regulation. 12. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING APPROVAL TESTS, AND OF TYPE APPROVAL AUTHORITIES The Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the Technical Services responsible for conducting approval tests and of the Type Approval Authorities which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval or production definitively discontinued, issued in other countries, are to be sent. ( 1 ) As defined in the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3), document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.4, para.2. ( 2 ) If the rated maximum net power is reached at several engine speeds, the rated engine speed is used in this Regulation as the highest engine speed at which the rated maximum net power is reached. ( 3 ) These components are, in particular, the exhaust manifold, the exhaust piping, the expansion chamber, the silencer proper, etc. If the engine intake is equipped with an air filter and the filter's presence is essential to ensure observance of the prescribed sound-level limits, the filter must be regarded as a component of the ‘exhaust or silencing system(s)’ and bear the marking prescribed in paragraphs 3.2.2 and 4.1. ( 4 ) The distinguishing numbers of the Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement are reproduced in Annex 3 to the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3) (ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.4). ( 5 ) A test is made on a stationary vehicle in order to provide a reference value for administrations which use this method to check vehicles in use. ANNEX 1 COMMUNICATION (maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm)) issued by: Name of administration concerning (2): Approval granted Approval extended Approval refused Approval withdrawn Production definitively discontinued of a vehicle type with regard to its sound emission pursuant to Regulation No 9 Approval No Extension No 1. Trade name or mark of the vehicle: 2. Vehicle type: 2.1. Variant(s) (as necessary): 2.2. Version(s) (as necessary): 3. Manufacturer’s name and address: 4. If applicable, name and address of manufacturer’s representative: 5. Combustion engine 5.1. Engine manufacturer 5.2. Engine type 5.3. Kind of engine: e.g., positive-ignition, compression ignition, etc. (3) 5.4. Cycles: two-stroke or four-stroke (if applicable) (2) 5.5. Engine capacity (if applicable): cm3 5.6. Rated maximum net power (method of measurement): kW 5.7. Rated engine speed: min– 1 6. Electric motor (if applicable) 6.1. Make 6.2. Type 7. Transmission 7.1. Make 7.2. Type (manual, automatic, CVT) 7.3. Number of gears: 7.4. Gears used: 7.5. Final drive ratio(s): 8. Type and dimensions of tyres (by axle): 9. Maximum permissible weight including semi-trailer (where applicable): kg 10. Brief description of the original exhaust system: 11. Type(s) of original exhaust system(s): 12. Type(s) of intake system(s) (if necessary in order to observe the sound level limit): 13. Load conditions of vehicles during test: 14. For stationary vehicle test: location and orientation of the microphone (by reference to diagrams in Annex 3 to this Regulation — Appendix): 15. Sound levels: 15.1. Vehicle in motion dB(A) 15.2. At steady vehicle speed (before acceleration) of .km/h 15.3. Vehicle stationary dB(A) 15.4. at engine speed of min– 1 16. In use compliance reference data 16.1. Gear (i) for vehicles with manual transmission: 16.2. Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (i): km/h 16.3. Sound pressure level L(i): dB(A) 17. Vehicle submitted for approval on: 18. Technical Service responsible for conducting approval tests: 19. Date of report issued by that Service: 20. Number of report issued by that Service: 21. Approval granted/extended/refused/withdrawn (2) 22. Position of approval mark on the vehicle: 23. Place: 24. Date: 25. Signature: 26. The following documents, bearing the approval number shown above, are annexed to this communication: (a) Drawings, diagrams and plans of the engine and of the exhaust or silencing system; (b) Photographs of the engine and of the exhaust or silencing system; (c) List of duly identified components constituting the exhaust or silencing system. (1) Distinguishing number of the country which has granted/extended/refused/withdrawn an approval (see approval provisions in the Regulation). (2) Delete what does not apply. (3) If a non-conventional engine is used, this should be stated. ANNEX 2 ARRANGEMENTS OF THE APPROVAL MARK Model A (See paragraph 5.4 of this Regulation) The above approval mark affixed to a vehicle shows that the vehicle type concerned has, with regard to its sound emission, been approved in the Netherlands (E 4) pursuant to Regulation No 9 under approval No 072439. The approval number indicates that the approval was granted according to the requirements of Regulation No 9 as amended by the 07 series of amendments. Model B (See paragraph 5.5 of this Regulation) The above approval mark affixed to a vehicle shows that the vehicle type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E 4) pursuant to Regulations Nos 9 and 33 ( 1 ) . The approval numbers indicate that, at the date when the respective approvals were given, Regulation No 9 included the 07 series of amendments and Regulation No 33 was still in its original form. ( 1 ) The second number is given merely as an example. ANNEX 3 METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS FOR MEASURING THE SOUND EMITTED BY L 2 , L 4 AND L 5 CATEGORY VEHICLES 1. MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 1.1. General The apparatus used for measuring the sound pressure level shall be a sound level meter or equivalent measuring system meeting the requirements of Class 1 instruments (inclusive of the recommended windscreen, if used). These requirements are described in IEC 61672-1:2013. Measurements shall be carried out using the time weighting ‘F’ of the acoustic measuring instrument and the ‘A’ frequency weighting curve also described in IEC 61672-1:2013. When using a system that includes periodic monitoring of the A-weighted sound pressure level, a reading should be made at a time interval not greater than 30 ms. The instruments shall be maintained and calibrated in accordance with the instructions of the instrument manufacturer. 1.2. Calibration At the beginning and at the end of every measurement session, the entire acoustic measuring system shall be checked by means of a sound calibrator that fulfils the requirements of Class 1 sound calibrators according to IEC 60942:2003. Without any further adjustment, the difference between the readings shall be less than or equal to 0,5 dB(A). If this value is exceeded, the results of the measurements obtained after the previous satisfactory check shall be discarded. 1.3. Compliance with requirements Compliance of the sound calibrator with the requirements of IEC 60942:2003 shall be verified once a year. Compliance of the instrumentation system with the requirements of IEC 61672-1:2013 shall be verified at least every 2 years. All compliance testing shall be conducted by a laboratory which is authorised to perform calibrations traceable to the appropriate standards. 1.4. Instrumentation for speed measurements The rotational speed of the engine shall be measured with an instrument meeting specification limits of at least ± 2 per cent or better at the engine speeds required for the measurements being performed. The road speed of the vehicle shall be measured with instruments meeting specification limits of at least ± 0,5 km/h when using continuous measuring devices. If testing uses independent measurements of vehicle speed, this instrumentation shall meet specification limits of at least ± 0,2 km/h ( 1 ) . 1.5. Meteorological instrumentation The meteorological instrumentation used to monitor the environmental conditions during the test shall meet the following specifications: 2. CONDITIONS OF MEASUREMENT 2.1. Test site, weather conditions and background noise level correction 2.1.1. Test site The test site shall consist of a central acceleration track surrounded by a substantially level test area. The test track shall be level; the track surface shall be dry and so designed that tyre sound remains low. On the test site, free sound field conditions shall be maintained to within ± 1 dB between the sound source placed in the middle of the acceleration section and the microphone. This condition shall be deemed to be met if there are no large sound-reflecting objects such as fences, rocks, bridges or buildings within 50 m of the centre of the acceleration section. The surface of the test track shall conform to the requirements of Annex 5 to this Regulation. No obstacle likely to affect the sound field shall be close to the microphone and no one shall come between the microphone and the sound source. The observer taking the measurements shall take up position so as to avoid influencing the metre readings. The surface of the test track shall conform to the requirements of Annex 5 to this Regulation or to ISO10844:2014. After the end of the period indicated in paragraph 11.8 of this Regulation only ISO 10844:2014 shall be used as reference. 2.1.2. Weather conditions and background noise correction Measurements shall not be made in poor weather conditions. The tests shall not be carried out if the wind speed, including gusts, exceeds 5 m/s during the sound-measurement interval. For measurement purposes, the weighted sound level (A) of sound sources other than on the test vehicle and the sound level produced by the effect of the wind shall be at least 10 dB(A) below the sound level produced by the vehicle. The microphone may be fitted with a suitable wind guard, provided that its influence on the sensitivity and directional characteristics of the microphone are taken into account. If the difference between ambient noise and measured sound levels is between 10 and 15 dB(A), in order to calculate the test result, the appropriate correction shall be subtracted from the readings on the sound level meter, as given in Table 1. Table 1 Correction applied to individual measured test value 2.2. Condition of the vehicle 2.2.1. General conditions The vehicle shall be supplied as specified by the vehicle manufacturer. Before the measurements are started, the vehicle shall be brought to its normal operating conditions as regards: If the vehicle is fitted with fans with an automatic actuating mechanism, this system shall not be interfered with during the sound measurements. If the vehicle is equipped with devices which are not necessary for its propulsion, but which are used whilst the vehicle is in normal service on the road, those devices shall be in operation in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer. For vehicles having more than one driven wheel, only the drive provided for normal road operation may be used. If the vehicle is fitted with a trailer or a semi-trailer, this shall be removed for the purposes of the test. 2.2.2. Test mass of the vehicle The vehicle shall be tested with its test mass as defined in paragraph 2.10 of this Regulation. 2.2.3. Tyre selection and condition The tyres shall be appropriate for the vehicle and shall be inflated to the pressure recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for the test mass of the vehicle. The tyres shall be selected by the vehicle manufacturer, and correspond to one of the tyre sizes and types designated for the vehicle by the vehicle manufacturer. The minimum tread depth shall be at least 80 per cent of the full tread depth. 3. METHODS OF MEASUREMENT 3.1. Measurement of the sound emission of the vehicles in motion 3.1.1. Test arrangement and microphone positions 3.1.1.1. The test arrangement is shown in Figure 1. Two lines, AA′ and BB′, parallel to the microphone line PP′ and situated respectively 10 m forward and 10 m rearward of that line shall be marked out on the test track. 3.1.1.2. The distance of the microphone positions from the line CC′, on the microphone line PP′, perpendicular to the reference line CC′ on the test track (see Figure 1), shall be 7,5 ± 0,05 m. The microphones shall be located 1,2 ± 0,02 m above the ground level. The reference direction for free-field conditions (see IEC 61672-1:2013) shall be horizontal and directed perpendicularly towards the path of the vehicle line CC′. 3.1.2. Acceleration test execution, approach vehicle speed and gear use 3.1.2.1. Acceleration test execution The vehicle shall approach line AA′ at an initial steady vehicle speed v AA′ as specified below. When the front of the vehicle reaches line AA′ the accelerator handle shall be fully opened as quickly as practically possible and kept in that position until the rear of the vehicle reaches the line BB′; the accelerator handle shall then be returned as quickly as possible to the idle position. The vehicle speed achieved, when the rear of the vehicle reaches the line BB′ is called v BB′ . The engine speeds corresponding to v AA′ and v BB′ in a specific test condition are called n AA′ and n BB′ . In the case of articulated vehicles consisting of two non-separable units regarded as a single vehicle, the semi-trailer shall be disregarded in determining when line BB′ is crossed. For all measurements, the vehicle shall be driven in a straight line along the test track in such a way that the track of the median longitudinal plane of the vehicle is as close as possible to the line CC′. Figure 1 Measuring positions for vehicles in motion 3.1.2.2. Determination of the approach vehicle speed and the gear use 3.1.2.2.1. Vehicle with no gearbox The vehicle shall approach line AA′ at a steady vehicle speed v AA′ corresponding either, in terms of engine speed, (min – 1 ) to 75 per cent of the rated engine speed as defined in paragraph 2.4 of this Regulation, or to 75 per cent of the maximum engine speed permitted by the governor, or to 50 km/h, whichever is the lowest. 3.1.2.2.2. Vehicles with manual transmissions, automatic transmissions, or transmissions with continuously variable transmission ratios (CVT's) tested with locked gears If the vehicle is fitted with a dual mode transmission (e.g. low and high), the mode for normal on-road operation shall be selected. If the vehicle is fitted with a gearbox with two or three or four forward gears or the same number of lockable gears in automatic transmission or in CVT, the second gear shall be used. If the gearbox has more than four forward gears or the same number of lockable gears in automatic transmission or in CVT, the third gear shall be used. The vehicle shall approach line AA′ at a steady vehicle speed v AA′ corresponding either, in terms of engine speed, to 75 per cent of the rated engine speed as defined in paragraph 2.4 of this Regulation or to 75 per cent of the maximum engine speed permitted by the governor, or to 50 km/h, whichever is the lowest. If, by following the above procedure, the engine speed n BB′ , achieved when the rear of the vehicle passes the line BB′, exceeds the rated engine speed as defined in paragraph 2.4 of this Regulation, the first higher gear (or locked gear) which ensures that the rated engine speed is no longer exceeded up to the line BB′ of the measurement area should be used instead of the second or third gear. Auxiliary step-up ratios (‘overdrive’) shall not be engaged. 3.1.2.2.3. Vehicles with automatic transmissions, adaptive transmissions or transmissions with variable transmission ratios tested with non-locked gears The gear selector position for full automatic operation shall be used. Where several full automatic operation modes are available (e.g. economic, sporty), that mode shall be selected which results in the highest average acceleration of the vehicle between lines AA′ and BB′. The test may then include a gear change to a lower gear and a higher acceleration. A gear change to a higher gear and a lower acceleration is not allowed. In any case, a gear change to a gear which is typically not used at the specified condition in urban traffic shall be avoided. Therefore, it is permitted to establish and use electronic or mechanical devices, including alternative gear selector positions, to prevent a downshift to a gear which is typically not used at the specified test condition in urban traffic. The functionality of the devices shall be described in the communication form. The vehicle shall approach the line AA′ at a steady vehicle speed v AA′ of 50 km/h or at 75 per cent of its maximum vehicle speed as defined in paragraph 2.11 of this Regulation, whichever is the lower. 3.1.3. Sound level determination The maximum sound level recorded at each side of the vehicle shall be reduced by 1 dB(A) to account for measurement inaccuracy and mathematically rounded to the nearest first decimal place (e.g. 78,45 shall be noted as to 78,5 while 78,44 shall be noted as to 78,4). These values constitute the results of the measurement. The measurement will be invalid if an abnormal discrepancy is recorded between the peak value and the general sound level. At least two measurements shall be made on each side of the vehicle. The measurements shall be considered valid if the difference between the results of the two consecutive measurements on the same side of the vehicle is not more than 2 dB(A). Preliminary measurements may be made for adjustment purposes, but shall be disregarded for the determination of the measurement results. 3.1.4. Calculation of the final test result The final test result is the average of the four test results rounded off to the nearest whole decibel. If the figure following the decimal point is between 0 and 4, the total is rounded down and if it is between 5 and 9, it is rounded up. In case of hybrid electric vehicles, the final result is the highest of the test results for conditions A and B as described in paragraph 6.2.1.1 of this Regulation. 3.2. Measurement of the sound emitted by stationary vehicles (for testing of vehicles in use) 3.2.1. Sound pressure level close to the outlet(s) of the exhaust system In addition, so as to facilitate the subsequent testing of vehicles in use, the sound pressure level shall be measured near the outlet of the exhaust system (silencing system), in conformity with the requirements set out below, and the result of the measurement shall be included in the test report prepared for the issuance of the document referred to in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 3.2.2. Measuring instruments The measurements shall be made using a precision sound level meter in accordance with paragraph 1 of this annex. 3.2.3. Conditions for measurements 3.2.3.1. Condition of the vehicle Before the measurements are started, the vehicle engine shall be brought to its normal operating temperature. If the vehicle is equipped with automatic fans, no adjustment shall be made to them during the measurement of the sound level. While measurements are being made, the gear lever shall be in neutral. If the transmission cannot be disconnected, the drive wheel of the vehicle should be allowed to run under no-load conditions by, for example, placing the vehicle on a support or on rollers. 3.2.3.2. Test site Any area not subject to major acoustic perturbations may be used as a test site. Level areas covered with concrete, asphalt or some other hard material and are highly reflective are suitable; surfaces consisting of earth which has been tamped down shall not be used. The test site shall have at least the dimensions of a rectangle the sides of which shall be 3 m from the outline of the vehicle (excluding handlebars). No significant obstacle such as a person other than the observer and the driver shall be within this rectangle. The vehicle shall be placed within the above-mentioned rectangle in such a way that the measuring microphone is at least 1 metre from any stone edging. 3.2.3.3. Miscellaneous Instrument readings caused by ambient or wind noise shall be at least 10 dB(A) less than the sound level to be measured. The microphone may be fitted with a suitable wind-guard provided that its effect on microphone sensitivity is taken into account. 3.2.4. Method of measurement 3.2.4.1. Number of measurements At least three measurements shall be made at each measurement point. The measurements shall be considered valid only if the difference between the results of three consecutive measurements is not more than 2 dB(A). 3.2.4.2. Positioning of the microphone (see Figure 2) The microphone shall be located at a distance of 0,5 ± 0,01 m from the reference point of the exhaust pipe defined in Figure 3 and at an angle of 45 ± 5° to the vertical plane containing the flow axis of the pipe termination. The microphone shall be at the height of the reference point, but not less than 0,2 m from the ground surface. The reference axis of the microphone shall lie in a plane parallel to the ground surface and shall be directed towards the reference point on the exhaust outlet. Figure 2 Microphone positions for the measurement of sound of the stationary vehicle Height of the reference point on exhaust outlet Figure 3 Reference point The reference point shall be the highest point satisfying the following conditions: If two microphone positions are possible, the location farthest laterally from the vehicle longitudinal centreline shall be used. If the flow axis of the exhaust outlet pipe is at 90° ± 5° to the vehicle longitudinal centreline, the microphone shall be located at the point that is the furthest from the engine. If a vehicle has two or more exhaust outlets spaced less than 0,3 m apart and connected to a single silencer, only one measurement shall be made. The microphone shall be located relative to the outlet the farthest from the vehicle's longitudinal centreline, or, when such outlet does not exist, to the outlet that is highest above the ground. For vehicles having an exhaust provided with outlets spaced more than 0,3 m apart, one measurement is made for each outlet as if it were the only one, and the highest sound pressure level shall be noted. For the purpose of roadside checking, the reference point may be moved to the outer surface of the vehicle body. For vehicles equipped with multiple exhaust outlets, the reported sound pressure level shall be for the outlet having the highest average sound pressure level. 3.2.4.3. Operating conditions The engine speed shall be held steady at one of the following values: Where n rated is the rated engine speed as defined in paragraph 2.4 of this Regulation. For a vehicle which cannot reach, in a stationary test, the target engine speed defined above, 95 per cent of the maximum engine speed reachable in a stationary test shall be used instead as target engine speed. The engine speed shall be gradually increased from idle to the target engine speed and held constant within a tolerance band of ± 5 per cent. Then the throttle control shall be rapidly released and the engine speed shall be returned to idle. The sound pressure level shall be measured during a period consisting of constant engine speed of at least 1 s and throughout the entire deceleration period. The maximum sound level meter reading shall be taken as the test value. A measurement shall be regarded as valid only if the test engine speed did not deviate from the target engine speed by more than the specified tolerance of ± 5 per cent for at least 1 s. 3.2.4.4. Measurements shall be made at the microphone location(s) prescribed above. The maximum A-weighted sound pressure level indicated during the test shall be noted, retaining one significant figure behind the decimal place (e.g. 92,45 shall be noted as to 92,5 while 92,44 shall be noted as to 92,4). The test shall be repeated until three consecutive measurements that are within 2,0 dB(A) of each other are obtained at each outlet. The test result for a given outlet is the arithmetic average of the three valid measurements, mathematically rounded to the nearest integer value (e.g. 92,5 shall be noted as to 93 while 92,4 shall be noted as to 92). 3.2.4.5. Multi-mode exhaust system 3.2.4.5.1. Vehicles equipped with a multiple mode, manually adjustable exhaust system shall be tested in all modes. 3.2.4.5.2. For vehicles equipped with a multi-mode exhaust system and a manual exhaust mode control the reported sound pressure level shall be for the mode having the highest average sound pressure level. 4. SOUND FROM THE VEHICLE IN MOTION (DATA REPORTED TO FACILITATE TESTING OF THE VEHICLE IN USE). 4.1. A test procedure for in use compliance tests may be defined by a Contracting Party, taking due account of any differences from the test conditions used at type-approval. 4.2. In order to facilitate in use compliance test of vehicles, the following information relating to the sound-pressure level measurements carried out in accordance with paragraph 1 of Annex 3 for the vehicle in motion is referred to as in use compliance reference data: 4.3. The in use compliance reference data shall be entered in the communication form conforming to Annex 1. 5. ORIGINAL EXHAUST (SILENCING) SYSTEM 5.1. Requirements for silencers containing absorbent fibrous materials 5.1.1. Fibrous absorbent material shall be asbestos-free and may be used in the construction of silencers only if suitable devices ensure that the fibrous absorbent material is kept in place for the whole time that the silencer is being used and the exhaust or silencing system meets the requirements of any one of paragraphs 5.1.2, 5.1.3, 5.1.4 or 5.1.5 below. 5.1.2. After removal of the fibrous material, the sound-level shall conform to the requirements of paragraph 6.2.1.3 of this Regulation. 5.1.3. The fibrous absorbent material may not be placed in those parts of the silencer through which the exhaust gases pass and shall conform to the following requirements: 5.1.4. Before the system is tested in accordance with paragraph 3 above, it shall be put into a normal state for road use by one of the following methods: 5.1.4.1. Conditioning by continuous road operation 5.1.4.1.1. Depending on the engine capacity of the vehicle, the minimum distances to be completed during conditioning shall be: 5.1.4.1.2. 50 per cent ± 10 per cent of this conditioning cycle shall consist of town driving and the remainder of long-distance runs at high vehicle speed; the continuous road cycle may be replaced by a corresponding test-track programme; 5.1.4.1.3. The two vehicle speed regimes shall be alternated at least six times; 5.1.4.1.4. The complete test programme shall include a minimum of 10 breaks of at least 3 h duration in order to reproduce the effects of cooling and condensation. 5.1.4.2. Conditioning by pulsation 5.1.4.2.1. The exhaust system or components thereof shall be fitted to the vehicle or to the engine. In the former case, the vehicle shall be mounted on a roller dynamometer. In the second case, the engine shall be mounted on a test bench. The test apparatus, a detailed diagram of which is shown in Figure 4, shall be fitted at the outlet of the exhaust system. Any other apparatus providing equivalent results shall be acceptable. Figure 4 Test apparatus for conditioning by pulsation optional optional 5.1.4.2.2. The test equipment shall be adjusted so that the flow of exhaust gases is alternately interrupted and restored 2 500 times by a rapid-action valve. 5.1.4.2.3. The valve shall open when the exhaust gas back-pressure, measured at least 100 mm downstream of the intake flange, reaches a value of between 35 and 40 kPa. Should such a figure be unattainable because of the engine characteristics, the valve shall open when the gas back-pressure reaches a level equivalent to 90 per cent of the maximum that can be measured before the engine stops. It shall close when this pressure does not differ by more than 10 per cent from its stabilised value with the valve open. 5.1.4.2.4. The time-delay switch shall be set for the duration of exhaust gases calculated on the basis of the requirements of paragraph 5.1.4.2.3 above. 5.1.4.2.5. The engine speed shall be 75 per cent of the rated engine speed as defined in paragraph 2.4 of this Regulation. 5.1.4.2.6. The power indicated by the dynamometer shall be 50 per cent of the full-throttle power measured at 75 per cent of the rated engine speed as defined in paragraph 2.4 of this Regulation. 5.1.4.2.7. Any drainage holes shall be closed off during the test. 5.1.4.2.8. The entire test shall be completed within 48 hours. If necessary, a cooling period shall be allowed after each hour. 5.1.4.3. Conditioning on a test bench 5.1.4.3.1. The exhaust system shall be fitted to an engine representative of the type fitted to the vehicle for which the system is designed, and mounted on a test bench. 5.1.4.3.2. Conditioning shall consist of the specified number of test bench cycles for the engine capacity class of vehicle, for which the exhaust system was designed. The number of cycles for each vehicle class shall be: 5.1.4.3.3. Each test-bench cycle shall be followed by a break of at least six hours in order to reproduce the effects of cooling and condensation. 5.1.4.3.4. Each test-bench cycle shall consist of six phases. The engine conditions for, and the duration of, each phase shall be: 5.1.4.3.5. During this conditioning procedure, at the request of the manufacturer, the engine and the silencer may be cooled in order that the temperature recorded at a point not more than 100 mm from the exhaust gas outlet does not exceed that measured when the vehicle is running at 110 km/h or 75 per cent of the rated engine speed as defined in paragraph 2.4 of this Regulation in top gear. The engine and/or vehicle speeds shall be determined with a tolerance of ± 3 per cent. 5.1.5. Exhaust gases are not in contact with fibrous materials and fibrous materials are not under the influence of pressure variations. 5.2. Diagram and markings 5.2.1. The diagram and a dimensioned cross-section of the silencer shall be annexed to the document mentioned in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 5.2.2. All original silencers shall bear at least the following: This reference shall be legible, indelible and visible in the position at which it is to be fitted. 5.2.3. Any packaging of original replacements for exhaust or silencing systems shall be marked legibly with the words ‘original part’ and the make and type reference integrated together with the ‘E’ mark and also the reference of the country of origin. 5.3. Intake silencers If the engine intake has to be fitted with an air filter and/or intake silencer in order to comply with the permissible sound level, the filter and/or silencer shall be regarded as part of the silencer and the requirements of paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2 above shall also be applicable to them. ( 1 ) Independent measurements of speed are when two or more separate devices will determine the values of v AA′ and v BB′ . A continuous measuring device such as radar will determine all required speed information with one device. ANNEX 4 MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL LIMITS (NEW VEHICLES) ANNEX 5 TEST TRACK SPECIFICATIONS ( 1 ) 1. INTRODUCTION This annex describes the specifications relating to the physical characteristics and the laying of the test track. These specifications based on a special standard ( 2 ) describe the required physical characteristics as well as the test methods for these characteristics. 2. REQUIRED CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SURFACE A surface is considered to conform to this standard provided that the texture and voids content or sound absorption coefficient have been measured and found to fulfil all the requirements of paragraphs 2.1 to 2.4 below and provided that the design requirements (paragraph 3.2 below) have been met. 2.1. Residual voids content The residual voids content, V C , of the test track paving mixture shall not exceed 8 per cent. For the measurement procedure, see paragraph 4.1 below. 2.2. Sound absorption coefficient If the surface fails to conform to the residual voids content requirement, the surface is acceptable only if its sound absorption coefficient, α ≤ 0,10. For the measurement procedure, see paragraph 4.2 below. The requirements of paragraph 2.1 above and this paragraph are met also if only sound absorption has been measured and found to be α ≤ 0,10. Note : The most relevant characteristic is the sound absorption, although the residual voids content is more familiar among road constructors. However, sound absorption needs to be measured only if the surface fails to comply with the voids requirement. This is because the latter is connected with relatively large uncertainties in terms of both measurements and relevance and some surfaces therefore may be rejected erroneously on the basis of the voids measurement only. 2.3. Texture depth The texture depth (TD) measured according to the volumetric method (see paragraph 4.3 below) shall be: TD ≥ 0,4 mm 2.4. Homogeneity of the surface Every practical effort shall be made to ensure that the surface is made to be as homogeneous as possible within the test area. This includes the texture and voids content, but it should also be observed that if the rolling process results in more effective rolling at some places than at others, the texture may be different and unevenness causing bumps may also occur. 2.5. Period of testing In order to check whether the surface continues to conform to the texture and voids content or sound absorption requirements stipulated in this standard, periodic testing of the surface shall be done at the following intervals: 3. TEST SURFACE DESIGN 3.1. Area When designing the test track lay-out it is important to ensure that, as a minimum requirement, the area traversed by the vehicles running through the test strip is covered with the specified test material with suitable margins for safe and practical driving. This will require the width of the track to be at least 3 m and the length of the track to extend beyond lines AA and BB by at least 10 m at either end. Figure 1 shows a plan of a suitable test site and indicates the minimum area which shall be machine laid and machine compacted with the specified test surface material. According to Annex 3, paragraph 3.1.1.1, measurements have to be made on each side of the vehicle. This can be done either by measuring with two microphone locations (one on each side of the track) and driving in one direction, or measuring with a microphone only on one side of the track but driving the vehicle in two directions. If the latter method is used, then there are no surface requirements on that side of the track where there is no microphone. Figure 1 Minimum requirement for test surface area. The shaded part is called ‘Test Area’ Microphone (height 1,2 m) Minimum area covered with test road surface, i.e. test area Dimensions in metres Centreline of travel NOTE – There shall be no large acoustically reflective objectives within this radius. 3.2. Design and preparation of the surface 3.2.1. Basic design requirements; the test surface shall meet four design requirements: 3.2.2. Design guidelines As a guide to the surface constructor, an aggregate grading curve which will give desired characteristics is shown in Figure 2. In addition, Table 1 gives some guidelines for obtaining the desired texture and durability. The grading curve fits the following formula: P (% passing) = 100 · (d/d max ) 1/2 where: Figure 2 Grading curve of the aggregate in the asphaltic mix with tolerances per cent passing (by mass) Sieve size in mm In addition to the above, the following recommendations are given: Table 1 Design guidelines 4. TEST METHOD 4.1. Measurement of the residual voids content For the purpose of this measurement, cores have to be taken from the track in at least four different positions which are equally distributed in the test area between lines AA and BB (see Figure 1). In order to avoid in homogeneity and unevenness in the wheel tracks, cores should not be taken in wheel tracks themselves, but close to them. Two cores (minimum) should be taken close to the wheel tracks and one core (minimum) should be taken approximately midway between the wheel tracks and each microphone location. If there is a suspicion that the condition of homogeneity is not met (see paragraph 2.4 above), cores shall be taken from more locations within the test area. The residual voids content has to be determined for each core, then the average value from all cores shall be calculated and compared with the requirement of paragraph 2.1 above. In addition, no single core shall have a voids value which is higher than 10 per cent. The test surface constructor is reminded of the problem which may arise when the test area is heated by pipes or electrical wires and cores shall be taken from this area. Such installations shall be carefully planned with respect to future core drilling locations. It is recommended that a few locations of size approximately 200 × 300 mm should be left where there are no wires/pipes or where the latter are located deep enough in order not to be damaged by cores taken from the surface layer. 4.2. Sound absorption coefficient The sound absorption coefficient (normal incidence) shall be measured by the impedance tube method using the procedure specified in ISO/DIS 10 534: ‘ Acoustics — Determination of sound absorption coefficient and impedance by a tube method ’. Regarding test specimens, the same requirements shall be followed as regarding the residual voids content (see paragraph 4.1 above). The sound absorption shall be measured in the range between 400 Hz and 800 Hz and in the range between 800 Hz and 1 600 Hz (at least at the centre frequencies of third octave bands) and the maximum values shall be identified for both of these frequency ranges. Then these values, for all test cores shall be averaged to constitute the final result. 4.3. Volumetric macrotexture measurement For the purpose of this standard, texture depth measurements shall be made on at least 10 positions evenly spaced along the wheel tracks of the test strip and the average value taken to compare with the specified minimum texture depth. For the description of the procedure see standard ISO 10844:1994. 5. STABILITY IN TIME AND MAINTENANCE 5.1. Age influence In common with any other surfaces, it is expected that the tyre/road sound level measured on the test surface may increase slightly during the first 6-12 months after construction. The surface will achieve its required characteristics not earlier than four weeks after construction. The stability over time is determined mainly by the polishing and compaction by vehicles driving on the surface. It shall be periodically checked as stated in paragraph 2.5 above. 5.2. Maintenance of the surface Loose debris or dust which could significantly reduce the effective texture depth shall be removed from the surface. In countries with winter climates, salt is sometimes used for de-icing. Salt may alter the surface temporarily or even permanently in such a way as to increase sound, and is therefore not recommended. 5.3. Repaving the test area If it is necessary to repave the test track, it is usually unnecessary to repave more than the test strip (of 3 m width in Figure 1) where vehicles are driving, provided the test area outside the strip met the requirement of residual voids content or sound absorption when it was measured. 6. DOCUMENTATION OF THE TEST SURFACE AND OF TESTS PERFORMED ON IT 6.1. Documentation of the test surface The following data shall be given in a document describing the test surface: 6.2. Documentation of vehicle sound tests conducted on the surface In the document describing the vehicle sound test(s) it should be stated whether all the requirements of this standard were fulfilled or not. Reference shall be given to a document according to paragraph 6.1 above describing the results which verify this. ( 1 ) The specifications for the test site reproduced in this annex are valid until the end of the period indicated in paragraph 11.8 of this Regulation. ( 2 ) ISO 10844:1994