COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2020/2009 of 22 June 2020 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for surface treatment using organic solvents including preservation of wood and wood products with chemicals (notified under document C(2020) 4050) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for surface treatment using organic solvents including preservation of wood and wood products with chemicals, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 22 June 2020. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 establishing a forum for the exchange of information pursuant to Article 13 of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions ( OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 ). Best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for surface treatment using organic solvents including preservation of wood and wood products with chemicals These BAT conclusions concern the following activities specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU: These BAT conclusions also cover the combined treatment of waste water from different origins provided that the main pollutant load originates from the activities specified in point 6.7 or 6.10 of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU and that the waste water treatment is not covered by Council Directive 91/271/EEC ( 1 ) . These BAT conclusions do not address the following: For surface treatment of substances, objects or products using organic solvents: For preservation of wood and wood products with chemicals: Other BAT conclusions and reference documents which may be of relevance for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: ACRONYMS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following acronyms apply: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, these BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) BAT-AELs for total and fugitive VOC emissions For total VOC emissions, the emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) are given in these BAT conclusions: For fugitive VOC emissions, the emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) are given in these BAT conclusions as a percentage of the solvent input, calculated as yearly averages as per Part 7, 3(b)(i) of Annex VII to Directive 2010/75/EU. BAT-AELs and indicative emission levels for emissions in waste gases Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) and indicative emission levels for emissions in waste gases given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations, expressed as mass of emitted substance per volume of waste gas under the following standard conditions: dry gas, at a temperature of 273,15 K and a pressure of 101,3 kPa, without correction for oxygen content and expressed in mg/Nm 3 . For averaging periods of BAT-AELs and indicative emission levels for emissions in waste gases, the following definitions apply. BAT-AELs for emissions to water Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substance per volume of water), expressed in mg/l. Averaging periods associated with the BAT-AELs refer to either of the following two cases: Time-proportional composite samples can be used provided that sufficient flow stability is demonstrated. Alternatively, spot samples may be taken, provided that the effluent is appropriately mixed and homogeneous. Spot samples are taken if the sample is unstable with respect to the parameter to be measured. All BAT-AELs for emissions to water apply at the point where the emission leaves the plant. Other environmental performance levels Specific energy consumption (energy efficiency) levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AEPLs) The environmental performance levels related to specific energy consumption refer to yearly averages calculated using the following equation: where: Specific water consumption levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AEPLs) The environmental performance levels related to specific water consumption refer to yearly averages calculated using the following equation: where: Indicative levels for specific waste quantity sent off site The indicative levels related to the specific quantity of waste sent off site refer to yearly averages calculated using the following equation: where: 1. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR SURFACE TREATMENT USING ORGANIC SOLVENTS 1.1. General BAT conclusions 1.1.1. Environmental Management Systems BAT 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to elaborate and implement an Environmental Management System (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Specifically for surface treatment using organic solvents, BAT is also to incorporate the following features in the EMS: Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 establishes the European Union eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), which is an example of an EMS consistent with this BAT. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the EMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2. Overall environmental performance BAT 2. In order to improve the overall environmental performance of the plant, in particular concerning VOC emissions and energy consumption, BAT is to: 1.1.3. Selection of raw materials BAT 3. In order to prevent or reduce the environmental impact of the raw materials used, BAT is to use both of the techniques given below. BAT 4. In order to reduce solvent consumption, VOC emissions and the overall environmental impact of the raw materials used, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.4. Storage and handling of raw materials BAT 5. In order to prevent or reduce fugitive VOC emissions during storage and handling of solvent-containing materials and/or hazardous materials, BAT is to apply the principles of good housekeeping by using all of the techniques given below. 1.1.5. Distribution of raw materials BAT 6. In order to reduce raw material consumption and VOC emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.6. Coating application BAT 7. In order to reduce raw material consumption and the overall environmental impact of the coating application processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.7. Drying/curing BAT 8. In order to reduce energy consumption and the overall environmental impact from drying/curing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.8. Cleaning BAT 9. In order to reduce VOC emissions from cleaning processes, BAT is to minimise the use of solvent-based cleaning agents and to use a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.9. Monitoring 1.1.9.1. Solvent mass balance BAT 10. BAT is to monitor total and fugitive VOC emissions by compiling, at least once every year, a solvent mass balance of the solvent inputs and outputs of the plant, as defined in Part 7(2) of Annex VII to Directive 2010/75/EU and to minimise the uncertainty of the solvent mass balance data by using all of the techniques given below. Applicability The level of detail of the solvent mass balance will be proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have, as well as to the type and quantity of materials used. 1.1.9.2. Emissions in waste gases BAT 11. BAT is to monitor emissions in waste gases with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 1.1.9.3. Emissions to water BAT 12. BAT is to monitor emissions to water with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 1.1.10. Emissions during OTNOC BAT 13. In order to reduce the frequency of the occurrence of OTNOC and to reduce emissions during OTNOC, BAT is to use both of the techniques given below. 1.1.11. Emissions in waste gases 1.1.11.1. VOC emissions BAT 14. In order to reduce VOC emissions from the production and storage areas, BAT is to use technique (a) and an appropriate combination of the other techniques given below. BAT 15. In order to reduce VOC emissions in waste gases and increase resource efficiency, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) are given in Tables 11, 15, 17, 19, 21, 24, 27, 30, 32 and 35 of these BAT conclusions. BAT 16. In order to reduce the energy consumption of the VOC abatement system, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.11.2. NO X and CO emissions BAT 17. In order to reduce NO X emissions in waste gases while limiting CO emissions from the thermal treatment of solvents in off-gases, BAT is to use technique (a) or both of the techniques given below. Table 1 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for NO X emissions in waste gases and indicative emission level for CO emissions in waste gases from the thermal treatment of off-gases The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.1.11.3. Dust emissions BAT 18. In order to reduce dust emissions in waste gases from substrate surface preparation, cutting, coating application and finishing processes for the sectors and processes listed in Table 2, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 2 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for dust emissions in waste gases The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.1.12. Energy efficiency BAT 19. In order to use energy efficiently, BAT is to use techniques (a) and (b) and an appropriate combination of the techniques (c) to (h) given below. Table 3 BAT-associated environmental performance levels (BAT-AEPLs) for specific energy consumption The associated monitoring is given in BAT 19 (b). 1.1.13. Water use and waste water generation BAT 20. In order to reduce water consumption and waste water generation from aqueous processes (e.g. degreasing, cleaning, surface treatment, wet scrubbing), BAT is to use technique (a) and an appropriate combination of the other techniques given below. Table 4 BAT-associated environmental performance levels (BAT-AEPLs) for specific water consumption The associated monitoring is given in BAT 20 (a). 1.1.14. Emissions to water BAT 21. In order to reduce emissions to water and/or to facilitate water reuse and recycling from aqueous processes (e.g. degreasing, cleaning, surface treatment, wet scrubbing), BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given below. Table 5 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for direct discharges to a receiving water body The associated monitoring is given in BAT 12. Table 6 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for indirect discharges to a receiving water body The associated monitoring is given in BAT 12. 1.1.15. Waste management BAT 22. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal, BAT is to use the techniques (a) and (b) and one or both of the techniques (c) and (d) given below. 1.1.16. Odour emissions BAT 23. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce odour emissions, BAT is to set up, implement and regularly review an odour management plan, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following elements: Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where an odour nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. 1.2. BAT conclusions for the coating of vehicles The BAT conclusion in this section applies to the coating of vehicles (passenger cars, vans, trucks, truck cabins,and buses), and applies in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. 1.2.1. VOC emissions and energy and raw material consumption BAT 24. In order to reduce the consumption of solvents, other raw materials and energy, as well as to reduce VOC emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the coating systems given below. Table 7 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for total emissions of VOCs from the coating of vehicles The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. 1.2.2. Waste quantity sent off site Table 8 Indicative levels for specific waste quantity sent off site from the coating of vehicles The associated monitoring is given in BAT 22 (b). 1.3. BAT conclusions for the coating of other metal and plastic surfaces The emission levels given below for coating of other metal and plastic surfaces are associated with the general BAT conclusions described in Section 1.1. The emission levels given below may not apply where metal and/or plastic automotive components are coated in a vehicle coating plant and these emissions are included in the calculation of the total VOC emissions for the coating of vehicles (see Section 1.2). Table 9 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for total emissions of VOCs from the coating of other metal and plastic surfaces The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. As an alternative to the BAT-AELs in Table 9, the BAT-AELs in both Table 10 and Table 11 may be used. Table 10 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from the coating of other metal and plastic surfaces The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 11 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from the coating of other metal and plastic surfaces The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.4. BAT conclusions for the coating of ships and yachts The BAT conclusion in this section applies to the coating of ships and yachts, and applies in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. BAT 25. In order to reduce total emissions of VOCs and dust emissions to air, to reduce emissions to water and to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to use techniques (a) and (b) and a combination of techniques (c) to (i) given below. Table 12 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from the coating of ships and yachts The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. 1.5. BAT conclusions for the coating of aircraft The BAT conclusion in this section applies to the coating of aircraft, and applies in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. BAT 26: In order to reduce total emissions of VOCs and to improve the overall environmental performance of coating of aircraft, BAT is to use technique (a) or both of the techniques given below. Table 13 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from the coating of aircraft The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. 1.6. BAT conclusions for coil coating The emission levels for coil coating given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. Table 14 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from coil coating The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 15 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from coil coating The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.7. BAT conclusions for the manufacturing of adhesive tapes The emission levels for the manufacturing of adhesive tapes given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. Table 16 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from the manufacturing of adhesive tapes The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 17 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from the manufacturing of adhesive tapes The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.8. BAT conclusions for the coating of textiles, foils and paper The emission levels for the coating of textiles, foils and paper given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. Table 18 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from the coating of textiles, foils and paper The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 19 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from the coating of textiles, foils and paper The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.9. BAT conclusions for the manufacturing of winding wire The BAT conclusion in this section applies to the manufacturing of winding wire, and applies in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. BAT 27. In order to reduce total emissions of VOCs and energy consumption, BAT is to use technique (a) and one or a combination of the techniques (b) to (d) given below. Table 20 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from the manufacture of winding wire The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 21 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from the manufacture of winding wire The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.10. BAT conclusions for the coating and printing of metal packaging The emission levels for the coating and printing of metal packaging given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. Table 22 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from the coating and printing of metal packaging The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. As an alternative to the BAT-AEL in Table 22, the BAT-AELs in both Table 23 and Table 24 may be used. Table 23 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from the coating and printing of metal packaging The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 24 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from the coating and printing of metal packaging The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.11. BAT conclusions for heatset web offset printing The BAT conclusion in this section applies to heatset web offset printing, and applies in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. BAT 28. In order to reduce total VOC emissions, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given below. Table 25 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from heatset web offset printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. As an alternative to the BAT-AELs in Table 25, the BAT-AELs in both Table 26 and Table 27 may be used. Table 26 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from heatset web offset printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 27 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from heatset web offset printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.12. BAT conclusions for flexography and non-publication rotogravure printing The emission levels for flexography and non-publication rotogravure printing given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. Table 28 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from flexography and non-publication rotogravure printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. As an alternative to the BAT-AEL in Table 28, the BAT-AELs in both Table 29 and Table 30 may be used. Table 29 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from flexography and non-publication rotogravure printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 30 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from flexography and non-publication rotogravure printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.13. BAT conclusions for publication rotogravure printing The BAT conclusion in this section applies to publication rotogravure printing, and applies in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. BAT 29. In order to reduce VOC emissions from publication rotogravure printing, BAT is to use a toluene recovery system based on adsorption and one or both of the techniques given below. Table 31 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from publication rotogravure printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 32 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from publication rotogravure printing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 1.14. BAT conclusions for the coating of wooden surfaces The emission levels for the coating of wooden surfaces given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. Table 33 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions of VOCs from the coating of wooden surfaces The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. As an alternative to the BAT-AELs in Table 33, the BAT-AELs in both Table 34 and Table 35 may be used. Table 34 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for fugitive emissions of VOCs from the coating of wooden surfaces The associated monitoring is given in BAT 10. Table 35 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for VOC emissions in waste gases from the coating of wooden surfaces The associated monitoring is given in BAT 11. 2. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR PRESERVATION OF WOOD AND WOOD PRODUCTS WITH CHEMICALS 2.1. Environmental management systems BAT 30. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to elaborate and implement an Environmental Management System (EMS) that incorporates all of the features (i) to (xx) of BAT 1 as well as the following specific features: Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 establishes the European Union eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), which is an example of an EMS consistent with this BAT. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the EMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 2.2. Substitution of harmful/hazardous substances BAT 31. In order to prevent or reduce emissions of PAHs and/or solvents, BAT is to use water-based preservatives. Description Solvent-based preservatives or creosote are replaced by water-based preservatives. Water acts as the carrier for the biocides. Applicability The applicability may be restricted due to product quality requirements or specifications. BAT 32. In order to reduce the environmental risk posed by the use of treatment chemicals, BAT is to substitute treatment chemicals currently in use with less hazardous ones based on a regular (e.g. once every year) check aiming at identifying potentially new available and safer alternatives. Applicability Substitution may be restricted due to product quality requirements or specifications. 2.3. Resource efficiency BAT 33. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce the environmental impact and risk associated with the use of treatment chemicals, BAT is to reduce their consumption by using all of the techniques given below. 2.4. Delivery, storage and handling of treatment chemicals BAT 34. In order to reduce emissions from delivery, storage and handling of treatment chemicals, BAT is to use technique (a) or (b) and all of the techniques (c) to (f) given below. 2.5. Preparation/conditioning of wood BAT 35. In order to reduce the consumption of treatment chemicals and the consumption of energy and to reduce emissions of treatment chemicals, BAT is to optimise the wood charge of the vessel and to avoid trapping of treatment chemicals by using a combination of the techniques given below. 2.6. Preservative application process BAT 36. In order to prevent accidental leakage and emissions of treatment chemicals from non-pressure processes, BAT is to use one of the techniques given below. BAT 37. In order to reduce emissions of aerosols from wood and wood products preservation using water-based treatment chemicals, BAT is to enclose spraying processes, collect overspray and reuse it in the preparation of wood preservation solution. BAT 38. In order to prevent or reduce emissions of treatment chemicals from pressure processes (autoclaves), BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. BAT 39. In order to reduce energy consumption in pressure processes (autoclaves), BAT is to use variable pump control. Description After reaching the required working pressure, the treatment system is switched to a pump with reduced power and energy consumption. Applicability Applicability may be limited in the case of oscillating pressure processes. 2.7. Post-treatment conditioning and interim storage BAT 40. In order to prevent or reduce the contamination of soil or groundwater from the interim storage of freshly treated wood, BAT is to allow sufficient dripping time after treatment and to remove the treated wood from the contained/bunded area only once it is deemed dry. Description To allow the surplus treatment chemicals to drip back into the treatment vessel, treated wood/wood packs are held in the contained/bunded area (e.g. above the treatment vessel or over a dripping pad) for a sufficient time after the treatment and before transfer to the post-treatment drying area. Then, before leaving the post-treatment drying area, treated wood/wood packs are, for example, lifted by mechanical means and suspended for a minimum of 5 minutes. If no dripping of treatment solution occurs, the wood is deemed to be dry. 2.8. Waste management BAT 41. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal, especially of hazardous waste, BAT is to use the techniques (a) and (b) and one or both of the techniques (c) and (d) given below. BAT 42. In order to reduce the environmental risk related to waste management, BAT is to store waste in suitable containers or on sealed surfaces and to keep hazardous waste separately in a designated weather-protected and contained/bunded area. 2.9. Monitoring 2.9.1. Emissions to water BAT 43. BAT is to monitor pollutants in waste water and potentially contaminated surface run-off water prior to each batch discharge in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 2.9.2. Groundwater quality BAT 44. BAT is to monitor pollutants in groundwater with a frequency of at least once every 6 months and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. The monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 2 years based on a risk assessment or if pollutant levels are proven to be sufficiently stable (e.g. after a period of 4 years). 2.9.3. Emissions in waste gases BAT 45. BAT is to monitor emissions in waste gases with a frequency of at least once every year and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 2.10. Emissions to soil and groundwater BAT 46. In order to prevent or reduce emissions to soil and groundwater, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. 2.11. Emissions to water and waste water management BAT 47. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce emissions to water and to reduce water consumption, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. BAT 48. In order to reduce emissions to water from wood and wood products preservation using creosote, BAT is to collect the condensates from the depressurisation and vacuum operation of the treatment vessel and from creosote (re)conditioning and either treat them on site using an activated carbon or sand filter or dispose of them as hazardous waste. Description: Condensate volumes are collected, allowed to settle and treated in an activated carbon or sand filter. The treated water is either reused (closed circuit) or discharged to the public sewer system. Alternatively, the collected condensates may be disposed of as hazardous waste. 2.12. Emissions to air BAT 49. In order to reduce emissions of VOCs to air from wood and wood products preservation using solvent-based treatment chemicals, BAT is to enclose the emitting equipment or processes, extract the off-gases and send them to a treatment system (see techniques in BAT 51). BAT 50. In order to reduce emissions of organic compounds and odour to air from wood and wood products preservation using creosote, BAT is to use low-volatility impregnating oils, i.e. Grade C creosote instead of Grade B. Applicability Grade C creosote may not be applicable in the case of cold climatic conditions. BAT 51. In order to reduce emissions of organic compounds to air from wood and wood products preservation using creosote, BAT is to enclose emitting equipment or processes (e.g. storage and impregnation tanks, depressurisation, creosote reconditioning), extract the off-gases and use one or a combination of the treatment techniques given below. Table 36 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for TVOC and PAH emissions in waste gases from wood and wood products preservation using creosote and/or solvent-based treatment chemicals The associated monitoring is given in BAT 45. BAT 52. In order to reduce NO X emissions in waste gases while limiting CO emissions from the thermal treatment of off-gases in wood and wood products preservation using creosote and/or solvent-based treatment chemicals, BAT is to use technique (a) or both of the techniques given below. Table 37 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for NO X emissions in waste gases and indicative emission level for CO emissions in waste gases to air from the thermal treatment of off-gases in wood and wood products preservation using creosote and/or solvent-based treatment chemicals The associated monitoring is given in BAT 45. 2.13. Noise BAT 53. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce noise emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where a noise nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. ( 1 ) Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment ( OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 ). ( 2 ) Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from medium combustion plants ( OJ L 313, 28.11.2015, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations and/or due to operational conditions, a 30-minute sampling/measurement and/or an average of three consecutive measurements is inappropriate, a more representative sampling/measurement procedure may be employed. ( 4 ) The selection of the application techniques may be restricted at plants with low throughput and/or high product variety as well as by the substrate type and shape, product quality requirements and the need to ensure that the materials used, coating application techniques, drying/curing techniques and off-gas treatment systems are mutually compatible. ( 5 ) The selection of the drying/curing techniques may be restricted by the substrate type and shape, product quality requirements and the need to ensure that the materials used, coating application techniques, drying/curing techniques and off-gas treatment systems are mutually compatible. ( 6 ) To the extent possible, the measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. ( 7 ) In the case of a TVOC load of less than 0,1 kg C/h, or in the case of an unabated and stable TVOC load of less than 0,3 kg C/h, the monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 3 years or the measurement may be replaced by calculation provided that it ensures the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. ( 8 ) For the thermal treatment of off-gases, the temperature in the combustion chamber is continuously measured. This is combined with an alarm system for temperatures falling outside the optimised temperature window. ( 9 ) Generic EN standards for continuous measurements are EN15267-1, EN15267-2, EN15267-3 and EN 14181. ( 10 ) The monitoring only applies if DMF is used in the processes. ( 11 ) In the absence of an EN standard, the measurement includes the DMF contained in the condensed phase. ( 12 ) In the case of a stack with a TVOC load of less than 0,1 kg C/h, the monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 3 years. ( 13 ) The monitoring only applies in the case of direct discharge to a receiving water body. ( 14 ) The monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 3 months if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 15 ) In the case of batch discharge that is less frequent than the minimum monitoring frequency, monitoring is carried out once per batch. ( 16 ) TOC monitoring and COD monitoring are alternatives. TOC monitoring is the preferred option because it does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 17 ) Monitoring of Cr(VI) only applies if chromium(VI) compounds are used in the processes. ( 18 ) In the case of indirect discharge to a receiving water body, the monitoring frequency may be reduced if the downstream waste water treatment plant is designed and equipped appropriately to abate the pollutants concerned. ( 19 ) Monitoring of Cr only applies if chromium compounds are used in the processes. ( 20 ) Monitoring of F- only applies if fluorine compounds are used in the processes. ( 21 ) The BAT-AEL and indicative level do not apply where off-gases are sent to a combustion plant. ( 22 ) The BAT-AEL may not apply if nitrogen-containing compounds (e.g. DMF or NMP ( N -methylpyrrolidone)) are present in the off-gas. ( 23 ) The BAT-AEPL may not apply where the coil coating line is part of a larger manufacturing installation (e.g. steelworks) or for combilines. ( 24 ) The BAT-AEPL may not apply where the coil coating line is part of a larger manufacturing installation (e.g. steelworks) or for combilines. ( 25 ) The averaging period is given in the general considerations. ( 26 ) The BAT-AEL for COD may be replaced by a BAT-AEL for TOC. The correlation between COD and TOC is determined on a case-by-case basis. The BAT-AEL for TOC is the preferred option because TOC monitoring does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 27 ) The BAT-AEL only applies if fluorine compounds are used in the processes. ( 28 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be 1 mg/l in the case of zinc-containing substrates or of substrates pretreated using zinc. ( 29 ) The BAT-AEL only applies if chromium compounds are used in the processes. ( 30 ) The BAT-AEL only applies if chromium(VI) compounds are used in the processes. ( 31 ) The BAT-AELs may not apply if the downstream waste water treatment plant is designed and equipped appropriately to abate the pollutants concerned, provided this does not lead to a higher level of pollution in the environment. ( 32 ) The averaging period is given in the general considerations. ( 33 ) The BAT-AEL only applies if fluorine compounds are used in the processes. ( 34 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be 1 mg/l in the case of zinc-containing substrates or of substrates pretreated using zinc. ( 35 ) The BAT-AEL only applies if chromium compounds are used in the processes. ( 36 ) The BAT-AEL only applies if chromium(VI) compounds are used in the processes. ( 37 ) The BAT-AELs refer to emissions from all process stages, carried out at the same installation from the electrophoretic coating or any other kind of coating process up to and including the final wax and polish of the topcoat, as well as solvents used in cleaning of production equipment, both during and outside the production period. ( 38 ) The surface area is defined as set out in Part 3 of Annex VII to Directive 2010/75/EU. ( 39 ) The upper end of the range is higher if dry scrubbing with limestone is used. ( 40 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range is 35 mg C/Nm3 if techniques are used which allow the reuse/recycling of the recovered solvent. ( 41 ) For plants using BAT 16 (c) in combination with an off-gas treatment technique, an additional BAT-AEL of less than 50 mg C/Nm3 applies to the waste gas of the concentrator. ( 42 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range is 50 mg C/Nm3 if techniques are used which allow the reuse/recycling of the recovered solvent. ( 43 ) For plants using BAT 16 (c) in combination with an off-gas treatment technique, an additional BAT-AEL of less than 50 mg C/Nm3 applies to the waste gas of the concentrator. ( 44 ) This BAT-AEL may not apply to the manufacturing of plastic films used in temporary surface protection. ( 45 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range is 50 mg C/Nm3 if techniques are used which allow the reuse/recycling of the recovered solvent. ( 46 ) For plants using BAT 16 (c) in combination with an off-gas treatment technique, an additional BAT-AEL of less than 50 mg C/Nm3 applies to the waste gas of the concentrator. ( 47 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range is 50 mg C/Nm3 if techniques are used which allow the reuse/recycling of the recovered solvent. ( 48 ) For plants using BAT 16 (c) in combination with an off-gas treatment technique, an additional BAT-AEL of less than 50 mg C/Nm3 applies to the waste gas of the concentrator. ( 49 ) For plants using BAT 16 (c) in combination with an off-gas treatment technique, an additional BAT-AEL of less than 50 mg C/Nm3 applies to the waste gas of the concentrator. ( 50 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range is related to the production of high-quality products. ( 51 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range is related to the production of high-quality products. ( 52 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range is 50 mg C/Nm3 if techniques are used which allow the reuse/recycling of the recovered solvent. ( 53 ) For plants using BAT 16 (c) in combination with an off-gas treatment technique, an additional BAT-AEL of less than 50 mg C/Nm3 applies to the waste gas of the concentrator. ( 54 ) For plants using BAT 16 (c) in combination with an off-gas treatment technique, an additional BAT-AEL of less than 50 mg C/Nm3 applies to the waste gas of the concentrator. ( 55 ) Specific substances are monitored, depending on the composition of the biocidal products in use in the process. ( 56 ) The monitoring only applies if copper compounds are used in the process. ( 57 ) The monitoring only applies to plants using solvent-based treatment chemicals. Specific substances are monitored, depending on the solvents in use in the process. ( 58 ) The monitoring only applies to plants using creosote treatment. ( 59 ) The monitoring may not apply if the substance concerned is not used in the process and if the groundwater is proven not to be contaminated with this substance. ( 60 ) Specific substances are monitored, depending on the composition of biocidal products which are used or were previously used in the process. ( 61 ) The monitoring only applies to plants using solvent-based treatment chemicals. Specific substances are monitored, depending on the solvents in use in the process. ( 62 ) To the extent possible, the measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. ( 63 ) This includes: acenaphthene, acenaphthylene, anthracene, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(g,h,i)perylene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, chrysene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene, fluoranthene, fluorene, indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, naphthalene, phenanthrene and pyrene. ( 64 ) The monitoring only applies to emissions from the thermal treatment of off-gases. ( 65 ) The BAT-AEL refers to the sum of the following PAH compounds: acenaphthene, acenaphthylene, anthracene, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(g,h,i)perylene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, chrysene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene, fluoranthene, fluorene, indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, naphthalene, phenanthrene and pyrene. ( 66 ) The BAT-AEL and indicative level do not apply where off-gases are sent to a combustion plant.