COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2017/176 of 25 January 2017 on establishing EU Ecolabel criteria for wood-, cork- and bamboo-based floor coverings (notified under document C(2017) 303) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the EU Ecolabel ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 8(2) thereof, After consulting the European Union Ecolabelling Board, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The product group of ‘wood-, cork- and bamboo-based floor coverings’ shall comprise indoor floor coverings, including wood floorings, laminate floorings, cork floor coverings and bamboo floorings which are made, for more than 80 % by weight of the final product, from wood, wood-based, cork, cork-based, bamboo and bamboo-based materials or fibres, not containing synthetic fibres in any of the composing layers. It shall not comprise wall coverings, coverings for external use, coverings with a structural function or levelling compounds. Article 2 For the purpose of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 In order to be awarded the EU Ecolabel under Regulation (EC) No 66/2010, a product shall fall within the product group ‘wood-, cork- and bamboo-based floor coverings’ as defined in Article 1 of this Decision and shall comply with the EU Ecolabel criteria as well as the related assessment and verification requirements set out in the Annex to this Decision. Article 4 The EU Ecolabel criteria for the product group ‘wood-, cork- and bamboo-based floor coverings’ and the related assessment and verification requirements shall be valid for six years from the date of notification of this Decision. Article 5 For administrative purposes, the code number assigned to the product group ‘wood-, cork- and bamboo- based floor coverings’ shall be ‘035’. Article 6 Decision 2010/18/EC is repealed. Article 7 By derogation from Article 6, applications for the EU Ecolabel for products falling within the product group ‘wooden floor coverings’ submitted within two months from the date of notification of this Decision may be submitted in accordance with the criteria set out in Decision 2010/18/EC or on the criteria set out in this Decision. EU Ecolabel licences awarded in accordance with the criteria set out in Decision 2010/18/EC may be used for 12 months from the date of notification of this Decision. Article 8 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 25 January 2017. For the Commission Karmenu VELLA Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 27, 30.1.2010, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision 2010/18/EC of 26 November 2009 on establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the Community Ecolabel for wooden floor coverings ( OJ L 8, 13.1.2010, p. 32 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2004/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of organic solvents in certain paints and varnishes and vehicle refinishing products and amending Directive 1999/13/EC ( OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 87 ). ( 4 ) ( 5 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC ( OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 16 ). FRAMEWORK EU ECOLABEL CRITERIA Criteria for awarding the EU Ecolabel to wood-, cork- and bamboo- based floor covering products: ASSESSMENT AND VERIFICATION The specific assessment and verification requirements are indicated within each criterion. Where the applicant is required to provide declarations, documentation, analyses, test reports, or other evidence to show compliance with the criteria, these may originate from the applicant or its supplier(s), etc., as appropriate. Competent bodies shall preferentially recognise attestations which are issued by bodies accredited according to the relevant harmonised standard for testing and calibration laboratories and verifications by bodies that are accredited according to the relevant harmonised standard for bodies certifying products, processes and services. Accreditation shall be carried out according to the provisions of the Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) . Where appropriate, test methods other than those indicated for each criterion may be used if the competent body assessing the application accepts their equivalence. Where appropriate, competent bodies may require supporting documentation and may carry out independent verifications or site visits. As pre-requisite, the product shall meet all applicable legal requirements of the country or countries in which the product is intended to be placed on the market. The applicant shall declare the product's compliance with this requirement. If a supplier prefers not to disclose the substances constituting a mixture to the applicant, that information can be sent directly to the competent body by the supplier. Criterion 1. Product description A technical description of the floor covering including drawings that illustrate the parts or materials that form the final floor covering product, its dimensions and a description of the manufacturing process shall be provided to the competent body. That description shall be accompanied by the bill of materials for the product that shall state the total weight of the product and how this is split between the different materials used. Compliance with the scope of the product group as defined in Article 1 shall be demonstrated. Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance, supported by the following information about the floor covering: The product data sheet, environmental product declaration or equivalent document can be accepted as evidence of compliance with this criterion provided that it includes the listed information. Criterion 2. Wood-, cork- and bamboo-based materials This requirement is applied to wood, wood-based, cork, cork-based, bamboo, bamboo-based materials weighing more than 1 % of the finished product. All wood, wood-based, cork, cork-based, bamboo, bamboo-based materials shall not originate from genetically modified organisms (GMO) and be covered by chain of custody certificates issued by an independent third party certification scheme such as the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), the Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC) or equivalent. All virgin wood, cork and bamboo shall be covered by valid sustainable forest management certificates issued by an independent third party certification scheme such as FSC, PEFC or equivalent. Where a certification scheme allows the mixing of uncertified material with certified and/or recycled materials in a product or production line, a minimum of 70 % of the wood, cork and/or bamboo shall be sustainable certified virgin materials and/or recycled material. Uncertified material shall be covered by a verification system which ensures that it is legally sourced and meets any other requirement of the certification scheme with respect to uncertified material. The certification bodies issuing forest and/or chain of custody certificates shall be accredited or recognised by that certification scheme. Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance supported by a valid, independently certified chain of custody certificate of the manufacturer for all wood, wood-based, cork, cork-based, bamboo, bamboo-based material used in the product or production line and demonstrate that no virgin material is sourced from GMO. The applicant shall provide audited accounting documents that demonstrate that at least 70 % of the materials originate from forests or areas managed according to Sustainable Forestry Management principles and/or from recycled sources that meet the requirements set out by the relevant independent chain of custody scheme. FSC, PEFC or equivalent schemes shall be accepted as independent third party certification. If the product or production line includes uncertified material, proof shall be provided that the content of uncertified virgin material does not exceed 30 % and is covered by a verification system which ensures that it is legally sourced and meets any other requirement of the certification scheme with respect to uncertified material. Criterion 3. General requirements for hazardous substances and mixtures The presence in the product and any component parts thereof, of substances that have been identified according to Article 59(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 as substances of very high concern (SVHCs) or substances or mixtures that meet the criteria for classification, labelling and packaging (CLP) according to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 4 ) for the hazards listed in Table 3.1 of this Decision, shall be restricted in accordance with points 3.a and 3.b. For the purpose of this criterion, Candidate List SVHCs and CLP hazard classifications are grouped in Table 3.1 according to their hazardous properties. Table 3.1. Grouping of restricted hazards Group 1 Hazards — SVHC and CLP Hazards that identify a substance as being within Group 1: Group 2 Hazards — CLP Hazards that identify a substance as being within Group 2: Group 3 Hazards — CLP Hazards that identify a substance as being within Group 3: 3.a. Restriction of SVHCs The product and any component parts thereof shall not contain SVHCs at concentrations greater than 0,10 % (weight by weight). No derogation from this requirement shall be given to Candidate List SVHCs present in the product or any component parts thereof at concentrations greater than 0,10 % (weight by weight). Assessment and verification The applicant shall compile declarations of absence of SVHCs above the specified concentration limit for the product and any component parts used in the product. Declarations shall be with reference to the latest version of the Candidate List published by ECHA ( 5 ) . 3.b. Restriction of CLP classified substances or mixtures used in the floor covering Substances or mixtures used by the floor covering manufacturer or his suppliers during the preparation of raw materials, manufacturing, assembly or any other treatment of the floor covering shall not be classified with any of the CLP hazards listed in Table 3.1. Restricted substances or mixtures shall include adhesives, paints, primers, varnishes, stains, resins, biocidal products, fillers, waxes, oils, joint fillers, dyes and sealants. However, the use of such restricted substances shall be permitted if at least one of the following conditions applies: Assessment and verification The applicant and/or its suppliers shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with criterion 3.b. supported, where appropriate, by a list of relevant substances or mixtures used together with declarations about their hazard classification or non-classification, their added quantities and if appropriate, statements whether the substances or mixtures change their properties upon processing so that the restricted CLP hazards no longer apply. If so, the quantities of any unreacted residual content of the restricted substance shall be provided. The following information shall be provided in relation to the hazard classification or non-classification for each of the substances: When considering self-classification entries in the REACH registered substance database, priority shall be given to entries from joint submissions. Where a classification is recorded as ‘data-lacking’ or ‘inconclusive’ according to the REACH registered substance database, or when the substance has not yet been registered under the REACH system, toxicological data meeting the requirements of Annex VII to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 shall be provided that are sufficient to support conclusive self-classification in accordance with Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 and ECHA's supporting guidance. In the case of ‘data lacking’ or ‘inconclusive’ database entries, self-classifications shall be verified. For that purpose, the following information sources shall be accepted: Information on the hazardous properties of substances may, in accordance with Annex XI to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, be generated by means other than tests, for instance through the use of alternative methods such as in vitro methods, by quantitative structure activity models or by the use of grouping or read-across. Criterion 4. Specific substance requirements 4.a. Contaminants in recycled wood, cork and bamboo Any recycled fibres or chips used in the manufacture of the final floor covering product shall be tested in accordance with the European Panel Federation (EPF) standard for delivery conditions of recycled wood ( 10 ) or with another equivalent standard that has equal or stricter limits, and shall comply with the limits for contaminants as listed in Table 4.1. Table 4.1. Limits for contaminants in recycled wood, cork, bamboo and their fibres or chips (mg/kg dry recycled material) Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body: 4.b. Biocidal products The treatment of wood, cork and/or bamboo of the floor coverings with biocidal products shall not be permitted. The following active substances shall not be permitted for in-can preservation of water-based mixtures such as adhesives or lacquers: Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of non-use of biocidal products or, if applicable, a declaration supported by an SDS from the water-based mixtures' suppliers stating what active substances have been used as in-can preservatives for the water-based mixtures. 4.c. Heavy metals in paints, primers and varnishes Any paints, primers or varnishes used on wood, wood-based, cork, cork-based, bamboo or bamboo-based materials shall not contain substances based on the following metals: cadmium, lead, chromium VI, mercury, arsenic or selenium at concentrations exceeding 0,010 % (weight by weight) for each individual metal in the in-can paint, primer or varnish formulation. Assessment and verification The applicant or his supplier, as appropriate, shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with this criterion and provide the respective SDS from the suppliers of the paints, primers and varnished used. 4.d. VOC content in surface treatment Surface treatment products used on wood, wood-based, cork, cork-based, bamboo or bamboo-based materials shall have either of the following: The criterion relates to the total VOC in the surface treatment products with the chemical composition they have in wet form. If the products require dilution before use, the calculation is to be based on the content in the diluted product. For the purpose of this criterion, VOC means volatile organic compound as defined in Article 2(5) of Directive 2004/42/EC. This criterion does not apply to mixtures used for repairing (e.g. knots, checks, dents, etc.) during the manufacturing process. Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with this criterion supported by the SDS of any surface treatment substances or mixtures used on wood, wood-based, cork, cork-based, bamboo or/and bamboo-based materials. If the SDS states that the VOC content of the surface treatment substances or mixtures used is less than or equal to 5 % weight by weight, no further verification shall be necessary. Should the VOC content information not be included in the SDS, the VOC content shall be calculated from the list of substances in the surface treatment mixture. The concentration of each VOC ingredient shall be stated as a percentage by weight. Alternatively, if the VOC content is higher than 5 % weight by weight, the applicant shall provide a calculation demonstrating that the effective quantity of VOC applied per m 2 of the treated surface area of the floor covering is less than 10 g/m 2 , in accordance with the guidance provided in Appendix I. 4.e. VOCs content in other used substances and mixtures VOC content shall be less than: Free-formaldehyde of liquid aminoplast resins used in the manufacturing of the floor coverings shall be less than 0,2 % weight by weight. The criterion relates to the total VOC in the substances with the chemical composition they have in wet form. If the mixtures require dilution prior to use, the calculation is to be based on the content in the diluted product. For the purpose of this criterion, VOC means volatile organic compound as defined in Article 2(5) of Directive 2004/42/EC. This criterion does not apply to mixtures used for repairing (e.g. knots, checks, dents, etc.) during the manufacturing process. Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with the criterion supported by the SDS of any in-can adhesive, resin or other substances used or equivalent documentation that supports the declaration of compliance, together with a complete recipe with designation of quantities and CAS numbers. If the SDS states that the VOC content is less than 3 % weight by weight of the in-can adhesive and resin used or less than 1 % weight by weight of other substances used, no further verification shall be necessary. Should the VOC content information not be included in the SDS, the VOC content shall be calculated from the list of substances. The concentration of each VOC ingredient shall be stated as a percentage by weight. The applicant shall provide test reports demonstrating that the free-formaldehyde content in the liquid aminoplast resins is less than 0,2 % weight by weight in accordance with standard EN1243. 4.f. Plasticisers Any adhesive, resin or surface treatment substance or mixture shall not contain any phthalate plasticisers that are referred to in Article 57 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. The non-presence of these phthalates shall be considered as the total sum of the listed phthalates amounting to less than 0,10 % of the adhesive, resin or surface treatment substance or mixture weight (1 000 mg/kg). Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body either: 4.g. Halogenated organic compounds Halogenated organic compounds shall not be permitted in the substances used in the manufacture of floor coverings (e.g. as binders, adhesives, coatings, etc.). Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance supported by a declaration of non-use of halogenated organic compounds from the manufacturer of the substances. In addition, the respective SDS of the substances shall be provided. 4.h. Flame retardants Flame retardants shall not be permitted in the substances used in the manufacture of floor coverings. Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance supported by a declaration of non-use of flame retardants from the manufacturer of the substances. In addition, the respective SDS of the substances shall be provided. 4.i. Aziridine and polyaziridine Aziridine and polyaziridine shall not be permitted in the substances used in the manufacture of floor coverings (e.g. as surface treatment, coatings, etc.). Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance supported by a declaration of non-use of aziridine and polyaziridine from the manufacturer of the substances. In addition, the respective SDS of the substances shall be provided. Criterion 5. Energy consumption in the production process The average annual energy consumed during the production of the floor coverings shall be calculated as indicated in Table 5.1 and Appendix II and shall exceed the following limits (E score): Table 5.1. Calculation of the E score The following is an indicative list of activities that shall be included and not included in the calculations of the energy consumption. Activities shall start at the reception of the fells (tree trunks), cork and bamboo in the manufacturer's or his suppliers facilities until the end of the manufacturing process. Assessment and verification The applicant shall state and demonstrate: The documents used to communicate the energy consumption, fuel purchase and energy generation as well as the documents to communicate flooring production to the national authorities may be used to demonstrate compliance with this criterion. Criterion 6. Emissions of VOC from the floor coverings The floor coverings shall not exceed the emission values listed in Table 6.1 measured in a test chamber in accordance with testing standard CEN/TS16516. Packaging and delivery of samples sent for testing, their handling and conditioning shall follow the procedures described in CEN/TS 16516. Table 6.1. Emission requirements For the purpose of this criterion, VOC means all volatile organic compounds eluting between and including n-hexane and n-hexadecane on a gas chromatographic column and having a boiling point in the range of approximately 68 °C and 287 °C, where the measurement has been carried out using a capillary column coated with 5 % phenyl-polysiloxane and 95 % methyl-polysiloxane. Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance supported by the test reports from chamber tests carried out in accordance with CEN/TS16516 or an equivalent method showing that the limits in the Table 6.1 have been met. Test reports shall include: If the chamber concentration limits specified at 28 days can be met 3 days after placing the sample in the chamber, or any other time period between 3 and 27 days after placing the sample in the chamber, then the compliance with the requirements may be declared and the test may be stopped prematurely. Test data from up to 12 months prior to the EU Ecolabel application shall be valid for products as long as no changes to the manufacturing process or chemical formulations used have been made that would be considered to increase VOC emissions from the final product. A valid certificate from relevant indoor climate labels may also be used as proof of compliance if the indoor climate label fulfils the requirements of this criterion, and if it is judged by the competent body to be equivalent. Criterion 7. Emissions of formaldehyde from the floor coverings and the core board The floor covering manufactured by using formaldehyde-based core boards, adhesives, resins or finishing agents and if used, the untreated core boards manufactured by using formaldehyde-based adhesives or resins shall have either of the following: Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with this criterion. The assessment and verification of low formaldehyde emission floor coverings and core boards shall vary depending on the certification scheme it falls under. The verification documentation required for each scheme is described in Table 7.1. Table 7.1. Verification documentation of low formaldehyde emission floor coverings Criterion 8. Fitness for use Only the requirements associated with the specific type of flooring have to be fulfilled. The floor coverings shall be tested and classified in accordance with the latest versions of the standards and indications included in Table 8.1. Table 8.1. Standards for testing and classifying the floor coverings Floor coverings shall achieve at least: Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with the criterion. The declaration shall be supported by test reports that shall include: If the floor covering has been tested according to a test method other than what is specified above, this may be acceptable if the test methods are comparable in the opinion of the competent body. Criterion 9. Reparability and extended guarantee Only the requirements associated with the specific type of flooring have to be fulfilled. For the purpose of undertaking repair and replacement of worn out parts, the floor covering shall meet the following requirements: Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance supported by: Criterion 10. Consumer information The product shall be sold with the relevant consumer information on the packaging or any other documentation accompanying the product. Only the requirements associated with the specific type of flooring have to be fulfilled. Instructions related to the following aspects shall be legible and be provided in the language of the country where the product is placed on the market and/or include graphical representation or icons: A detailed description of the best ways to dispose of the product (i.e. reuse, recycling, energy recovery, etc.) shall be given to the consumer, ranking them according to the impact on the environment. Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with the criterion supported by a copy of the consumer information document that is to be provided with the product. The copy shall show compliance with each of the points listed in the criterion, as appropriate. Criterion 11. Information appearing on the EU Ecolabel The logo shall be visible and legible. The EU Ecolabel registration/licence number shall appear on the product and shall be legible and clearly visible. The optional label with text box shall contain the following text: Assessment and verification The applicant shall provide to the competent body a declaration of compliance with the criterion supported by a copy of the information appearing on the EU Ecolabel. ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 ( OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30 ). ( 2 ) Trade name means all names under which the substance is marketed within the Union market. ( 3 ) Component part means each of the layers the floor coverings consist of whose material, shape and form provide a specific function. It includes, for example, the wear or scratch resistant layer, the pattern or veneer layer, the substrate or stability layer and the backing layer. ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) ECHA, Candidate List of substances of very high concern for Authorisation, ( 6 ) CAS registry: ( 7 ) EC inventory: ( 8 ) ECHA, REACH registered substances database: ( 9 ) ECHA, Cooperation with peer regulatory agencies, ( 10 ) ‘EPF Standard for delivery conditions of recycled wood’, October 2002 at: ( d ) The chamber test has to be carried out 28 days after the conclusion of the surface treatment. Up to this point in time the product to be tested is stored in a sealed package at the production site and thus delivered to the test laboratory. ( 11 ) The requirements apply to floor coverings with a moisture content of H = 6,5 %. ( 12 ) Regulation 93120 ‘Airborne toxic control measure to reduce formaldehyde emissions from composite wood products’ California Code of Regulations. ( 13 ) Wood veneer floor covering means rigid floor covering consisting of a substrate made from a wood-based panel, with a top layer of wood veneer and possibly a backing. ( 14 ) For the purposes of compliance, measurements and calculations shall be made using reliable, accurate and reproducible methods that take into account the generally recognised state of the art measurement and calculation methods, including harmonised standards that have their reference published in the Official Journal of the European Union . They shall meet the technical definitions, conditions and parameters as described in the Criteria User Manual. ( 1 ) The test method used to measure the abrasion resistance shall be declared as well as the thickness of the top layer, if appropriate. ( 2 ) Classification of wood species regarding the wood hardness and correlations between the use classes in the EN 685 and the thickness of the wear top layer and the species of wood can be found in CTBA Revetments interiors Parquet 71.01. APPENDIX I Guidance on the calculation of the quantity of VOC applied The requirement relates to the total VOC in the surface treatment products with the chemical composition they have in the wet form. If the products required dilutions, the calculation is to be based on the content in the diluted product. This method is based on the application method that calculates the quantities applied per m 2 surface area. It determines the content of the organic solvents as a percentage of quantity of the surface treatment applied. The applied quantity of VOC is calculated using the following formula The formula consists in: Table 4.2. Efficiency of the surface treatments APPENDIX II Guidance for calculating the energy consumption in the production process Energy consumption per flooring m 2 is calculated as an annual arithmetic average of the last three years. Should the company not have these data, the competent bodies will assess the acceptance of equivalent data. If the producer has an energy surplus that is sold as electricity, steam or heat, the sold quantity can be deducted from the fuel consumption. Only fuel that is actually consumed in the manufacture of the floor covering is to be included in the calculation. Energy consumption is reported in kWh/m 2 , although calculations may also be made in MJ/m 2 (1 kWh = 3,6 MJ). The energy content of the fuels is calculated based on Table 5.2. If electrical energy is produced on-site, one of the following methods can be used for calculating fuel consumption: Values of the energy consumption shall be calculated by means of the standard fuel values. The energy contents of various fuels are given in Table 5.2. Table 5.2. Standard fuel values ( 1 ) The formula for calculating the energy content of woodchips depends on the water content. Energy is required to evaporate the water in the wood. This energy reduces the heat value of the woodchips. The energy content can be calculated as: The factor 21,442 is the sum of water's heat of evaporation (2,442 MJ/kg) and the energy content of dry wood 19,0 MJ/kg. If the applicant has laboratory analyses of the heat value of a fuel, the competent bodies may consider using this heat value for calculating the energy content. ( 1 ) The values are laid down in Annex IV to Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC ( OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p. 1 ). APPENDIX III List of standards and other technical specifications Table III.1. List of standards and other technical specifications