COUNCIL AND COMMISSION DECISION of 23 September 1997 on the conclusion, by the European Communities, of the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects ( 1 ) (98/181/EC, ECSC, Euratom) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, THE COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community and, in particular, Article 95 thereof, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community and, in particular, Article 54(2), the last sentence of Article 57(2), Articles 66, 73c(2), 87, 99, 100a, 113, 130s(l) and 235, in conjunction with the second sentence of Article 228(2) and the second subparagraph of Article 228(3) thereof, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community and, in particular, the second paragraph of Article 101 thereof, Having regard to the opinion of the Consultative Committee set up by the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the unanimous assent of the Council pursuant to Article 95 of the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community, Having regard to the assent of the European Parliament ( 2 ) , Having regard to the approval given by the Council pursuant to Article 101 of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, Whereas the European Energy Charter was signed by the European Communities and by their Member States on 17 December 1991; Whereas, on 17 December 1994, the European Communities and their Member States signed the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects in order to provide a secure and binding international legal framework for the principles and objectives set out in that Charter; Whereas the European Communities and their Member States have been applying the Energy Charter Treaty provisionally by virtue of Council Decisions 94/998/EC ( 3 ) and 94/1067/Euratom ( 4 ) since the date of signature thereof; Whereas the principles and objectives of the Energy Charter Treaty are of fundamental importance to Europe's future, allowing the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to develop their energy potential, while helping to improve security of supply; Whereas the principles and objectives of the Energy Charter Protocol will help to provide greater protection for the environment, notably by promoting energy efficiency; Whereas it is necessary to consolidate the initiative and the central role of the European Communities, by enabling the latter to participate fully in the implementation of the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol; Whereas conclusion of the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol will help attain the objectives of the European Communities; Whereas Article 73c(2) of the Treaty establishing the European Community must be used as a legal basis for this Decision, since the Energy Charter Treaty imposes certain obligations on the European Communities regarding the movement of capital and payments between the Communities and third country contracting parties to the Energy Charter Treaty; Whereas the Energy Charter Treaty could affect legislative acts based on Article 235 of the Treaty establishing the European Community; whereas the latter Treaty has provided no powers other than those arising from Article 235 for implementation of the obligations imposed by that Treaty with regard to cooperation in the energy field; Whereas the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol must be approved by the European Communities; Whereas, in order to ensure uniform external representation of the European Communities, both in the conclusion procedure and in implementing the commitments entered into by the European Communities and the Member States, appropriate coordination procedures should be established; whereas, to this end, provision should be made for this Decision to be deposited with the Government of the Portuguese Republic at the same time as the instruments of ratification of the Member States; whereas, for the same reason, the position to be adopted by the European Communities and the Member States must be coordinated with regard to the decisions to be taken by the Energy Charter Conference set up by the Energy Charter Treaty in the fields for which they share responsibility; Whereas the Energy Charter Conference has autonomous decision-making powers; whereas, consequently, appropriate procedures must be provided for establishing the European Communities' position within the Energy Charter Conference; Whereas these procedures should be of a simplified nature, in order to allow for an effective participation of the European Communities in the said Conference; Whereas, with regard to decisions of the aforementioned Conference requiring the adoption or modification of Community legislation, the Council and the Commission shall act in accordance with the rules laid down in Article 228(1) and (2) of the Treaty establishing the European Community; Whereas, where the decisions to be taken by the Energy Charter Conference concern areas of mixed competence, the European Communities and the Member States are to cooperate with a view to achieving a common position, in accordance with the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice of the European Communities, HAVE DECIDED AS FOLLOWS: Article 1 The Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Energy Charter Protocol’) are hereby approved on behalf of the European Coal and Steel Community, the European Community and the European Atomic Energy Community. The texts of the Energy Charter Treaty and of the Energy Charter Protocol are attached to this Decision. Article 2 The President of the Council shall, on behalf of the European Community, deposit the instrument of approval of the Energy Charter Treaty and of the Energy Charter Protocol with the Government of the Portuguese Republic, in accordance with Articles 39 and 49 of the Energy Charter Treaty and with Articles 15 and 21 of the Energy Charter Protocol. Under the same conditions, the President of the Commission shall deposit the instruments of approval on behalf of the European Coal and Steel Community and of the European Atomic Energy Community. The President of the Council and the President of the Commission, acting on behalf of the European Community, the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community respectively, shall consult with the Member States in order to ensure, as far as possible, the simultaneous deposit of their instruments of approval. Article 3 1. The position which the European Community may be required to take within the Energy Charter Conference, set up by the Energy Charter Treaty, with regard to decisions of that Conference requiring the introduction or modification of Community legislation shall, subject to paragraph 3, be adopted by the Council, acting in accordance with the relevant rules of the Treaty establishing the European Community. The Council shall act by qualified majority. However, the Council shall act by unanimity if the decision to be taken by the said Conference covers a field for which unanimity would be required for the adoption of internal Community rules. 2. In other cases, the position to be taken by the European Community shall be adopted by the Council. 3. For matters falling within paragraph 1, the Council and the Commission shall fully inform the European Parliament on a regular basis and shall give the European Parliament the opportunity to express its views on the position of the Community to be taken in the Conference referred to in paragraph 1. In the case of decisions of the said Conference pursuant to Article 34(7) of the Energy Charter Treaty, the Council shall consult, or obtain the assent of, the European Parliament before taking its decision, under the conditions laid down in Article 228(3) of the Treaty establishing the European Community. 4. The position to be taken in the name of the European Coal and Steel Community shall be adopted by the Commission with the approval of the Council, acting by qualified majority or unanimity according to the subject matter. 5. The position to be taken in the name of the European Atomic Energy Community shall be adopted by the Commission with the approval of the Council acting by a qualified majority. Article 4 This Decision shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities . Done at Brussels, 23 September 1997. For the Council The President H. WIJERS For the Commission The President J. SANTER ( 1 ) The Decision on the conclusion of the Energy Charter Treaty on behalf of the European Community was adopted by the Council on 27 May 1997. ( 2 ) OJ C 85, 17.3.1997 . ( 3 ) OJ L 380, 31.12.1994, p. 1 . ( 4 ) OJ L 380, 31.12.1994, p. 113 . FINAL ACT OF THE EUROPEAN ENERGY CHARTER CONFERENCE BACKGROUND THE ENERGY CHARTER TREATY UNDERSTANDINGS DECLARATIONS THE ENERGY CHARTER PROTOCOL ON ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RELATED ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS THE EUROPEAN ENERGY CHARTER DOCUMENTATION Done at Lisbon on the seventeenth day of December in the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-four. Fait à Lisbonne, le dix-sept décembre mil neuf cent quatre-vingt-quatorze. Geschehen zu Lissabon am siebzehnten Dezember neunzehnhundertvierundneunzig. Fatto a Lisbona il diciassettesimo giorno del mese di dicembre dell'anno millenovecentonovanta-quattro. Hecho en Lisboa, el diecisiete de diciembre de mil novecientos noventa y cuatro. Udfærdiget i Lissabon, den syttende december nittenhundrede og fireoghalvfems. Έγινε στη Λισαβόνα, στις δέκα επτά Δεκεμβρίου του έτους χίλια ενιακόσια ενενήντα τέσσερα. Gedaan te Lissabon, de zeventiende december negentienhonderd vierennegentig. Feito em Lisboa, aos dezassete de Dezembro de mil novecentos e noventa e quatro. Tehty Lissabonissa seitsemäntenätoista päivänä joulukuuta tuhatyhdeksänsataayhdeksänkym-mentäneljä. Som skedde i Lissabon den sjuttonde december nittonhundranittiofyra. Për Republikën e Shqipërisë For Australia Für die Republik Österreich Pour le royaume de Belgique Voor het Koninkrijk België Für das Königreich Belgien Cette signature engage également la Communauté française de Belgique, la Communauté flamande, la Communauté germanophone de Belgique, la Région wallonne, la Région flamande et la région de Bruxelles-Capitale. Deze handtekening bindt eveneens de Vlaamse Gemeenschap, de Franse Gemeenschap van België, de Duitstalige Gemeenschap van België, het Waals Gewest en het Brussels Hoofdstedelijk Gewest. Diese Unterschrift bindet ebenso die Flämische Gemeinschaft, die Französische Gemeinschaft Belgiens, die Deutschsprachige Gemeinschaft Belgiens, die Flämische Region, die Wallonische Region und die Region Brüssel-Hauptstadt. For Canada Pour le Canada za Republiku Hrvatsku For the Republic of Cyprus Za Českou Republiku For Kongeriget Danmark Eesti Vabariigi nimel Por las Comunidades Europeas For De Europæiske Fællesskaber Für die Europäischen Gemeinschaften Για τις Ευρωπαϊκές Κοινότητες For the European Communities Pour les Communautés européennes Per le Comunità europee Voor de Europese Gemeenschappen Pelas Comunidades Europeias Euroopan yhteisöjen puolesta På Europeiska gemenskapernas vägnar Suomen tasavallan puolesta Pour la République française Für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland Για την Ελληνική Δημοκρατία A Magyar Köztársaság nevében Fyrir hönd Lyðveldisins islands Thar cheann na hÉireann For Ireland Per la Repubblica italiana Latvijas Republikas varda Für das Fürstentum Liechtenstein Lietuvos Respublikos vardu Pour le grand-duché de Luxembourg For the Republic of Malta Pentru Republica Moldova Voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden For Kongeriket Norge Za Rzeczpospolita Polską Pela República Portuguesa Pentru Rômania Za Slovenskú republiku Za Republiko Slovenijo Por el Reino de España För Konungariket Sverige Für die Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft Pour la Confédération suisse Per la Confederazione svizzera Türkiye Cumhuriyeti adina For the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland For the United States of America ANNEX 1 THE ENERGY CHARTER TREATY Preamble THE CONTRACTING PARTIES TO THIS TREATY, Having regard to the Charter of Paris for a New Europe signed on 21 November 1990, Having regard to the European Energy Charter adopted in the Concluding Document of the Hague Conference on the European Energy Charter signed at The Hague on 17 December 1991, Recalling that all signatories to the Concluding Document of the Hague Conference undertook to pursue the objectives and principles of the European Energy Charter and implement and broaden their cooperation as soon as possible by negotiating in good faith an Energy Charter Treaty and Protocols, and desiring to place the commitments contained in that Charter on a secure and binding international legal basis; Desiring also to establish the structural framework required to implement the principles enunciated in the European Energy Charter; Wishing to implement the basic concept of the European Energy Charter initiative which is to catalyse economic growth by means of measures to liberalize investment and trade in energy; Affirming that Contracting Parties attach the utmost importance to the effective implementation of full national treatment and most favoured nation treatment, and that these commitments will be applied to the making of investments pursuant to a supplementary treaty, Having regard to the objective of progressive liberalization of international trade and to the principle of avoidance of discrimination in international trade as enunciated in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and its Related Instruments and as otherwise provided for in this Treaty; Determined progressively to remove technical, administrative and other barriers to trade in energy materials and products and related equipment, technologies and services; Looking to the eventual membership in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of those Contracting Parties which are not currently parties thereto and concerned to provide interim trade arrangements which will assist those Contracting Parties and not impede their preparation for such membership; Mindful of the rights and obligations of certain Contracting Parties which are also parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and its Related Instruments; Having regard to competition rules concerning mergers, monopolies, anti-competitive practices and abuse of dominant position, Having regard also to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Nuclear Suppliers Guidelines and other international nuclear non-proliferation obligations or understandings, Recognizing the necessity for the most efficient exploration, production, conversion, storage, transport, distribution and use of energy; Recalling the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution and its protocols, and other international environmental agreements with energy-related aspects; and Recognizing the increasingly urgent need for measures to protect the environment, including the decommissioning of energy installations and waste disposal, and for internationally-agreed objectives and criteria for these purposes, HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: PART I DEFINITIONS AND PURPOSE Article 1 Definitions As used in this Treaty: Article 2 Purpose of the Treaty This Treaty establishes a legal framework in order to promote long-term cooperation in the energy field, based on complementarities and mutual benefits, in accordance with the objectives and principles of the Charter. PART II COMMERCE Article 3 International markets The Contracting Parties shall work to promote access to international markets on commercial terms, and generally to develop an open and competitive market, for energy materials and products. Article 4 Non-derogation from GATT and Related Instruments Nothing in this Treaty shall derogate, as between particular Contracting Parties which are parties to the GATT, from the provisions of the GATT and Related Instruments as they are applied between those Contracting Parties. Article 5 Trade-related investment measures 1. A Contracting Party shall not apply any trade-related investment measure that is inconsistent with the provisions of Article III or XI of the GATT; this shall be without prejudice to the Contracting Party's rights and obligations under the GATT and Related Instruments and Article 29. 2. Such measures include any investment measure which is mandatory or enforceable under domestic law or under any administrative ruling, or compliance with which is necessary to obtain an advantage, and which requires: 3. Nothing in paragraph 1 shall be construed to prevent a Contracting Party from applying the trade-related investment measures described in subparagraphs 2 (a) and (c) as a condition of eligibility for export promotion, foreign aid, government procurement or preferential tariff or quota programmes. 4. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Contracting Party may temporarily continue to maintain trade-related investment measures which were in effect more than 180 days before its signature of this Treaty, subject to the notification and phase-out provisions set out in Annex TRM. Article 6 Competition 1. Each Contracting Party shall work to alleviate market distortions and barriers to competition in economic activity in the energy sector. 2. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that within its jurisdiction it has and enforces such laws as are necessary and appropriate to address unilateral and concerted anti-competitive conduct in economic activity in the energy sector. 3. Contracting Parties with experience in applying competition rules shall give full consideration to providing, upon request and within available resources, technical assistance on the development and implementation of competition rules to other Contracting Parties. 4. Contracting Parties may cooperate in the enforcement of their competition rules by consulting and exchanging information. 5. If a Contracting Party considers that any specified anti-competitive conduct carried out within the area of another Contracting Party is adversely affecting an important interest relevant to the purposes identified in this Article, the Contracting Party may notify the other Contracting Party and may request that its competition authorities initiate appropriate enforcement action. The notifying Contracting Party shall include in such notification sufficient information to permit the notified Contracting Party to identify the anti-competitive conduct that is the subject of the notification and shall include an offer of such further information and cooperation as the notifying Contracting Party is able to provide. The notified Contracting Party or, as the case may be, the relevant competition authorities may consult with the competition authorities of the notifying Contracting Party and shall accord full consideration to the request of the notifying Contracting Party in deciding whether or not to initiate enforcement action with respect to the alleged anti-competitive conduct identified in the notification. The notified Contracting Party shall inform the notifying Contracting Party of its decision or the decision of the relevant competition authorities and may if it wishes inform the notifying Contracting Party of the grounds for the decision. If enforcement action is initiated, the notified Contracting Party shall advise the notifying Contracting Party of its outcome and, to the extent possible, of any significant interim development. 6. Nothing in this Article shall require the provision of information by a Contracting Party contrary to its laws regarding disclosure of information, confidentiality or business secrecy. 7. The procedures set forth in paragraph 5 and Article 27 (1) shall be the exclusive means within this Treaty of resolving any disputes that may arise over the implementation or interpretation of this Article. Article 7 Transit 1. Each Contracting Party shall take the necessary measures to facilitate the transit of energy materials and products consistent with the principle of freedom of transit and without distinction as to the origin, destination or ownership of such energy materials and products or discrimination as to pricing on the basis of such distinctions, and without imposing any unreasonable delays, restrictions or charges. 2. Contracting Parties shall encourage relevant entities to cooperate in: 3. Each Contracting Party undertakes that its provisions relating to transport of energy materials and products and the use of energy transport facilities shall treat energy materials and products in transit in no less favourable a manner than its provisions treat such materials and products originating in or destined for its own area, unless an existing international agreement provides otherwise. 4. In the event that transit of energy materials and products cannot be achieved on commercial terms by means of energy transport facilities the Contracting Parties shall not place obstacles in the way of new capacity being established, except as may be otherwise provided in applicable legislation which is consistent with paragraph 1. 5. A Contracting Party through whose area energy materials and products may transit shall not be obliged to which it demonstrates to the other Contracting Parties concerned would endanger the security or efficiency of its energy systems, including the security of supply. Contracting Parties shall, subject to paragraphs 6 and 7, secure established flows of energy materials and products to, from or between the areas of other Contracting Parties. 6. A Contracting Party through whose area energy materials and products transit shall not, in the event of a dispute over any matter arising from that transit, interrupt or reduce, permit any entity subject to its control to interrupt or reduce, or require any entity subject to its jurisdiction to interrupt or reduce the existing flow of energy materials and products prior to the conclusion of the dispute resolution procedures set out in paragraph 7, except where this is specifically provided for in a contract or other agreement governing such transit or permitted in accordance with the conciliator's decision. 7. The following provisions shall apply to a dispute described in paragraph 6, but only following the exhaustion of all relevant contractual or other dispute resolution remedies previously agreed between the Contracting Parties party to the dispute or between any entity referred to in paragraph 6 and an entity of another Contracting Party party to the dispute: 8. Nothing in this Article shall derogate from a Contracting Party's rights and obligations under international law including customary international law, existing bilateral or multilateral agreements, including rules concerning submarine cables and pipelines. 9. This Article shall not be so interpreted as to oblige any Contracting Party which does not have a certain type of energy transport facilities used for transit to take any measure under this Article with respect to that type of energy transport facilities. Such a Contracting Party is, however, obliged to comply with paragraph 4. 10. For the purposes of this Article: Article 8 Transfer of technology 1. The Contracting Parties agree to promote access to and transfer of energy technology on a commercial and non-discriminatory basis to assist effective trade in energy materials and products and investment and to implement the objectives of the Charter subject to their laws and regulations, and to the protection of intellectual property rights. 2. Accordingly, to the extent necessary to give effect to paragraph 1 the Contracting Parties shall eliminate existing and create no new obstacles to the transfer of technology in the field of energy materials and products and related equipment and services, subject to non-proliferation and other international obligations. Article 9 Access to capital 1. The Contracting Parties acknowledge the importance of open capital markets in encouraging the flow of capital to finance trade in energy materials and products and for the making of and assisting with regard to investments in economic activity in the energy sector in the areas of other Contracting Parties, particularly those with economies in transition. Each Contracting Party shall accordingly endeavour to promote conditions for access to its capital market by companies and nationals of other Contracting Parties, for the purpose of financing trade in energy materials and products and for the purpose of investment in economic activity in the energy sector in the areas of those other Contracting Parties, on a basis no less favourable than that which it accords in like circumstances to its own companies and nationals or companies and nationals of any other Contracting Party or any third State, whichever is the most favourable. 2. A Contracting Party may adopt and maintain programmes providing for access to public loans, grants, guarantees or insurance for facilitating trade or investment abroad. It shall make such facilities available, consistent with the objectives, constraints and criteria of such programmes (including any objectives, constraints or criteria relating to the place of business of an applicant for any such facility or the place of delivery of goods or services supplied with the support of any such facility) for investments in the economic activity in the energy sector of other Contracting Parties or for financing trade in energy materials and products with other Contracting Parties. 3. Contracting Parties shall, in implementing programmes in economic activity in the energy sector to improve the economic stability and investment climates of the Contracting Parties, seek as appropriate to encourage the operations and take advantage of the expertise of relevant international financial institutions. 4. Nothing in this Article shall prevent: PART III INVESTMENT PROMOTION AND PROTECTION Article 10 Promotion, protection and treatment of investments 1. Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent conditions for investors of other Contracting Parties to make investments in its area. Such conditions shall include a commitment to accord at all times to investments of investors of other Contracting Parties fair and equitable treatment. Such investments shall also enjoy the most constant protection and security and no Contracting Party shall in any way impair by unreasonable or discriminatory measures their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal. In no case shall such investments be accorded treatment less favourable than that required by international law, including treaty obligations. Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it has entered into with an investor or an investment of an investor of any other Contracting Party. 2. Each Contracting Party shall endeavour to accord to investors of other Contracting Parties, as regards the making of investments in its area, the treatment described in paragraph 3. 3. For the purposes of this Article, ‘treatment’ means treatment accorded by a Contracting Party which is no less favourable than that which it accords to its own investors or to investors of any other Contracting Party or any third State, whichever is the most favourable. 4. A supplementary treaty shall, subject to conditions to be laid down therein, oblige each party thereto to accord to investors of other parties, as regards the making of investments in its area, the treatment described in paragraph 3. That treaty shall be open for signature by the States and Regional Economic Integration Organizations which have signed or acceded to this Treaty. Negotiations towards the supplementary treaty shall commence not later than 1 January 1995, with a view to concluding it by 1 January 1998. 5. Each Contracting Party shall, as regards the making of investments in its area, endeavour to: 7. Each Contracting Party shall accord to investments in its area of investors of other Contracting Parties, and their related activities including management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal, treatment no less favourable than that which it accords to investments of its own investors or of the investors of any other Contracting Party or any third State and their related activities including management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal, whichever is the most favourable. 8. The modalities of application of paragraph 7 in relation to programmes under which a Contracting Party provides grants or other financial assistance, or enters into contracts, for energy technology research and development, shall be reserved for the supplementary treaty described in paragraph 4. Each Contracting Party shall through the Secretariat keep the Charter Conference informed of the modalities it applies to the programmes described in this paragraph. 9. Each State or Regional Economic Integration Organization which signs or accedes to this Treaty shall, on the date it signs the Treaty or deposits its instrument of accession, submit to the Secretariat a report summarizing all laws, regulations or other measures relevant to: A Contracting Party shall keep its report up to date by promptly submitting amendments to the Secretariat. The Charter Conference shall review these reports periodically. In respect of subparagraph (a) the report may designate parts of the energy sector in which a Contracting Party accords to investors of other Contracting Parties the treatment described in paragraph 3. In respect of subparagraph (b) the review by the Charter Conference may consider the effects of such programmes on competition and investments. 10. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the treatment described in paragraphs 3 and 7 shall not apply to the protection of intellectual property; instead, the treatment shall be as specified in the corresponding provisions of the applicable international agreements for the protection of intellectual property rights to which the respective Contracting Parties are parties. 11. For the purposes of Article 26, the application by a Contracting Party of a trade-related investment measure as described in Article 5 (1) and (2) to an investment of an investor of another Contracting Party existing at the time of such application shall, subject to Article 5 (3) and (4), be considered a breach of an obligation of the former Contracting Party under this part. 12. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that its domestic law provides effective means for the assertion of claims and the enforcement of rights with respect to investments, investment agreements, and investment authorizations. Article 11 Key personnel 1. A Contracting Party shall, subject to its laws and regulations relating to the entry, stay and work of natural persons, examine in good faith requests by investors of another Contracting Party, and key personnel who are employed by such investors or by investments of such investors, to enter and remain temporarily in its area to engage in activities connected with the making or the development, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of relevant investments, including the provision of advice or key technical services. 2. A Contracting Party shall permit investors of another Contracting Party which have investments in its area, and investments of such investors, to employ any key person of the investor's or the investment's choice regardless of nationality and citizenship provided that such key person has been permitted to enter, stay and work in the area of the former Contracting Party and that the employment concerned conforms to the terms, conditions and time limits of the permission granted to such key person. Article 12 Compensation for losses 1. Except where Article 13 applies, an investor of any Contracting Party which suffers a loss with respect to any investment in the area of another Contracting Party owing to war or other armed conflict, state of national emergency, civil disturbance, or other similar event in that area, shall be accorded by the latter Contracting Party, as regards restitution, indemnification, compensation or other settlement, treatment which is the most favourable of that which that Contracting Party accords to any other investor, whether its own investor, the investor of any other Contracting Party, or the investor of any third State. 2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, an investor of a Contracting Party which, in any of the situations referred to in that paragraph, suffers a loss in the area of another Contracting Party resulting from: shall be accorded restitution or compensation which in either case shall be prompt, adequate and effective. Article 13 Expropriation 1. Investments of investors of a Contracting Party in the area of any other Contracting Party shall not be nationalized, expropriated or subjected to a measure or measures having effect equivalent to nationalization or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as ‘expropriation’) except where such expropriation is: Such compensation shall amount to the fair market value of the investment expropriated at the time immediately before the expropriation or impending expropriation became known in such a way as to affect the value of the investment (hereinafter referred to as the ‘valuation date’). Such fair market value shall at the request of the investor be expressed in a freely convertible currency on the basis of the market rate of exchange existing for that currency on the valuation date. Compensation shall also include interest at a commercial rate established on a market basis from the date of expropriation until the date of payment. 2. The investor affected shall have a right to prompt review, under the law of the Contracting Party making the expropriation, by a judicial or other competent and independent authority of that Contracting Party, of its case, of the valuation of its investment, and of the payment of compensation, in accordance with the principles set out in paragraph 1. 3. For the avoidance of doubt, expropriation shall include situations where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a company or enterprise in its area in which an investor of any other Contracting Party has an investment, including through the ownership of shares. Article 14 Transfers related to investments 1. Each Contracting Party shall with respect to investments in its area of investors of any other Contracting Party guarantee the freedom of transfer into and out of its area, including the transfer of: 2. Transfers pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be effected without delay and (except in case of a return in kind) in a freely convertible currency. 3. Transfers shall be made at the market rate of exchange existing on the date of transfer with respect to spot transactions in the currency to be transferred. In the absence of a market for foreign exchange, the rate to be used will be the most recent rate applied to inward investments or the most recent exchange rate for conversion of currencies into special drawing rights, whichever is more favourable to the investor. 4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 to 3, a Contracting Party may protect the rights of creditors, or ensure compliance with laws on the issuing, trading and dealing in securities and the satisfaction of judgements in civil, administrative and criminal adjudicatory proceedings, through the equitable, non-discriminatory, and good faith application of its laws and regulations. 5. Notwithstanding paragraph 2, Contracting Parties which are States that were constituent parts of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics may provide in agreements concluded between them that transfers of payments shall be made in the currencies of such Contracting Parties, provided that such agreements do not treat investments in their areas of investors of other Contracting Parties less favourably than either investments of investors of the Contracting Parties which have entered into such agreements or investments of investors of any third State. 6. Notwithstanding subparagraph 1 (b), a Contracting Party may restrict the transfer of a return in kind in circumstances where the Contracting Party is permitted pursuant to Article 29 (2) (a) or the GATT and Related Instruments to restrict or prohibit the exportation or the sale for export of the product constituting the return in kind; provided that a Contracting Party shall permit transfers of returns in kind to be effected as authorized or specified in an investment agreement, investment authorization, or other written agreement between the Contracting Party and either an investor of another Contracting Party or its investment. Article 15 Subrogation 1. If a Contracting Party or its designated agency (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Indemnifying Party’) makes a payment under an indemnity or guarantee given in respect of an investment of an investor (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Party Indemnified’) in the area of another Contracting Party (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Host Party’), the Host Party shall recognize: 2. The Indemnifying Party shall be entitled in all circumstances to: as the Party Indemnified was entitled to receive by virtue of this Treaty in respect of the investment concerned. 3. In any proceeding pursuant to Article 26, a Contracting Party shall not assert as a defence, counterclaim, right of set-off or for any other reason, that indemnification or other compensation for all or part of the alleged damages has been received or will be received pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract. Article 16 Relation to other agreements Where two or more Contracting Parties have entered into a prior international agreement, or enter into a subsequent international agreement, whose terms in either case concern the subject matter of Part III or V of this Treaty; where any such provision is more favourable to the investor or investment. Article 17 Non-application of Part III in certain circumstances Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of this part to: PART IV MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Article 18 Sovereignty over energy resources 1. The Contracting Parties recognize State sovereignty and sovereign rights over energy resources. They reaffirm that these must be exercised in accordance with and subject to the rules of international law. 2. Without affecting the objectives of promoting access to energy resources, and exploration and development thereof on a commercial basis, the Treaty shall in no way prejudice the rules in Contracting Parties governing the system of property ownership of energy resources. 3. Each State continues to hold in particular the rights to decide the geographical areas within its area to be made available for exploration and development of its energy resources, the optimalization of their recovery and the rate at which they may be depleted or otherwise exploited, to specify and enjoy any taxes, royalties or other financial payments payable by virtue of such exploration and exploitation, and to regulate the environmental and safety aspects of such exploration, development and reclamation within its area, and to participate in such exploration and exploitation, inter alia, through direct participation by the government or through State enterprises. 4. The Contracting Parties undertake to facilitate access to energy resources, inter alia, by allocating in a non-discriminatory manner on the basis of published criteria authorizations, licences, concessions and contracts to prospect and explore for or to exploit or extract energy resources. Article 19 Environmental aspects 1. In pursuit of sustainable development and taking into account its obligations under those international agreements concerning the environment to which it is party, each Contracting Party shall strive to minimize in an economically efficient manner harmful environmental impacts occurring either within or outside its area from all operations within the energy cycle in its area, taking proper account of safety. In doing so each Contracting Party shall act in a cost-effective manner. In its policies and actions each Contracting Party shall strive to take precautionary measures to prevent or minimize environmental degradation. The Contracting Parties agree that the polluter in the areas of Contracting Parties, should, in principle, bear the cost of pollution, including trans-boundary pollution, with due regard to the public interest and without distorting investment in the energy cycle or international trade. Contracting Parties shall accordingly: 2. At the request of one or more Contracting Parties, disputes concerning the application or interpretation of provisions of this Article shall, to the extent that arrangements for the consideration of such disputes do not exist in other appropriate international fora, be reviewed by the Charter Conference aiming at a solution. 3. For the purposes of this Article: Article 20 Transparency 1. Laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings of general application which affect trade in energy materials and products are, in accordance with Article 29 (2) (a), among the measures subject to the transparency disciplines of the GATT and relevant Related Instruments. 2. Laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings of general application made effective by any Contracting Party, and agreements in force between Contracting Parties, which affect other matters covered by this Treaty shall also be published promptly in such a manner as to enable Contracting Parties and investors to become acquainted with them. The provisions of this paragraph shall not require any Contracting Party to disclose confidential information which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of any investor. 3. Each Contracting Party shall designate one or more enquiry points to which requests for information about the abovementioned laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings may be addressed and shall communicate promptly such designation to the Secretariat which shall make it available on request. Article 21 Taxation 1. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, nothing in this Treaty shall create rights or impose obligations with respect to taxation measures of the Contracting Parties. In the event of any inconsistency between this Article and any other provision of the Treaty, this Article shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency. 2. Article 7 (3) shall apply to taxation measures other than those on income or on capital, except that such provision shall not apply to: 3. Article 10 (2) and (7) shall apply to taxation measures of the Contracting Parties other than those on income or on capital, except that such provisions shall not apply to: 4. Article 29 (2) to (6) shall apply to taxation measures other than those on income or on capital. 6. For the avoidance of doubt, Article 14 shall not limit the right of a Contracting Party to impose or collect a tax by withholding or other means. 7. For the purposes of this Article: Article 22 State and privileged enterprises 1. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that any State enterprise which it maintains or establishes shall conduct its activities in relation to the sale or provision of goods and services in its area in a manner consistent with the Contracting Party's obligations pursuant to Part III of this Treaty. 2. No Contracting Party shall encourage or require such a State enterprise to conduct its activities in its area in a manner inconsistent with the Contracting Party's obligations pursuant to other provisions of this Treaty. 3. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that if it establishes or maintains an entity and entrusts the entity with regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority, such entity shall exercise that authority in a manner consistent with the Contracting Party's obligations pursuant to this Treaty. 4. No Contracting Party shall encourage or require any entity to which it grants exclusive or special privileges to conduct its activities in its area in a manner inconsistent with the Contracting Party's obligations pursuant to this Treaty. 5. For the purposes of this Article, ‘entity’ includes any enterprise, agency or other organization or individual. Article 23 Observance by sub-national authorities 1. Each Contracting Party is fully responsible pursuant to this Treaty for the observance of all provisions of the Treaty, and shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to ensure such observance by regional and local governments and authorities within its area. 2. The dispute settlement provisions in Parts II, IV and V of this Treaty may be invoked in respect of measures affecting the observance of the Treaty by a Contracting Party which have been taken by regional or local governments or authorities within the area of the Contracting Party. Article 24 Exceptions 1. This Article shall not apply to Articles 12, 13 and 29. 2. The provisions of this Treaty other than: shall not preclude any Contracting Party from adopting or enforcing any measure: provided that no such measure shall constitute a disguised restriction on economic activity in the energy sector, or arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between Contracting Parties or between investors or other interested persons of Contracting Parties. Such measures shall be duly motivated and shall not nullify or impair any benefit one or more other Contracting Parties may reasonably expect pursuant to this Treaty to an extent greater than is strictly necessary to the stated end. 3. The provisions of this Treaty other than those referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be construed to prevent any Contracting Party from taking any measure which it considers necessary: Such measure shall not constitute a disguised restriction on transit. 4. The provisions of this Treaty which accord most favoured nation treatment shall not oblige any Contracting Party to extend to the investors of any other Contracting Party any preferential treatment: Article 25 Economic Integration Agreements 1. The provisions of this Treaty shall not be so construed as to oblige a Contracting Party which is party to an Economic Integration Agreement (hereinafter referred to as‘EIA’) to extend, by means of most favoured nation treatment, to another Contracting Party which is not a party to that EIA, any preferential treatment applicable between the parties to that EIA as a result of their being parties thereto. 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, ‘EIA’ means an agreement substantially liberalizing, inter alia, trade and investment, by providing for the absence or elimination of substantially all discrimination between or among parties thereto through the elimination of existing discriminatory measures and/or the prohibition of new or more discriminatory measures, either at the entry into force of that agreement or on the basis of a reasonable time frame. 3. This Article shall not affect the application of the GATT and Related Instruments according to Article 29. PART V DISPUTE SETTLEMENT Article 26 Settlement of disputes between an investor and a Contracting Party 1. Disputes between a Contracting Party and an investor of another Contracting Party relating to an investment of the latter in the area of the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the former under Part III shall, if possible, be settled amicably. 2. If such disputes can not be settled according to the provisions of paragraph 1 within a period of three months from the date on which either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the investor party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution: 4. In the event that an investor chooses to submit the dispute for resolution under subparagraph (2) (c), the investor shall further provide its consent in writing for the dispute to be submitted to: 6. A tribunal established pursuant to paragraph 4 shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable rules and principles of international law. 7. An investor other than a natural person which has the nationality of a Contracting Party party to the dispute on the date of the consent in writing referred to in paragraph 4 and which, before a dispute between it and that Contracting Party arises, is controlled by investors of another Contracting Party, shall for the purpose of Article 25 (2) (b) of the Icsid Convention be treated as a ‘national of another Contracting State’ and shall for the purpose of Article 1 (6) of the Additional Facility Rules be treated as a ‘national of another State’. 8. The awards of arbitration, which may include an award of interest, shall be final and binding upon the parties to the dispute. An award of arbitration concerning a measure of a sub-national government or authority of the disputing Contracting Party shall provide that the Contracting Party may pay monetary damages in lieu of any other remedy granted. Each Contracting Party shall carry out without delay any such award and shall make provision for the effective enforcement in its area of such awards. Article 27 Settlement of disputes between Contracting Parties 1. Contracting Parties shall endeavour to settle disputes concerning the application or interpretation of this Treaty through diplomatic channels. 2. If a dispute has not been settled in accordance with paragraph 1 within a reasonable period of time, either party thereto may, except as otherwise provided in this Treaty or agreed in writing by the Contracting Parties, and except as concerns the application or interpretation of Article 6 or Article 19 or, for Contracting Parties listed in Annex LA, the last sentence of Article 10 (1), upon written notice to the other party to the dispute submit the matter to an ad hoc tribunal pursuant to this Article. 3. Such an ad hoc arbitral tribunal shall be constituted as follows: Article 28 Non-application of Article 27 to certain disputes A dispute between Contracting Parties with respect to the application or interpretation of Article 5 or 29 shall not be settled pursuant to Article 27 unless the Contracting Parties parties to the dispute so agree. PART VI TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS Article 29 Interim provisions on trade-related matters 1. The provisions of this Article shall apply to trade in energy materials and products while any Contracting Party is not a party to the GATT and Related Instruments. 3. Each signatory to this Treaty, and each State or Regional Economic Integration Organization acceding to this Treaty, shall on the date of its signature or of its deposit of its instrument of accession provide to the Secretariat a list of all tariff rates and other charges levied on energy materials and products at the time of importation or exportation, notifying the level of such rates and charges applied on such date of signature or deposit. Any changes to such rates or other charges shall be notified to the Secretariat, which shall inform the Contracting Parties of such changes. 4. Each Contracting Party shall endeavour not to increase any tariff rate or other charge levied at the time of importation or exportation: 5. A Contracting Party may increase such tariff rate or other charge above the level referred to in paragraph 4 only if: 6. Signatories undertake to commence negotiations not later than 1 January 1995 with a view to concluding by 1 January 1998, as appropriate in the light of any developments in the world trading system, a text of an amendment to this Treaty which shall, subject to conditions to be laid down therein, commit each Contracting Party not to increase such tariffs or charges beyond the level prescribed under that amendment. 7. Annex D shall apply to disputes regarding compliance with provisions applicable to trade pursuant to this Article and, unless both Contracting Parties agree otherwise, to disputes regarding compliance with Article 5 between Contracting Parties at least one of which is not a party to the GATT, except that Annex D shall not apply to any dispute between Contracting Parties, the substance of which arises under an agreement that: Article 30 Developments in international trading arrangements Contracting Parties undertake that in the light of the results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations embodied principally in the Final Act thereof done at Marrakesh, 15 April 1994, they will commence consideration not later than 1 July 1995 or the entry into force of this Treaty, whichever is the later, of appropriate amendments to this Treaty with a view to the adoption of any such amendments by the Charter Conference. Article 31 Energy-related equipment The provisional Charter Conference shall at its first meeting commence examination of the inclusion of energy-related equipment in the trade provisions of this Treaty. Article 32 Transitional arrangements 1. In recognition of the need for time to adapt to the requirements of a market economy, a Contracting Party listed in Annex T may temporarily suspend full compliance with its obligations under one or more of the following provisions of this Treaty, subject to the conditions in paragraphs 3 to 6: 2. Other Contracting Parties shall assist any Contracting Party which has suspended full compliance pursuant to paragraph 1 to achieve the conditions under which such suspension can be terminated. This assistance may be given in whatever form the other Contracting Parties consider most effective to respond to the needs notified pursuant to subparagraph 4 (c) including, where appropriate, through bilateral or multilateral arrangements. 3. The applicable provisions, the stages towards full implementation of each, the measures to be taken and the date or, exceptionally, contingent event, by which each stage shall be completed and measure taken are listed in Annex T for each Contracting Party claiming transitional arrangements. Each such Contracting Party shall take the measure listed by the date indicated for the relevant provision and stage as set out in Annex T. Contracting Parties which have temporarily suspended full compliance pursuant to paragraph 1 undertake to comply fully with the relevant obligations by 1 July 2001. Should a Contracting Party find it necessary, due to exceptional circumstances, to request that the period of such temporary suspension be extended or that any further temporary suspension not previously listed in Annex T be introduced, the decision on a request to amend Annex T shall be made by the Charter Conference. 4. A Contracting Party which has invoked transitional arrangements shall notify the Secretariat no less often than once every 12 months: 5. The Secretariat shall: 6. The Charter Conference shall annually review the progress by Contracting Parties towards implementation of the provisions of this Article and the matching of needs and offers of technical assistance referred to in paragraph 2 and subparagraph 4 (c). In the course of that review it may decide to take appropriate action. PART VII STRUCTURE AND INSTITUTIONS Article 33 Energy Charter Protocols and Declarations 1. The Charter Conference may authorize the negotiation of a number of Energy Charter Protocols or Declarations in order to pursue the objectives and principles of the Charter. 2. Any signatory to the Charter may participate in such negotiation. 3. A State or Regional Economic Integration Organization shall not become a party to a Protocol or Declaration unless it is, or becomes at the same time, a signatory to the Charter and a Contracting Party to this Treaty. 4. Subject to paragraph 3 and subparagraph 6 (a), final provisions applying to a Protocol shall be defined in that Protocol. 5. A Protocol shall apply only to the Contracting Parties which consent to be bound by it, and shall not derogate from the rights and obligations of those Contracting Parties not party to the Protocol. Article 34 Energy Charter Conference 1. The Contracting Parties shall meet periodically in the Energy Charter Conference (referred to herein as the ‘Charter Conference’) at which each Contracting Party shall be entitled to have one representative. Ordinary meetings shall be held at intervals determined by the Charter Conference. 2. Extraordinary meetings of the Charter Conference may be held at such times as may be determined by the Charter Conference, or at the written request of any Contracting Party, provided that, within six weeks of the request being communicated to the Contracting Parties by the Secretariat, it is supported by at least one-third of the Contracting Parties. 3. The functions of the Charter Conference shall be to: 4. In the performance of its duties, the Charter Conference, through the Secretariat, shall cooperate with and make as full a use as possible, consistently with economy and efficiency, of the services and programmes of other institutions and organizations with established competence in matters related to the objectives of this Treaty. 5. The Charter Conference may establish such subsidiary bodies as it considers appropriate for the performance of its duties. 6. The Charter Conference shall consider and adopt rules of procedure and financial rules. 7. In 1999 and thereafter at intervals (of not more than five years) to be determined by the Charter Conference, the Charter Conference shall thoroughly review the functions provided for in this Treaty in the light of the extent to which the provisions of the Treaty and Protocols have been implemented. At the conclusion of each review the Charter Conference may amend or abolish the functions specified in paragraph 3 and may discharge the Secretariat. Article 35 Secretariat 1. In carrying out its duties, the Charter Conference shall have a Secretariat which shall be composed of a Secretary-General and such staff as are the minimum consistent with efficient performance. 2. The Secretary-General shall be appointed by the Charter Conference. The first such appointment shall be for a maximum period of five years. 3. In the performance of its duties the Secretariat shall be responsible to and report to the Charter Conference. 4. The Secretariat shall provide the Charter Conference with all necessary assistance for the performance of its duties and shall carry out the functions assigned to it in this Treaty or in any Protocol and any other functions assigned to it by the Charter Conference. 5. The Secretariat may enter into such administrative and contractual arrangements as may be required for the effective discharge of its functions. Article 36 Voting 1. Unanimity of the Contracting Parties present and voting at the meeting of the Charter Conference where such matters fall to be decided shall be required for decisions by the Charter Conference to: The Contracting Parties shall make every effort to reach agreement by consensus on any other matter requiring their decision pursuant to this Treaty. If agreement cannot be reached by consensus, paragraphs 2 to 5 shall apply. 2. Decisions on budgetary matters referred to in Article 34 (3) (e) shall be taken by a qualified majority of Contracting Parties whose assessed contributions as specified in Annex B represent, in combination, at least three-fourths of the total assessed contributions specified therein. 3. Decisions on matters referred to in Article 34 (7) shall be taken by a three-fourths majority of the Contracting Parties. 4. Except in cases specified in subparagraphs 1 (a) to (f), paragraphs 2 and 3, and subject to paragraph 6, decisions provided for in this Treaty shall be taken by a three-fourths majority of the Contracting Parties present and voting at the meeting of the Charter Conference at which such matters fall to be decided. 5. For purposes of this Article, ‘Contracting Parties present and voting’ means Contracting Parties present and casting affirmative or negative votes, provided that the Charter Conference may decide upon rules of procedure to enable such decisions to be taken by Contracting Parties by correspondence. 6. Except as provided in paragraph 2, no decision referred to in this Article shall be valid unless it has the support of a simple majority of the Contracting Parties. 7. A Regional Economic Integration Organization shall, when voting, have a number of votes equal to the number of its Member States which are Contracting Parties to this Treaty; provided that such an Organization shall not exercise its right to vote if its Member States exercise theirs, and vice versa. 8. In the event of persistent arrears in a Contracting Party's discharge of financial obligations pursuant to this Treaty, the Charter Conference may suspend that Contracting Party's voting rights in whole or in part. Article 37 Funding principles 1. Each Contracting Party shall bear its own costs of representation at meetings of the Charter Conference and any subsidiary bodies. 2. The cost of meetings of the Charter Conference and any subsidiary bodies shall be regarded as a cost of the Secretariat. 3. The costs of the Secretariat shall be met by the Contracting Parties assessed according to their capacity to pay, determined as specified in Annex B, the provisions of which may be modified in accordance with Article 36 (1) (d). 4. A Protocol shall contain provisions to assure that any costs of the Secretariat arising from that Protocol are borne by the parties thereto. 5. The Charter Conference may in addition accept voluntary contributions from one or more Contracting Parties or from other sources. Costs met from such contributions shall not be considered costs of the Secretariat for the purposes of paragraph 3. PART VIII FINAL PROVISIONS Article 38 Signature This Treaty shall be open for signature at Lisbon from 17 December 1994 to 16 June 1995 by the States and Regional Economic Integration Organizations which have signed the Charter. Article 39 Ratification, acceptance or approval This Treaty shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by signatories. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary. Article 40 Application to territories 1. Any State or Regional Economic Integration Organization may at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, by a declaration deposited with the Depositary, declare that the Treaty shall be binding upon it with respect to all the territories for the international relations of which it is responsible, or to one or more of them. Such declaration shall take effect at the time the Treaty enters into force for that Contracting Party. 2. Any Contracting Party may at a later date, by a declaration deposited with the Depositary, bind itself under this Treaty with respect to other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the Treaty shall enter into force on the 90th day following the receipt by the Depositary of such declaration. 3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification to the Depositary. The withdrawal shall, subject to the applicability of Article 47 (3), become effective upon the expiry of one year after the date of receipt of such notification by the Depositary. 4. The definition of ‘area’ in Article 1 (10) shall be construed having regard to any declaration deposited pursuant to this Article. Article 41 Accession This Treaty shall be open for accession, from the date on which the Treaty is closed for signature, by States and Regional Economic Integration Organizations which have signed the Charter, on terms to be approved by the Charter Conference. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Depositary. Article 42 Amendments 1. Any Contracting Party may propose amendments to this Treaty. 2. The text of any proposed amendment to this Treaty shall be communicated to the Contracting Parties by the Secretariat at least three months before the date on which it is proposed for adoption by the Charter Conference. 3. Amendments to this Treaty, texts of which have been adopted by the Charter Conference, shall be communicated by the Secretariat to the Depositary which shall submit them to all Contracting Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval. 4. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval of amendments to this Treaty shall be deposited with the Depositary. Amendments shall enter into force between Contracting Parties having ratified, accepted or approved them on the 90th day after deposit with the Depositary of instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval by at least three-fourths of the Contracting Parties. Thereafter the amendments shall enter into force for any other Contracting Party on the 90th day after that Contracting Party deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval of the amendments. Article 43 Association agreements 1. The Charter Conference may authorize the negotiation of association agreements with States or Regional Economic Integration Organizations, or with international organizations, in order to pursue the objectives and principles of the Charter and the provisions of this Treaty or one or more Protocols. 2. The relationship established with and the rights enjoyed and obligations incurred by an associating State, Regional Economic Integration Organization, or international organization shall be appropriate to the particular circumstances of the association, and in each case shall be set out in the association agreement. Article 44 Entry into force 1. This Treaty shall enter into force on the 90th day after the date of deposit of the 30th instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval thereof, or of accession thereto, by a State or Regional Economic Integration Organization which is a signatory to the Charter as of 16 June 1995. 2. For each State or Regional Economic Integration Organization which ratifies, accepts or approves this Treaty or accedes thereto after the deposit of the 30th instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, it shall enter into force on the 90th day after the date of deposit by such State or Regional Economic Integration Organization of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. 3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, any instrument deposited by a Regional Economic Integration Organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by Member States of such Organization. Article 45 Provisional application 1. Each signatory agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending its entry into force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws or regulations. 4. Pending the entry into force of this Treaty the signatories shall meet periodically in the provisional Charter Conference, the first meeting of which shall be convened by the provisional Secretariat referred to in paragraph 5 not later than 180 days after the opening date for signature of the Treaty as specified in Article 38. 5. The functions of the Secretariat shall be carried out on an interim basis by a provisional Secretariat until the entry into force of this Treaty pursuant to Article 44 and the establishment of a Secretariat. 6. The signatories shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 or subparagraph 2 (c) as appropriate, contribute to the costs of the provisional Secretariat as if the signatories were Contracting Parties pursuant to Article 37 (3). Any modifications made to Annex B by the signatories shall terminate upon the entry into force of this Treaty. 7. A State or Regional Economic Integration Organization which, prior to this Treaty's entry into force, accedes to the Treaty in accordance with Article 41 shall, pending the Treaty's entry into force, have the rights and assume the obligations of a signatory pursuant to this Article. Article 46 Reservations No reservations may be made to this Treaty. Article 47 Withdrawal 1. At any time after five years from the date on which this Treaty has entered into force for a Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may give written notification to the Depositary of its withdrawal from the Treaty. 2. Any such withdrawal shall take effect upon the expiry of one year after the date of the receipt of the notification by the Depositary, or on such later date as may be specified in the notification of withdrawal. 3. The provisions of this Treaty shall continue to apply to investments made in the area of a Contracting Party by investors of other Contracting Parties or in the area of other Contracting Parties by investors of that Contracting Party as of the date when that Contracting Party's withdrawal from the Treaty takes effect for a period of 20 years from such date. 4. All Protocols to which a Contracting Party is party shall cease to be in force for that Contracting Party on the effective date of its withdrawal from this Treaty. Article 48 Status of Annexes and Decisions The Annexes to this Treaty and the Decisions set out in Annex 2 to the Final Act of the European Energy Charter Conference signed at Lisbon on 17 December 1994 are integral parts of the Treaty. Article 49 Depositary The Government of the Portuguese Republic shall be the Depositary of this Treaty. Article 50 Authentic texts In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed this Treaty in English, French, German, Italian, Russian and Spanish, of which every text is equally authentic, in one original, which will be deposited with the Government of the Portuguese Republic. Done at Lisbon on the seventeenth day of December in the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-four. Fait à Lisbonne, le dix-sept décembre mil neuf cent quatre-vingt-quatorze. Geschehen zu Lissabon am siebzehnten Dezember neunzehnhundertvierundneunzig. Fatto a Lisbona il diciassettesimo giorno del mese di dicembre dell'anno millenovecentonovanta-quattro. Hecho en Lisboa, el diecisiete de diciembre de mil novecientos noventa y cuatro. Udfærdiget i Lissabon, den syttende december nittenhundrede og fireoghalvfems. Έγινε στη Λισαβόνα, σπς δέκα επτά Δεκεμβρίου του έτους χίλια ενιακόσια ενενήντα τέσσερα. Gedaan te Lissabon, de zeventiende december negentienhonderd vierennegentig. Feito em Lisboa, aos dezassete de Dezembro de mil novecentos e noventa e quatro. Tehty Lissabonissa seitsemäntenätoista päivänä joulukuuta tuhatyhdeksänsataayhdeksänkymmentäneljä. Som skedde i Lissabon den sjuttonde december nittonhundranittiofyra. Për Republikën e Shqipërisë For Australia Für die Republik Österreich Pour le royaume de Belgique Voor het Koninkrijk België Für das Königreich Belgien Cette signature engage également la Communauté française de Belgique, la Communauté flamande, la Communauté germanophone de Belgique, la Région wallonne, la Région flamande et la région de Bruxelles-Capitale. Deze handtekening bindt eveneens de Vlaamse Gemeenschap, de Franse Gemeenschap van België, de Duitstalige Gemeenschap van België, het Waals Gewest en het Brussels Hoofdstedelijk Gewest. Diese Unterschrift bindet ebenso die Flämische Gemeinschaft, die Französische Gemeinschaft Belgiens, die Deutschsprachige Gemeinschaft Belgiens, die Flämische Region, die Wallonische Region und die Region Brüssel-Hauptstadt. For Canada Pour le Canada za Republiku Hrvatsku For the Republic of Cyprus Za Českou Republiku For Kongeriget Danmark Eesti Vabariigi nimel Por las Comunidades Europeas For De Europæiske Fællesskaber Für die Europäischen Gemeinschaften Για τις Ευρωπαϊκές Κοινότητες For the European Communities Pour les Communautés européennes Per le Comunità europee Voor de Europese Gemeenschappen Pelas Comunidades Europeias Euroopan yhteisöjen puolesta På Europeiska gemenskapernas vägnar Suomen tasavallan puolesta Pour la République française Für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland Για την Ελληνική Δημοκρατία A Magyar Köztársaság nevében Fyrir hönd Lyòveldisins islands Thar cheann na hÉireann For Ireland Per la Repubblica italiana Latvijas Republikas varda Für das Fürstentum Liechtenstein Lietuvos Respublikos vardu Pour le grand-duché de Luxembourg For the Republic of Malta Pentru Republica Moldova Voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden For Kongeriket Norge Za Rzeczpospolitą Polską Pela República Portuguesa Pentru Rômania Za Slovenskú republiku Za Republiko Slovenijo Por el Reino de España För Konungariket Sverige Für die Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft Pour la Confédération suisse Per la Confederazione svizzera Türkiye Cumhuriyeti adina For the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland For the United States of America ANNEXES TO THE ENERGY CHARTER TREATY TABLE OF CONTENTS Annex EM ENERGY MATERIALS AND PRODUCTS (In accordance with Article 1 (4)) Nuclear energy Coal, natural gas, petroleum and petroleum products, electrical energy Other energy Annex NI NON-APPLICABLE ENERGY MATERIALS AND PRODUCTS FOR DEFINITION OF ‘ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IN THE ENERGY SECTOR’ (In accordance with Article 1 (5)) Annex TRM NOTIFICATION AND PHASE-OUT (TRIMs) (In accordance with Article 5 (4)) Annex N LIST OF CONTRACTING PARTIES REQUIRING AT LEAST THREE SEPARATE AREAS TO BE INVOLVED IN A TRANSIT (In accordance with Article 7 (10) (a)) Annex VC LIST OF CONTRACTING PARTIES WHICH HAVE MADE VOLUNTARY BINDING COMMITMENTS IN RESPECT OF ARTICLE 10 (3) (In accordance with Article 10 (6)) Annex ID LIST OF CONTRACTING PARTIES NOT ALLOWING AN INVESTOR TO RESUBMIT THE SAME DISPUTE TO INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION AT A LATER STAGE PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 26 (In accordance with Article 26 (3) (b) (i)) Annex IA LIST OF CONTRACTING PARTIES NOT ALLOWING AN INVESTOR OR CONTRACTING PARTY TO SUBMIT A DISPUTE CONCERNING THE LAST SENTENCE OF ARTICLE 10 (1) TO INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION (In accordance with Articles 26 (3) (c) and 27 (2)) Annex P SPECIAL SUB-NATIONAL DISPUTE PROCEDURE (In accordance with Article 27 (3) (i)) PART I PART II Annex G EXCEPTIONS AND RULES GOVERNING THE APPLICATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE GATT AND RELATED INSTRUMENTS (In accordance with Article 29 (2) (a)) Annex TFU PROVISIONS REGARDING TRADE AGREEMENTS BETWEEN STATES WHICH WERE CONSTITUENT PARTS OF THE FORMER UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS (In accordance with Article 29 (2) (b)) Annex D INTERIM PROVISIONS FOR TRADE DISPUTE SETTLEMENT (In accordance with Article 29 (7)) Annex B FORMULA FOR ALLOCATING CHARTER COSTS (In accordance with Article 37 (3)) Annex PA LIST OF SIGNATORIES WHICH DO NOT ACCEPT THE PROVISIONAL APPLICATION OBLIGATION OF ARTICLE 45 (3) (b) (In accordance with Article 45 (3) (c)) Annex T CONTRACTING PARTIES' TRANSITIONAL MEASURES (In accordance with Article 32 (1)) List of Contracting Parties entitled to transitional arrangements Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Bulgaria Croatia The Czech Republic Estonia Georgia Hungary Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Poland Romania The Russian Federation Slovakia Slovenia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan List of provisions subject to transitional arrangements Article 6 (2) ‘Each Contracting Party shall ensure that within its jurisdiction it has and enforces such laws as are necessary and appropriate to address unilateral and concerted anti-competitive conduct in economic activity in the energy sector.’ COUNTRY: ALBANIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description There is no law on protection of competition in Albania. The law No 7746 of 28 July 1993 on hydrocarbons and the law No 7796 of 17 February 1994 on minerals do not include such provisions. There is no law on electricity which is in the stage of preparation. This law is planned to be submitted to the Parliament by the end of 1996. In these laws Albania intends to include provisions on anti-competitive conduct. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: ARMENIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description At present a State monopoly exists in Armenia in most energy sectors. There is no law on protection of competition, thus the rules of competition are not yet being implemented. There are no laws on energy. The draft laws on energy are planned to be submitted to the Parliament in 1994. The laws are envisaged to include provisions on anti-competitive behaviour, which would be harmonized with the EC legislation on competition. Phase-out 31 December 1997. COUNTRY: AZERBAIJAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The anti-monopoly legislation is at the stage of elaboration. Phase-out 1 January 2000. COUNTRY: BELARUS Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Anti-monopoly legislation is at the stage of elaboration. Phase-out 1 January 2000. COUNTRY: GEORGIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Laws on demonopolization are at present at the stage of elaboration in Georgia and that is why the State has so far the monopoly for practically all energy sources and energy resources, which restricts the possibility of competition in the energy and fuel complex. Phase-out 1 January 1999. COUNTRY: KAZAKHSTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The law on development of competition and restriction of monopolistic activities (No 656 of 11 June 1991) has been adopted, but is of a general nature. It is necessary to develop the legislation further, in particular by means of adopting relevant amendments or adopting a new law. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: KYRGYZSTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The law on anti-monopoly policies has already been adopted. The transitional period is needed to adapt provisions of this law to the energy sector which is now strictly regulated by the State. Phase-out 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: MOLDOVA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The law on restriction of monopolistic activities and development of competition of 29 January 1992 provides an organizational and legal basis for the development of competition, and of measures to prevent, limit and restrict monopolistic activities; it is oriented towards implementing market economy conditions. This law, however, does not provide for concrete measures of anti-competitive conduct in the energy sector, nor does it cover completely the requirements of Article 6. In 1995 drafts of a law on competition and a State programme of demonopolization of the economy will be submitted to the Parliament. The draft law on energy which will also be submitted to the Parliament in 1995 will cover issues on demonopolization and development of competition in the energy sector. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: ROMANIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The rules of competition are not yet implemented in Romania. The draft law on protection of competition has been submitted to the Parliament and is scheduled to be adopted during 1994. The draft contains provisions with respect to anti-competitive behaviour, harmonized with the EC's law on competition. Phase-out 31 December 1996. COUNTRY: THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION Sector All energy sectors. Level of government The Federation. Description A comprehensive framework of anti-monopoly legislation has been created in the Russian Federation but other legal and organizational measures to prevent, limit or suppress monopolistic activities and unfair competition will have to be adopted and in particular in the energy sector. Phase-out 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: SLOVENIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Law on protection of competition adopted in 1993 and published in Official Journal No 18/93 treats anti-competitive conduct generally. The existing law also provides for conditions for the establishment of competition authorities. At present the main competition authority is the Office of Protection of Competition in the Ministry of Economic Relations and Development. With regard to importance of energy sector a separate law in this respect is foreseen and thus more time for full compliance is needed. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: TAJIKISTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description In 1993 Tajikistan passed the law on demonopolization and competition. However, due to the difficult economic situation in Tajikistan, the jurisdiction of the law has been temporarily suspended. Phase-out 31 December 1997. COUNTRY: TURKMENISTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Under the Ruling of the President of Turkmenistan No 1532 of 21 October 1993 the Committee on Restricting Monopolistic Activities has been etablished and is acting now, the function of which is to protect enterprises and other entities from monopoly conduct and practices and to promote the formation of market principles on the basis of the development of competition and entrepreneurship. Further development of legislation and regulations is needed which would regulate anti-monopoly conduct of enterprises in the economic activity in the energy sector. Phase-out 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The law on restricting monopoly activities has been adopted in Uzbekistan and has been in force since July 1992. However, the law (as is specified in Article 1 (3) does not extend to the activities of enterprises in the energy sector. Phase-out 1 July 2001. Article 6 (5) ‘If a Contracting Party considers that any specified anti-competitive conduct carried out within the area of another Contracting Party is adversely affecting an important interest relevant to the purposes identified in this Article, the Contracting Party may notify the other Contracting Party and may request that its competition authorities initiate appropriate enforcement action. The notifying Contracting Party shall include in such notification sufficient information to permit the notified Contracting Party to identify the anti-competitive conduct that is the subject of the notification and shall include an offer of such further information and cooperation as that Contracting Party is able to provide. The notified Contracting Party or, as the case may be, the relevant competition authorities may consult with the competition authorities of the notifying Contracting Party and shall accord full consideration to the request of the notifying Contracting Party in deciding whether or not to initiate enforcement action with respect to the alleged anti-competitive conduct identified in the notification. The notified Contracting Party shall inform the notifying Contracting Party of its decision or the decision of the relevant competition authorities and may if it wishes inform the notifying Contracting Party of the grounds for the decision. If enforcement action is initiated, the notified Contracting Party shall advise the notifying Contracting Party of its outcome and, to the extent possible, of any significant interim development.’ COUNTRY: ALBANIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description In Albania there are no established institutions to enforce the competition rules. Such institutions will be provided for in the law on the protection of competition which is planned to be finalized in 1996. Phase-out 1 January 1999. COUNTRY: ARMENIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Institutions to enforce the provisions of this paragraph have not been established in Armenia. The laws on energy and protection of competition are planned to include provisions to establish such institutions. Phase-out 31 December 1997. COUNTRY: AZERBAIJAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Anti-monopoly authorities shall be established after the adoption of anti-monopoly legislation. Phase-out 1 January 2000. COUNTRY: BELARUS Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Anti-monopoly authorities shall be established after the adoption of anti-monopoly legislation. Phase-out 1 January 2000. COUNTRY: GEORGIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Laws on demonopolization are at present at the stage of elaboration in Georgia and that is why there are no competition authorities established yet. Phase-out 1 January 1999. COUNTRY: KAZAKHSTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description An Anti-monopoly Committee has been established in Kazakhstan, but its activity needs improvement, both from legislative and organizational points of view, in order to elaborate an effective mechanism handling the complaints on anti-competitive conduct. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: KYRGYZSTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description There is no mechanism in Kyrgyzstan to control the anticompetitive conduct and the relevant legislation. It is necessary to establish relevant anti-monopoly authorities. Phase-out 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: MOLDOVA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The Ministry of Economy is responsible for the control of competitive conduct in Moldova. Relevant amendments have been made to the law on breach of administrative rules, which envisage some penalties for violating rules of competition by monopoly enterprises. The draft law on competition which is now at the stage of elaboration will have provisions on the enforcement of competition rules. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: ROMANIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Institutions to enforce the provisions of this paragraph have not been established in Romania. The institutions charged with the enforcement of competition rules are provided for in the draft law on protection of competition which is scheduled to be adopted during 1994. The draft also provides a period of nine months for enforcement, starting with the date of its publication. According to the Europe Agreement establishing an association between Romania and the European Communities, Romania was granted a period of five years to implement competition rules. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: TAJIKISTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Tajikistan has adopted laws on demonopolization and competition, but institutions to enforce competition rules are in the stage of development. Phase-out 31 December 1997. COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The law on restricting monopoly activities has been adopted in Uzbekistan and has been in force since July 1992. However, the law (as is specified in Article 1 (3) does not extend to the activities of the enterprises in the energy sector. Phase-out 1 July 2001. Article 7 (4) ‘In the event that transit of energy materials and products cannot be achieved on commercial terms by means of energy transport facilities the Contracting Parties shall not place obstacles in the way of new capacity being established, except as may be otherwise provided in applicable legislation which is consistent with paragraph 1.’ COUNTRY: AZERBAIJAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description It is necessary to adopt a set of laws on energy, including licensing procedures regulating transit. During a transition period it is envisaged to build and modernize power transmission lines, as well as generating capacities with the aim of bringing their technical level to the world requirements and adjusting to conditions of a market economy. Phase-out 31 December 1999. COUNTRY: BELARUS Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Laws on energy, land and other subjects are being worked out at present, and until their final adoption, uncertainty remains as to the conditions for establishing new transport capacities for energy carriers in the territory of Belarus. Phase-out 31 December 1998. COUNTRY: BULGARIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Bulgaria has no laws regulating transit of energy materials and products. An overall restructuring is ongoing in the energy sector, including development of institutional framework, legislation and regulation. Phase-out The transitional period of seven years is necessary to bring the legislation concerning the transit of energy materials and products in full compliance with this provision. 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: GEORGIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description It is necessary to prepare a set of laws on the matter. At present there are substantially different conditions for the transport and transit of various energy sources in Georgia (electric power, natural gas, oil products, coal). Phase-out 1 January 1999. COUNTRY: HUNGARY Sector Electricity industry. Level of government National. Description According to the current legislation establishment and operation of high-voltage transmission lines is a State monopoly. The creation of the new legal and regulatory framework for establishment, operation and ownership of high-voltage transmission lines is under preparation. The Ministry of Industry and Trade has already taken the initiative to put forward a new Act on Electricity Power, that will have its impact also on the Civil Code and on the Act on Concession. Compliance can be achieved after entering in force of the new law on electricity and related regulatory decrees. Phase-out 31 December 1996. COUNTRY: POLAND Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Polish law on energy, being in the final stage of coordination, stipulates for creating new legal regulations similar to those applied by free market countries (licenses to generate, transmit, distribute and trade in energy carriers). Until it is adopted by the Parliament a temporary suspension of obligations under this paragraph is required. Phase-out 31 December 1995. Article 9 (1) ‘The Contracting Parties acknowledge the importance of open capital markets in encouraging the flow of capital to finance trade in energy materials and products and for the making of and assisting with regard to investments in economic activity in the energy sector in the areas of other Contracting Parties, particularly those with economies in transition. Each Contracting Party shall accordingly endeavour to promote conditions for access to its capital market by companies and nationals of other Contracting Parties, for the purpose of financing trade in energy materials and products and for the purpose of investment in economic activity in the energy sector in the areas of those other Contracting Parties, on a basis no less favourable than that which it accords in like circumstances to its own companies and nationals or companies and nationals of any other Contracting Party or any third State, whichever is the most favourable.’ COUNTRY: AZERBAIJAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Relevant legislation is at the stage of elaboration. Phase-out 1 January 2000. COUNTRY: BELARUS Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Relevant legislation is at the stage of elaboration. Phase-out 1 January 2000. COUNTRY: GEORGIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Relevant legislation is at the stage of preparation. Phase-out 1 January 1997. COUNTRY: KAZAKHSTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The bill on foreign investments is at the stage of authorization approval with the aim to adopt it by the Parliament in autumn 1994. Phase-out 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: KYRGYZSTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Relevant legislation is currently under preparation. Phase-out 1 July 2001 Article 10 (7) — Specific measures ‘Each Contracting Party shall accord to investments in its area of investors of another Contracting Party, and their related activities including management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal, treatment no less favourable than that which it accords to investments of its own investors or of the investors of any other Contracting Party or any third State and their related activities including management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal, whichever is the most favourable.’ COUNTRY: BULGARIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Foreign persons may not acquire property rights over land. A company with more than 50 % of foreign person's share may not acquire property right over agricultural land. Foreigners and foreign legal persons may not aquire property rights over land except by way of inheritance according to the law. In this case they have to make it over. A foreign person may aquire property rights over buildings, but without property rights over the land. Foreign persons or companies with foreign controlling participation must obtain a permit before performing the following activities: Phase-out 1 July 2001. Article 14 (1) (d) ‘Each Contracting Party shall with respect to investments in its area of investors of any other Contracting Party guarantee the freedom of transfer into and out of its area, including the transfer of: unspent earnings and other remuneration of personnel engaged from abroad in connection with that investment;’ COUNTRY: BULGARIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Foreign nationals employed by companies with more than 50 % of foreign participation, or by a foreign person registered as sole trader or a branch or a representative office of a foreign company in Bulgaria, receiving their salary in Bulgarian leva, may purchase foreign currency not exeeding 70 % of their salary, including social security payments. Phase-out 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: HUNGARY Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description According to the Act on Investments of Foreigners in Hungary, Article 33, foreign top managers, executive managers, members of the Supervisory Board and foreign employees may transfer their income up to 50 % of their aftertax earnings derived from the company of their employment through the bank of their company. Phase-out The phase out of this particular restriction depends on the progress Hungary is able to make in the implementation of the foreign exchange liberalization programme whose final target is the full convertibility of the Forint. This restriction does not create barriers to foreign investors. Phase-out is based on stipulations of Article 32. 1 July 2001. Article 20 (3) ‘Each Contracting Party shall designate one or more enquiry points to which requests for information about the abovementioned laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings may be addressed and shall communicate promptly such designation to the Secretariat which shall make it available on request.’ COUNTRY: ARMENIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description In Armenia there are no official enquiry points yet to which requests for information about the relevant laws and other regulations could be addressed. There is no information centre either. There is a plan to establish such a centre in 1994 to 1995. Technical assistance is required. Phase-out 31 December 1996. COUNTRY: AZERBAIJAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description There are no official enquiry points so far in Azerbaijan to which requests for information about relevant laws and regulations could be addressed. At present such information is concentrated in various organizations. Phase-out 31 December 1997. COUNTRY: BELARUS Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Official enquiry offices which could give information on laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings do not exist yet in Belarus. As far as the judicial decisions and administrative rulings are concerned there is no practice of their publishing. Phase-out 31 December 1998. COUNTRY: KAZAKHSTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description The process of establishing enquiry points has begun. As far as the judicial decisions and administrative rulings are concerned they are not published in Kazakhstan (except for some decisions made by the Supreme Court), because they are not considered to be sources of law. To change the existing practice will require a long transitional period. Phase-out 1 July 2001. COUNTRY: MOLDOVA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description It is necessary to establish enquiry points. Phase-out 31 December 1995. COUNTRY: THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION Sector All energy sectors. Level of government The Federation and the Republics constituting Federation. Description No official enquiry points exist in the Russian Federation as of now to which requests for information about relevant laws and other regulation acts could be addressed. As far as the judicial decisions and administrative rulings are concerned they are not considered to be sources of law. Phase-out 31 December 2000. COUNTRY: SLOVENIA Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description In Slovenia there are no official enquiry points yet to which requests for information about relevant laws and other regulatory acts could be addressed. At present such information is available in various ministries. The law on foreign investments which is under preparation foresees establishment of such an enquiry point. Phase-out 1 January 1998. COUNTRY: TAJIKISTAN Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description There are no enquiry points yet in Tajikistan to which requests for information about relevant laws and other regulations could be addressed. It is only a question of having available funding. Phase-out 31 December 1997. COUNTRY: UKRAINE Sector All energy sectors. Level of government National. Description Improvement of the present transparency of laws up to the level of international practice is required. Ukraine will have to establish enquiry points providing information about laws, regulations, judicial decisions and administrative rulings and standards of general application. Phase-out 1 January 1998. Article 22 (3) ‘Each Contracting Party shall ensure that if it establishes or maintains a State entity and entrusts the entity with regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority, such entity shall exercise that authority in a manner consistent with the Contracting Party's obligations under this Treaty.’ COUNTRY: THE CZECH REPUBLIC Sector Uranium and nuclear industries. Level of government National. Description In order to deplete uranium ore reserves that are stocked by Administration of State Material Reserves, no imports of uranium ore and concentrates, including uranium fuel bundles containing uranium of non-Czech origin, will be licensed. Phase-out 1 July 2001. ANNEX 2 DECISIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE ENERGY CHARTER TREATY The European Energy Charter Conference has adopted the following Decisions: 1. With respect to the Treaty as a whole In the event of a conflict between the treaty concerning Spitsbergen of 9 February 1920 (the Svalbard Treaty) and the Energy Charter Treaty, the treaty concerning Spitsbergen shall prevail to the extent of the conflict, without prejudice to the positions of the Contracting Parties in respect of the Svalbard Treaty. In the event of such conflict or a dispute as to whether there is such conflict or as to its extent, Article 16 and Part V of the Energy Charter Treaty shall not apply. 2. With respect to Article 10 (7) The Russian Federation may require that companies with foreign participation obtain legislative approval for the leasing of federally-owned property, provided that the Russian Federation shall ensure without exception that this process is not applied in a manner which discriminates among investments of investors of other Contracting Parties. 3. With respect to Article 14 ( 1 ) 4. With respect to Article 14 (2) Without prejudice to the requirements of Article 14 and its other international obligations, Romania shall endeavour during the transition to full convertibility of its national currency to take appropriate steps to improve the efficiency of its procedures for the transfers of investment returns and shall in any case guarantee such transfers in a freely convertible currency without restriction or a delay exceeding six months. Romania shall ensure that investments in its area of the investors of all other Contracting Parties are accorded, with respect to transfers, treatment no less favourable than that which it accords to investments of investors of any other Contracting Party or of any third State, whichever is the most favourable. 5. With respect to Articles 24 (4) (a) and 25 An investment of an investor referred to in Article 1 (7) (a) (ii), of a Contracting Party which is not party to an EIA or a member of a free-trade area or a customs union, shall be entitled to treatment accorded under such EIA, free-trade area or customs union, provided that the investment: ( 1 ) This Decision has been drafted in the understanding that Contracting Parties which intend to avail themselves of it and which also have entered into Partnership and Cooperation Agreements with the European Communities and their Member States containing an article disapplying those Agreements in favour of the Treaty, will exchange letters of understanding which have the legal effect of making Article 16 of the Treaty applicable between them in relation to this Decision. The exchange of letters shall be completed in good time prior to signature. ANNEX 3 ENERGY CHARTER PROTOCOL on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects PREAMBLE THE CONTRACTING PARTIES to this Protocol, Having regard to the European Energy Charter adopted in the Concluding Document of the Hague Conference on the European Energy Charter, signed at The Hague on 17 December 1991; and in particular to the declarations therein that cooperation is necessary in the field of energy efficiency and related environmental protection, Having regard also to the Energy Charter Treaty, opened for signature from 17 December 1994 to 16 June 1995, Mindful of the work undertaken by international organizations and fora in the field of energy efficiency and environmental aspects of the energy cycle; Aware of the improvements in supply security, and of the significant economic and environmental gains, which result from the implementation of cost-effective energy efficiency measures; and aware of their importance for restructuring economies and improving living standards; Recognizing that improvements in energy efficiency reduce negative environmental consequences of the energy cycle including global warming and acidification; Convinced that energy prices should reflect as far as possible a competitive market, ensuring market-oriented price formation, including fuller reflection of environmental costs and benefits, and recognizing that such price formation is vital to progress in energy efficiency and associated environmental protection; Appreciating the vital role of the private sector including small and medium-sized enterprises in promoting and implementing energy efficiency measures, and intent on ensuring a favourable institutional framework for economically viable investment in energy efficiency; Recognizing that commercial forms of cooperation may need to be complemented by intergovernmental cooperation, particularly in the area of energy policy formulation and analysis as well as in other areas which are essential to the enhancement of energy efficiency but not suitable for private funding; and Desiring to undertake cooperative and coordinated action in the field of energy efficiency and related environmental protection and to adopt a Protocol providing a framework for using energy as economically and efficiently as possible, HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: PART I INTRODUCTION Article 1 Scope and objectives of the Protocol 1. This Protocol defines policy principles for the promotion of energy efficiency as a considerable source of energy and for consequently reducing adverse environmental impacts of energy systems. It furthermore provides guidance on the development of energy efficiency programmes, indicates areas of cooperation and provides a framework for the development of cooperative and coordinated action. Such action may include the prospecting for, exploration, production, conversion, storage, transport, distribution, and consumption of energy, and may relate to any economic sector. 2. The objectives of this Protocol are: Article 2 Definitions As used in this Protocol: PART II POLICY PRINCIPLES Article 3 Basic principles Contracting Parties shall be guided by the following principles: Article 4 Division of responsibility and coordination Each Contracting Party shall strive to ensure that energy efficiency policies are coordinated among all of its responsible authorities. Article 5 Strategies and policy aims Contracting Parties shall formulate strategies and policy aims for improving energy efficiency and thereby reducing environmental impacts of the energy cycle as appropriate in relation to their own specific energy conditions. These strategies and policy aims shall be transparent to all interested parties. Article 6 Financing and financial incentives 1. Contracting Parties shall encourage the implementation of new approaches and methods for financing energy efficiency and energy related environmental protection investments, such as joint venture arrangements between energy users and external investors (hereinafter referred to as ‘Third Party Financing’). 2. Contracting Parties shall endeavour to take advantage of and promote access to private capital markets and existing international financing institutions in order to facilitate investments in improving energy efficiency and in environmental protection related to energy efficiency. 3. Contracting Parties may, subject to the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty and to their other international legal obligations, provide fiscal or financial incentives to energy users in order to facilitate market penetration of energy efficiency technologies, products and services. They shall strive to do so in a manner that both ensures transparency and minimizes the distortion of international markets. Article 7 Promotion of energy efficient technology 1. Consistent with the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty, Contracting Parties shall encourage commercial trade and cooperation in energy efficient and environmentally sound technologies, energy related services and management practices. 2. Contracting Parties shall promote the use of these technologies, services and management practices throughout the energy cycle. Article 8 Domestic programmes 1. In order to achieve the policy aims formulated according to Article 5, each Contracting Party shall develop, implement and regularly update energy efficiency programmes best suited to its circumstances. 2. These programmes may include activities such as the: 3. In implementing their energy efficiency programmes, Contracting Parties shall ensure that adequate institutional and legal infrastructures exist. PART III INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION Article 9 Areas of cooperation The cooperation between Contracting Parties may take any appropriate form. Areas of possible cooperation are listed in the Annex. PART IV ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL ARRANGEMENTS Article 10 Role of the Charter Conference 1. All decisions made by the Charter Conference in accordance with this Protocol shall be made by only those Contracting Parties to the Energy Charter Treaty who are Contracting Parties to this Protocol. 2. The Charter Conference shall endeavour to adopt, within 180 days after the entry into force of this Protocol, procedures for keeping under review and facilitating the implementation of its provisions, including reporting requirements, as well as for identifying areas of cooperation in accordance with Article 9. Article 11 Secretariat and financing 1. The Secretariat established pursuant to Article 35 of the Energy Charter Treaty shall provide the Charter Conference with all necessary assistance for the performance of its duties under this Protocol and provide such other services in support of the Protocol as may be required from time to time, subject to approval by the Charter Conference. 2. The costs of the Secretariat and Charter Conference arising from this Protocol shall be met by the Contracting Parties to this Protocol according to their capacity to pay, determined according to the formula specified in Annex B to the Energy Charter Treaty. Article 12 Voting 1. Unanimity of Contracting Parties present and voting at the meeting of the Charter Conference where such matters fall to be decided shall be required for decisions to: Contracting Parties shall make every effort to reach agreement by consensus on any other matter requiring their decision pursuant to this Protocol. If agreement cannot be reached by consensus, decisions on non-budgetary matters shall be taken by a three-fourths majority of Contracting Parties present and voting at the meeting of the Charter Conference at which such matters fall to be decided. Decisions on budgetary matters shall be taken by a qualified majority of Contracting Parties whose assessed contributions pursuant to Article 11 (2) represent, in combination, at least three-fourths of the total assessed contributions. 2. For purposes of this Article, ‘Contracting Parties present and voting’ means Contracting Parties to this Protocol present and casting affirmative or negative votes, provided that the Charter Conference may decide upon rules of procedure to enable such decisions to be taken by Contracting Parties by correspondence. 3. Except as provided in paragraph 1 in relation to budgetary matters, no decision referred to in this Article shall be valid unless it has the support of a simple majority of Contracting Parties. 4. A Regional Economic Integration Organization shall, when voting, have a number of votes equal to the number of its Member States which are Contracting Parties to this Protocol; provided that such an Organization shall not exercise its right to vote if its Member States exercise theirs, and vice versa. 5. In the event of persistent arrears in a Contracting Party's discharge of financial obligations under this Protocol, the Charter Conference may suspend that Contracting Party's voting rights in whole or in part. Article 13 Relation to the Energy Charter Treaty 1. In the event of inconsistency between the provisions of this Protocol and the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty, the provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, prevail. 2. Article 10(1) and Article 12(1) to (3) shall not apply to votes in the Charter Conference on amendments to this Protocol which assign duties or functions to the Charter Conference or the Secretariat, the establishment of which is provided for in the Energy Charter Treaty. PART V FINAL PROVISIONS Article 14 Signature This Protocol shall be open for signature at Lisbon from 17 December 1994 to 16 June 1995 by the States and Regional Economic Integration Organizations whose representatives have signed the Charter and the Energy Charter Treaty. Article 15 Ratification, acceptance or approval This Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by signatories. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Depositary. Article 16 Accession This Protocol shall be open for accession, from the date on which the Protocol is closed for signature, by States and Regional Economic Integration Organizations which have signed the Charter and are Contracting Parties to the Energy Charter Treaty, on terms to be approved by the Charter Conference. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Depositary. Article 17 Amendments 1. Any Contracting Party may propose amendments to this Protocol. 2. The text of any proposed amendment to this Protocol shall be communicated to Contracting Parties by the Secretariat at least three months before the date on which it is proposed for adoption by the Charter Conference. 3. Amendments to this Protocol, texts of which have been adopted by the Charter Conference, shall be communicated by the Secretariat to the Depositary which shall submit them to all Contracting Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval. 4. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval of amendments to this Protocol shall be deposited with the Depositary. Amendments shall enter into force between Contracting Parties having ratified, accepted or approved them on the 30th day after deposit with the Depositary of instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval by at least three-fourths of the Contracting Parties. Thereafter the amendments shall enter into force for any other Contracting Party on the 30th day after that Contracting Party deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval of the amendments. Article 18 Entry into force 1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the 30th day after the date of deposit of the 15th instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval thereof, or of accession thereto, by a State or Regional Economic Integration Organization which is a signatory to the Charter and a Contracting Party to the Energy Charter Treaty or on the same date as the Energy Charter Treaty enters into force, whichever is later. 2. For each State or Regional Economic Integration Organization for which the Energy Charter Treaty has entered into force and which ratifies, accepts, or approves this Protocol or accedes thereto after the Protocol has entered into force in accordance with paragraph 1, the Protocol shall enter into force on the 30th day after the date of deposit by such State or Regional Economic Integration Organization of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. 3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, any instrument deposited by a Regional Economic Integration Organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by Member States of such Organization. Article 19 Reservations No reservations may be made to this Protocol. Article 20 Withdrawal 1. At any time after this Protocol has entered into force for a Contracting Party, that Contracting Party may give written notification to the Depositary of its withdrawal from the Protocol. 2. Any Contracting Party which withdraws from the Energy Charter Treaty shall be considered as also having withdrawn from this Protocol. 3. The effective date of withdrawal pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be 90 days after receipt of notification by the Depositary. The effective date of withdrawal pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be the same as the effective date of withdrawal from the Energy Charter Treaty. Article 21 Depositary The Government of the Portuguese Republic shall be the Depositary of this Protocol. Article 22 Authentic texts In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect, have signed this Protocol in English, French, German, Italian, Russian and Spanish, of which every text is equally authentic, in one original, which will be deposited with the Government of the Portuguese Republic. Done at Lisbon on the seventeenth day of December in the year one thousand nine hundred and ninety-four. Fait à Lisbonne, le dix-sept décembre mil neuf cent quatre-vingt-quatorze. Geschehen zu Lissabon am siebzehnten Dezember neunzehnhundertvierundneunzig. Fatto a Lisbona il diciassettesimo giorno del mese di dicembre dell'anno millenovecentonovanta-quattro. Hecho en Lisboa, el diecisiete de diciembre de mil novecientos noventa y cuatro. Udfærdiget i Lissabon, den syttende december nittenhundrede og fireoghalvfems. Έγινε στη Λισαβόνα, στις δέκα επτά Δεκεμβρίου του έτους χίλια ενιακόσια ενενήντα τέσσερα. Gedaan te Lissabon, de zeventiende december negentienhonderd vierennegentig. Feito em Lisboa, aos dezassete de Dezembro de mil novecentos e noventa e quatro. Tehty Lissabonissa seitsemäntenätoista päivänä joulukuuta tuhatyhdeksänsataayhdeksänkymmentäneljä. Som skedde i Lissabon den sjuttonde december nittonhundranittiofyra. Për Republikën e Shqipërisë For Australia Für die Republik Österreich Pour le royaume de Belgique Voor het Koninkrijk België Für das Königreich Belgien Cette signature engage également la Communauté française de Belgique, la Communauté flamande, la Communauté germanophone de Belgique, la Région wallonne, la Région flamande et la région de Bruxelles-Capitale. Deze handtekening bindt eveneens de Vlaamse Gemeenschap, de Franse Gemeenschap van België, de Duitstalige Gemeenschap van België, het Waals Gewest en het Brussels Hoofdstedelijk Gewest. Diese Unterschrift bindet ebenso die Flämische Gemeinschaft, die Französische Gemeinschaft Belgiens, die Deutschsprachige Gemeinschaft Belgiens, die Flämische Region, die Wallonische Region und die Region Brüssel-Hauptstadt. For Canada Pour le Canada za Republiku Hrvatsku For the Republic of Cyprus Za Českou Republiku For Kongeriget Danmark Eesti Vabariigi nimel Por las Comunidades Europeas For De Europæiske Fællesskaber Für die Europäischen Gemeinschaften Για τις Ευρωπαϊκές Κοινότητες For the European Communities Pour les Communautés européennes Per le Comunità europee Voor de Europese Gemeenschappen Pelas Comunidades Europeias Euroopan yhteisöjen puolesta På Europeiska gemenskapernas vägnar Suomen tasavallan puolesta Pour la République française Für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland Για την Ελληνική Δημοκρατία A Magyar Köztársaság nevében Fyrir hönd Lyòveldisins islands Thar cheann na hÉireann For Ireland Per la Repubblica italiana Latvijas Republikas varda Für das Fürstentum Liechtenstein Lietuvos Respublikos vardu Pour le grand-duché de Luxembourg For the Republic of Malta Pentru Republica Moldova Voor het Koninkrijk der Nederlanden For Kongeriket Norge Za Rzeczpospolitą Polską Pela República Portuguesa Pentru Rômania Za Slovenskú republiku Za Republiko Slovenijo Por el Reino de España För Konungariket Sverige Für die Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft Pour la Confédération Suisse Per la Confederazione svizzera Türkiye Cumhuriyeti adina For the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland For the United States of America Illustrative and non-exhaustive list of possible areas of cooperation pursuant to Article 9 Development of energy efficiency programmes, including identifying energy efficiency barriers and potentials, and the development of energy labelling and efficiency standards. Assessment of the environmental impacts of the Energy Cycle. Development of economic, legislative and regulatory measures. Technology transfer, technical assistance and industrial joint ventures subject to international property rights regimes and other applicable international agreements. Research and development. Education, training, information and statistics. Identification and assessment of measures such as fiscal or other market-based instruments, including tradable permits to take account of external, notably environmental, costs and benefits. Energy analysis and policy formulation:. Evaluation of economic instruments for improving energy efficiency and environmental objectives. Energy efficiency analysis in refining, conversion, transport and distribution of hydro-carbons. Improving energy efficiency in power generation and transmission: Improving energy efficiency in the building sector: Municipalities and local community services: Improving energy efficiency in the industrial sector: Improving energy efficiency in the transport sector: Information: Training and education: Financing: Statement submitted by the European Communities to the Secretariat of the Energy Charter pursuant to Article 26(3)(b)(ii) of the Energy Charter Treaty The European Communities, as Contracting Parties to the Energy Charter Treaty, make the following statement concerning their policies, practices and conditions with regard to disputes between an investor and a Contracting Parties and their submission to international arbitration or conciliation: ‘The European Communities are a regional economic integration organisation within the meaning of the Energy Charter Treaty. The Communities exercise the competences conferred on them by their Member States through autonomous decision-making and judicial institutions. The European Communities and their Member States have both concluded the Energy Charter Treaty and are thus internationally responsible for the fulfilment of the obligations contained therein, in accordance with their respective competences. The Communities and the Member States will, if necessary, determine among them who is the respondent party to arbitration proceedings initiated by an Investor of another Contracting Party. In such case, upon the request of the Investor, the Communities and the Member States concerned will make such determination within a period of 30 days ( 1 ) . The Court of Justice of the European Communities, as the judicial institution of the Communities, is competent to examine any question relating to the application and interpretation of the constituent treaties and acts adopted thereunder, including international agreements concluded by the Communities, which under certain conditions may be invoked before the Court of Justice. Any case brought before the Court of Justice of the European Communities by an investor of another Contracting Party in application of the forms of action provided by the constituent treaties of the Communities falls under Article 26(2)(a) of the Energy Charter Treaty ( 2 ) . Given that the Communities' legal system provides for means of such action, the European Communities have not given their unconditional consent to the submission of a dispute to international arbitration or conciliation. As far as international arbitration is concerned, it should be stated that the provisions of the ICSID Convention do not allow the European Communities to become parties to it. The provisions of the ICSID Additional Facility also do not allow the Communities to make use of them. Any arbitral award against the European Communities will be implemented by the Communities' institutions, in accordance with their obligation under Article 26(8) of the Energy Charter Treaty.’ ( 1 ) This is without prejudice to the right of the investor to initiate proceedings against both the Communities and their Member States. ( 2 ) Article 26(2)(a) is also applicable in the case where the Court of Justice of the European Communities may be called upon to examine the application or interpretation of the Energy Charter Treaty on the basis of a request for a preliminary ruling submitted by a court or tribunal of a Member State in accordance with Article 177 of the EC Treaty. Information concerning the entry into force of the Energy Charter Treaty and the Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects The European Communities, as Contracting Parties to the Energy Charter Treaty and the Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects, have deposited their instruments of approval with the Government of the Portuguese Republic on 16 December 1997. In accordance with Article 44(1) of the Energy Charter Treaty and Article 18(1) of the Protocol, the Energy Charter Treaty and the Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects will enter into force for the European Communities on 16 April 1998, following the deposit of the thirtieth instrument of ratification on 16 January 1998.