COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2023/2749 of 11 December 2023 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries (notified under document C(2023) 8434) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 December 2023. For the Commission Virginius SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 establishing a forum for the exchange of information pursuant to Article 13 of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions ( OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 ). ( 3 ) BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES (BAT) CONCLUSIONS FOR SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ANIMAL BY-PRODUCTS AND/OR EDIBLE CO-PRODUCTS INDUSTRIES These BAT conclusions concern the following activities specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU: These BAT conclusions also cover the following: These BAT conclusions do not cover the following: Other BAT conclusions and reference documents which could be relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions include the following: These BAT conclusions apply without prejudice to other relevant legislation, e.g. on hygiene, food/feed safety, animal welfare, biosecurity, energy efficiency (energy efficiency first principle). DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: ACRONYMS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following acronyms apply: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water The BAT-AELs for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of water), expressed in mg/l. Averaging periods associated with the BAT-AELs refer to either of the following two cases: Time-proportional composite samples can be used provided that sufficient flow stability is demonstrated. Alternatively, spot samples may be taken, provided that the effluent is appropriately mixed and homogeneous. In the case of total organic carbon (TOC), total nitrogen (TN) and chemical oxygen demand (COD), the calculation of the average abatement efficiency referred to in these BAT conclusions (see Table 1.1) is based on the influent and effluent load of the waste water treatment plant. The BAT-AELs apply at the point where the emission leaves the installation. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) and indicative emission level for channelled emissions to air The BAT-AELs and the indicative emission level for channelled emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of waste gas) under the following standard conditions: dry gas at a temperature of 273,15 K (or wet gas at a temperature of 293 K in the case of odour concentration) and a pressure of 101,3 kPa, without correction to a reference oxygen level, and expressed in the unit mg/Nm 3 or ou E /m 3 . For averaging periods of BAT-AELs and the indicative emission level for channelled emissions to air, the following definition applies. When the waste gases of two or more sources (e.g. dryers) are discharged through a common stack, the BAT-AEL and the indicative emission level apply to the combined discharge from the stack. Indicative emission levels for refrigerant losses The indicative emission levels for refrigerant losses refer to a rolling average over 3 years of yearly losses. Yearly losses are expressed as a percentage (%) of the total amount of refrigerant contained in the cooling system(s). The losses for a specific refrigerant in 1 year are equal to the amount of that refrigerant used to refill the cooling system(s). Other environmental performance levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AEPLs) BAT-AEPLs for specific waste water discharge The environmental performance levels related to specific waste water discharge refer to yearly averages and are calculated using the following equation: where: The carcass weight depends on the animal species under consideration: BAT-AEPLs for specific net energy consumption The environmental performance levels related to specific net energy consumption refer to yearly averages and are calculated using the following equation: where: The carcass weight depends on the animal species under consideration (see General consideration for BAT-AEPLs for specific waste water discharge). Unless otherwise stated, the calculation of the energy consumption of slaughterhouses may include the energy consumed by FDM activities. 1.1 General BAT conclusions 1.1.1 Overall environmental performance Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 establishes the European Union eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), which is an example of an EMS consistent with this BAT. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the EMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the inventory will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the CMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the plant. Applicability The level of detail and degree of formalisation of the OTNOC management plan will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the plant, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2 Monitoring Description Monitoring preferentially includes direct measurements. Calculations or recording, e.g. using suitable meters or invoices, can also be used. The monitoring is performed at installation level (and can be broken down to the most appropriate process level) and considers any significant changes in the processes. 1.1.3 Energy efficiency 1.1.4 Water consumption and waste water generation 1.1.5 Harmful substances 1.1.6 Resource efficiency 1.1.7 Emissions to water Description The appropriate buffer storage capacity is determined by a risk assessment (taking into account the nature of the pollutant(s), the effects of these pollutants on further waste water treatment, the receiving environment, the amount of waste water generated, etc.). A buffer tank is typically designed to store the amounts of waste water generated during several peak hours of operation. The waste water from this buffer storage is discharged after appropriate measures are taken (e.g. monitoring, treatment, reuse). Applicability For existing plants, the technique may not be applicable due to lack of space and/or due to the layout of the waste water collection system. The associated monitoring is given in BAT 7. 1.1.8 Emissions to air 1.1.9 Noise Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where a noise nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. 1.1.10 Odour Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where an odour nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. 1.1.11 Use of refrigerants Description Suitable refrigerants include for example water, carbon dioxide, propane and ammonia. 1.2 BAT conclusions for slaughterhouses The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. 1.2.1 Energy efficiency 1.2.2 Water consumption and waste water generation 1.2.3 Use of refrigerants 1.3 BAT conclusions for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. 1.3.1 Energy efficiency 1.3.2 Water consumption and waste water generation The environmental performance levels for specific waste water discharge given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1.4. Table 1.9 BAT-associated environmental performance levels (BAT-AEPLs) for specific waste water discharge The associated monitoring is given in BAT 6. 1.3.3 Emissions to air 1.4 Description of techniques 1.4.1 Emissions to water 1.4.2 Emissions to air 1.4.3 Use of refrigerants ( 1 ) Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment ( OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 ). ( 2 ) Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from medium combustion plants ( OJ L 313, 28.11.2015, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste ( OJ L 182, 16.7.1999, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1 . ( 5 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations, a 30-minute sampling/measurement is inappropriate, a more representative sampling/measurement procedure may be employed (e.g. for the odour concentration). ( 001 ) In the case of batch discharge less frequent than the minimum monitoring frequency, monitoring is carried out once per batch. ( 002 ) In the case of an indirect discharge, the monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every year for Cu and Zn and once every 6 months for AOX and Cl - if the downstream waste water treatment plant is designed and equipped appropriately to abate the pollutants concerned. ( 003 ) The monitoring only applies when the substance/parameter concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. ( 004 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 6 months if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 005 ) The monitoring only applies in the case of a direct discharge. ( 006 ) Either COD or TOC is monitored. TOC monitoring is the preferred option because it does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 007 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every month if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 7 ) To the extent possible, the measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. ( 8 ) The monitoring only applies when H 2 S is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. ( 9 ) This includes combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases, including non-condensable gases. ( 10 ) The monitoring only applies when odour is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. ( 11 ) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy ( OJ L327, 22.12.2000, p. 1 ) ( 12 ) The descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 1.4.1. ( 13 ) The averaging periods are defined in the general considerations. ( 14 ) No BAT-AEL applies for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). As an indication, the yearly average BOD 5 level in the effluent from a biological waste water treatment plant will generally be ≤ 20 mg/l. ( 15 ) Either the BAT-AEL for COD or the BAT-AEL for TOC applies. The BAT-AEL for TOC is the preferred option because TOC monitoring does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 16 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 120 mg/l for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products, only if the COD abatement efficiency is ≥ 95 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. ( 17 ) The BAT-AEL range may not apply for discharges of seawater from fishmeal and fish oil production. ( 18 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 40 mg/l for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products, only if the TOC abatement efficiency is ≥ 95 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. ( 19 ) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range is typically achieved when using filtration (e.g. sand filtration, microfiltration, ultrafiltration). ( 20 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 40 mg/l for gelatine manufacturing. ( 21 ) The BAT-AEL may not apply when the temperature of the waste water is low (e.g. below 12 °C) for prolonged periods. ( 22 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 40 mg/l for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products only if the Total N abatement efficiency is ≥ 90 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. ( 23 ) The BAT-AEL only applies when the substance/parameter concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. ( 24 ) The BAT-AEL only applies to slaughterhouses. ( 25 ) The averaging periods are defined in the general considerations. ( 26 ) The BAT-AELs may not apply if the downstream waste water treatment plant is designed and equipped appropriately to abate the pollutants concerned, provided this does not lead to a higher level of pollution in the environment. ( 27 ) The BAT-AEL only applies when the substance/parameter concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. ( 28 ) The BAT-AEL only applies to slaughterhouses. ( 29 ) The BAT-AEL range only applies when using exclusively natural gas as a fuel. ( 30 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 350 mg/Nm 3 for recuperative thermal oxidisers. ( 31 ) Either the BAT-AEPL expressed in kWh/tonne of carcasses or the BAT-AEPL expressed in kWh/animal applies. ( 32 ) The BAT-AEPLs refer to the exclusive slaughtering of the animals in question. ( 33 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 415 kWh/tonne of carcasses if the specific net energy consumption includes energy consumed by FDM activities. ( 34 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 150 kWh/animal if the specific net energy consumption includes energy consumed by FDM activities. ( 35 ) The BAT-AEPL range may not be applicable to installations producing more than 50 % convenience products (i.e. meat products processed further than simple meat cuts, e.g. marinated products, sausages) as a proportion of the total weight of the FDM products. ( 36 ) Either the BAT-AEPL expressed in m 3 /tonne of carcasses or the BAT-AEPL expressed in m 3 /animal applies. ( 37 ) The BAT-AEPLs refer to the exclusive slaughtering of the animals in question. ( 38 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 5,25 m 3 /tonne of carcasses in case the specific waste water discharge includes water used by FDM activities. ( 39 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 2,45 m 3 /animal in case the specific waste water discharge includes water used by FDM activities. ( 40 ) The BAT-AEPL applies to installations using exclusively pig skin as raw material. ( 41 ) The BAT-AEPL range may not apply for discharges of seawater from fishmeal and fish oil production. ( 42 ) The BAT-AEPL applies to installations using exclusively pig skin as raw material. ( 43 ) The BAT-AEL range may not apply in the case of combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases when both of the following conditions are fulfilled: ( 44 ) In the case of abatement technique(s) other than combustion of malodorous gases, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 3 000 ou E /m 3 if the abatement efficiency is ≥ 92 % or, as an alternative, process odour is not perceptible in the treated waste gases. ( 45 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 7 mg/Nm 3 in the case of combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases. ( 46 ) The BAT-AEL range only applies when H 2 S is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. ( 47 ) The BAT-AEL range may not apply in the case of combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases when both of the following conditions are fulfilled: ( 48 ) The BAT-AEL only applies to the combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodourous gases, including non-condensable gases. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)