COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION of 16 May 2012 as regards emergency measures to prevent the introduction into and the spread within the Union of Epitrix cucumeris (Harris), Epitrix similaris (Gentner), Epitrix subcrinita (Lec.) and Epitrix tuberis (Gentner) (notified under document C(2012) 3137) (2012/270/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community ( 1 ) , and in particular the third sentence of Article 16(3), thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Prohibitions concerning Epitrix cucumeris (Harris), Epitrix similaris (Gentner), Epitrix subcrinita (Lec.) and Epitrix tuberis (Gentner) Epitrix cucumeris (Harris), Epitrix similaris (Gentner), Epitrix subcrinita (Lec.) and Epitrix tuberis (Gentner), hereinafter ‘the specified organisms’, shall not be introduced into or spread within the Union. Article 2 Introduction of potato tubers into the Union 1. Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L., including those intended for planting, hereinafter ‘potato tubers’, originating ( 2 ) in third countries where one or more of the specified organisms are known to be present may only be introduced into the Union if they comply with the specific import requirements, as set out in point (1) of Section 1 of Annex I. 2. On entry into the Union potato tubers shall be inspected by the responsible official body in accordance with point (5) of Section 1 of Annex I. Article 3 Movement of potato tubers within the Union Potato tubers originating in demarcated areas within the Union established in accordance with Article 5 may be moved within the Union only if they meet the conditions, as set out in point (1) of Section 2 of Annex I. Potato tubers introduced into the Union in accordance with Article 2 from third countries where one or more of the specified organisms are known to be present, may be moved within the Union only if they meet the conditions, as set out in point (3) of Section 2 of Annex I. Article 4 Surveys and notifications of the specified organisms 1. Member States shall conduct annual official surveys for the presence of the specified organisms on potato tubers and, where appropriate, other host plants, including fields where potato tubers are growing, in their territory. Member States shall notify the results of those surveys to the Commission and the other Member States by 30 April of each year. 2. Any presence or suspected occurrence of a specified organism shall immediately be notified to the responsible official bodies. Article 5 Demarcated areas and measures to be taken in such areas 1. Where based on the results of the surveys referred to in Article 4(1) or other evidence, a Member State confirms the presence of a specified organism in a part of its territory, that Member State shall without delay establish a demarcated area consisting of an infested zone and a buffer zone, as set out in Section 1 of Annex II. It shall take measures, as laid down in Section 2 of Annex II. 2. Where a Member State takes measures in accordance with paragraph 1, it shall immediately notify the list of demarcated areas, information on their delimitation, including maps showing their location, and a description of the measures applied in those demarcated areas. Article 6 Compliance Member States shall take all measures to comply with this Decision and, if necessary, amend the measures which they have adopted to protect themselves against the introduction and spread of the specified organisms in such a manner that those measures comply with this Decision. They shall immediately inform the Commission of those measures. Article 7 Application This Decision shall apply until 30 September 2014. Article 8 Addressees This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 16 May 2012. For the Commission John DALLI Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Glossary of Phytosanitary Terms — Reference Standard ISPM No 5 and Phytosanitary Certificates — Reference Standard ISPM No 12 by the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention, Rome. ANNEX I SECTION 1 Specific requirements for introduction into the Union SECTION 2 Conditions for movement ( 1 ) OJ L 313, 12.10.2004, p. 16 . ( 2 ) OJ L 4, 8.1.1993, p. 22 . ( 3 ) OJ L 344, 26.11.1992, p. 38 . ( 4 ) OJ L 205, 17.8.1993, p. 22 . ANNEX II DEMARCATED AREAS AND MEASURES, AS PROVIDED FOR IN ARTICLE 5 SECTION 1 Establishment of demarcated areas SECTION 2 Measures in demarcated areas, as provided for in the second subparagraph of Article 5(1) Measures taken by Member States in demarcated areas shall include at least the following: