COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2020/689 of 17 December 2019 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards rules for surveillance, eradication programmes, and disease-free status for certain listed and emerging diseases (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health (‘Animal Health Law ( 1 ) ’), and in particular Article 29, Article 31(5), 32(2), 37(5), Article 39, Article 41(3), Article 42(6) and Article 280(4) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: PART I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject-matter and scope 1. This Regulation supplements the rules on surveillance, eradication programmes and disease-free status for certain listed and emerging diseases of terrestrial, aquatic and other animals as provided for in Regulation (EU) 2016/429. 2. Chapter 1 of Part II of this Regulation lays down the rules for surveillance of the diseases referred to in Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 and the emerging diseases as defined in Article 6(2) of that Regulation in relation to: 3. Chapter 2 of Part II of this Regulation lays down the rules for eradication programmes for the diseases of terrestrial animals referred to in points (b) and (c) of Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 in relation to: 4. Chapter 3 of Part II of this Regulation lays down the rules for eradication programmes for the diseases of aquatic animals referred to in points (b) and (c) Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 in relation to: 5. Chapter 4 of Part II of this Regulation lays down the rules for disease-free status with regard to certain diseases of terrestrial and aquatic animals referred to in Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 in relation to: 6. Part III of this Regulation lays down transitional and final provisions in relation to: Article 2 Definitions For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply: PART II SURVEILLANCE, ERADICATION PROGRAMMES, DISEASE-FREE STATUS CHAPTER 1 Surveillance Section 1 Design of surveillance, Targeted animal population and diagnostic methods Article 3 Design of surveillance 1. The competent authority shall design the surveillance for listed and emerging diseases of terrestrial animals and other animals taking into account: 2. The competent authority shall design the surveillance for listed and emerging diseases of aquatic animals taking into account: Article 4 Targeted animal population 1. The competent authority shall specify the targeted animal population relevant to the surveillance referred to in Article 3 for each listed disease and, when relevant, for each emerging disease and shall include: 2. To ensure the early detection of an emerging disease in species other than those referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1, the competent authority shall include, in the targeted animal population, kept animals of species that are not listed for the purpose of the relevant listed disease if the following criteria apply: Article 5 Exclusion of certain kept terrestrial animals from the targeted animal population 1. By way of derogation from point (a) of Article 4(1), the competent authority may limit the targeted animal population for the surveillance of a disease other than a category A disease to the categories of kept animals of listed species that are subject, for that disease, to: 2. The categories of kept animals referred to in paragraph 1 may be based on the animals’ age, their sex, the location and type of production. Article 6 Diagnostic methods 1. The competent authority shall ensure that the collection of samples, the techniques, validation and interpretation of the diagnostic methods for the purposes of surveillance shall comply: 2. The diagnostic methods for granting and maintaining disease-free status are laid down in: Article 7 Contribution of official controls and other official activities to animal health surveillance 1. The competent authority shall, if relevant, include in the design of the surveillance referred to in Article 3 of this Regulation the outcome of the official controls and other official activities defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625. These official controls and other official activities include: 2. When the competent authority suspects a listed disease or an emerging disease in the context of official controls or other official activities referred to in paragraph 1, it shall ensure that all relevant authorities are informed. This shall be done: Section 2 Disease confirmation and case definitions Article 8 Criteria for official confirmation of listed diseases, other than category A diseases, and certain emerging diseases and subsequent confirmation of outbreaks 1. The competent authority shall, on suspicion of listed diseases, other than category A disease, or of an emerging disease, conduct an investigation to confirm or to rule out the presence of that disease when: 2. The competent authority shall confirm an outbreak of any of the diseases referred to in paragraph 1 when it has classified an animal or a group of animals as a confirmed case of these diseases in accordance with Article 9(2). Article 9 Case definitions 1. The competent authority shall classify an animal or a group of animals as a suspected case of a listed disease or of an emerging disease when: 2. The competent authority shall classify an animal or a group of animals, as a confirmed case of a listed disease or of an emerging disease when: 3. Disease specific definitions of a suspected case and a confirmed case of listed diseases are laid down for terrestrial animals in Annex I and for aquatic animals in point 3 of Section 5 of Chapters 1 to 6 of Part II of Annex VI. 4. In the absence of disease specific definitions as provided for in paragraph 3, the criteria laid down in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply to definitions of a suspected case and a confirmed case of listed diseases and, if relevant, emerging diseases. Section 3 Union surveillance programme Article 10 Criteria for and contents of Union surveillance programmes 1. A category E disease shall be subject to a Union surveillance programme in accordance with Article 28 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 if it meets all of the following criteria: 2. The competent authority shall implement Union surveillance programmes for the relevant disease in accordance with the contents set out in Annex II. Article 11 Information to be included in the submission of and reporting on Union surveillance programmes 1. The competent authority shall, when submitting a Union surveillance programme, include in that submission at least the following information: 2. The competent authority shall, when reporting on a Union surveillance programme, include in that report at least the following information: CHAPTER 2 Eradication programmes for category B and C diseases of terrestrial animals Section 1 General provisions Article 12 Disease control strategy for the eradication of category B and C diseases of terrestrial animals 1. The competent authority shall, when establishing a compulsory eradication programme for a category B disease or an optional eradication programme for a category C disease of terrestrial animals, base those programmes on a disease control strategy that includes for each disease: 2. The competent authority may include in the eradication programme coordinated measures at its common land or coastal border with other Member States or third countries to ensure that the objectives of the programme are achieved and that the results will last. Where such coordination has not been established, the competent authority shall include in the eradication programme, if feasible, effective risk mitigating measures, including intensified surveillance. Article 13 Territorial scope and animal populations 1. The competent authority shall determine the scope of the eradication programme, including: 2. The territory covered by the eradication programme referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 shall be: 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, the competent authority may define zones smaller than 2 000 km 2 taking into account: Article 14 Final and intermediate targets 1. The competent authority shall include in the eradication programme qualitative and quantitative final targets that are covering all the disease specific requirements laid down in Article 72 for granting disease-free status. 2. The competent authority shall include in the eradication programme qualitative and quantitative intermediate annual or multiannual targets to reflect progress made towards the final targets. These intermediate targets shall include: Article 15 Period of application 1. The competent authority shall include in the eradication programme the period of application taking into account the initial situation and the intermediate targets indicated in Article 14(2). 2. For category C diseases, the period of application of the eradication programme shall not exceed 6 years from the date of its initial approval by the Commission in accordance with Article 31(3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. In duly justified cases, the Commission may, upon request of Member States, extend the period of application of the eradication programme for an additional 6-year period. Section 2 Requirements for eradication programmes based on granting disease-free status at the level of establishments Article 16 Disease control strategy based on the disease-free status at establishment level 1. The competent authority shall design the disease control strategy of an eradication programme with respect to the targeted animal population kept in establishments for the following diseases of terrestrial animals: 2. Disease control strategies of eradication programmes referred to in paragraph 1 shall be based on: Article 17 Targeted and additional animal populations for eradication programmes for certain diseases 1. The competent authority shall apply a compulsory eradication programme to the following targeted animal populations: 2. The competent authority shall apply the optional eradication programme to the following targeted animal populations: 3. The competent authority shall include additional animal populations where it considers that such animals pose a significant risk to the health status of animals referred to in paragraphs 1 or 2. Article 18 Obligations of operators with respect to eradication programmes for certain diseases 1. The operators of establishments where animals from the targeted animal populations referred to in Article 17 are kept, other than slaughterhouses, shall comply with the following general and disease specific requirements to obtain and maintain the disease-free status of the establishments: 2. The operators of slaughterhouses, where animals from the targeted animal populations referred to in Article 17 are kept and slaughtered shall comply with the general requirements laid down in points (a)(i), (iv) and (v) of paragraph 1. Article 19 Derogation with regard to granting disease-free status to establishments By way of derogation from Article 18 and provided that the relevant targeted animal populations comply with the general requirements laid down in point (a) of Article 18(1), the competent authority may decide that the obligations of operators to obtain and maintain disease-free status laid down in Article 18(1) do not apply to operators of the following establishments: Article 20 Obligation of the competent authority to grant, suspend and withdraw disease-free status 1. The competent authority shall grant disease-free status at establishment level according to the compliance of the establishments’ operators with the requirements laid down in Article 18. 2. The competent authority shall suspend or withdraw disease-free status at establishment level when the conditions for suspension or withdrawal have been met. Those conditions are laid down in: 3. The competent authority shall specify: 4. The competent authority may attribute distinct health status to different epidemiological units of the same establishment provided that its operator: Article 21 Disease control measures in the event of suspicion of certain diseases 1. The competent authority shall, when it suspects a case of the relevant disease, conduct investigations, initiate an epidemiological enquiry and suspend the disease-free status of the establishment where the suspected case occurred until the investigations and the epidemiological enquiry are concluded. 2. Pending the outcome of the investigations and the epidemiological enquiry referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority: 3. The competent authority shall maintain the measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 until the presence of the disease has been ruled out or confirmed. Article 22 Extension of disease control measures in the event of suspicion of certain diseases 1. The competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, extend the measures laid down in Article 21 to: 2. If the presence of the disease is suspected in wild animals, the competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, extend to the establishments that are at risk of infection the measures laid down in Article 21. Article 23 Derogations from disease control measures in the event of suspicion of certain diseases 1. By way of derogation from Article 21(1), based on duly justified grounds, the competent authority may decide not to suspend the disease-free status of the whole establishment when there are different epidemiological units as referred to in Article 20(4). 2. By way of derogation from point (a) of Article 21(2), the competent authority may authorise movement of animals from the relevant targeted animal population to an establishment under its official supervision provided that the following requirements are complied with: 3. By way of derogation from point (a) of Article 21(2), in the case of a category C disease, the competent authority may authorise movement of animals from the relevant targeted animal population provided that they are moved, if necessary by direct transport, to an establishment located in an area that is neither disease-free nor covered by an optional eradication programme. 4. When making use of the derogation laid down in paragraph 2, the competent authority shall: 5. The competent authority may use the derogations provided for in paragraphs 1 to 3 only if operators of establishments of origin and of destination and transporters of the animals that are subject to the derogations: Article 24 Official confirmation of certain diseases and disease control measures 1. If a case is confirmed, the competent authority shall: 2. By way of derogation from point (a) of paragraph 1, the competent authority may limit the withdrawal of the disease-free status to the epidemiological units where a case was confirmed. 3. If the disease is confirmed in wild animals, the competent authority shall conduct, if necessary, an epidemiological enquiry and investigations as provided for in Article 25. If it considers it necessary in order to prevent the spread of the disease, it shall: Article 25 Epidemiological enquiry and investigations in case of confirmation of certain diseases 1. When the disease is confirmed, the competent authority shall: 2. The competent authority shall consider the need to conduct an investigation on wild animals from additional animal populations where the epidemiological enquiry reveals epidemiological links between kept and wild animals. 3. The competent authority shall as soon as possible inform about the situation: Article 26 Movement of animals to or from infected establishments 1. The competent authority shall prohibit movements of animals from targeted animal population out of the infected establishment unless it has authorised their immediate slaughter in a designated slaughterhouse. 2. When the competent authority considers it necessary in order to prevent the spread of the disease, it shall: 3. The competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, extend the measures in paragraphs 1 and 2 to animals and products from additional animal populations to prevent the spread of the disease. Article 27 Testing and removal of animals from infected establishments 1. Following confirmation of the disease, the competent authority shall order that in infected establishments the following testing is conducted within a maximum period of time to be determined by it: 2. By way of derogation from point (b) of paragraph 1, testing shall not be ordered when disease-free status is restored in accordance with: 3. The competent authority shall order that in infected establishments all animals recognised as confirmed cases and, if necessary, as suspected cases are slaughtered within a maximum period of time it determines. 4. The slaughtering of the animals referred to in paragraph 3 shall be carried out under official supervision in a designated slaughterhouse. 5. The competent authority may order the killing and destruction of some or all of the animals referred to in paragraph 3 instead of their slaughtering. 6. The competent authority shall extend the measures laid down in this Article to animals from additional animal populations when this is necessary to eradicate the disease in the infected establishments. Article 28 Management of products from infected establishments 1. The competent authority shall in all establishments infected with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis or with MTBC, order that: 2. In the event of infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis, the competent authority shall order that in all infected establishments foetuses, still-born animals, animals which have died from the disease after birth and placentae shall be collected and disposed of. 3. In the event of infection with a category C disease, the competent authority shall when it considers it necessary, order any appropriate measures provided for paragraphs 1 and 2. 4. The competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, order the trace-back, the processing or the disposal of any products from infected establishments that may constitute a risk of spreading the disease or affect human health. Article 29 Derogations from the restriction of movement of animals from infected establishments 1. By way of derogation from Article 26(1), the competent authority may authorise movement of clinically healthy animals, other than confirmed cases, to an establishment under its official supervision provided that the following requirements are complied with: 2. By way of derogation from Article 26(1) in the case of a category C disease, the competent authority may authorise movement of clinically healthy animals from the relevant targeted animal population, other than confirmed cases, provided that: 3. When making use of the derogation laid down in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall withdraw the disease-free status of the establishment of destination of the animals that are subject to the derogation and shall: 4. The competent authority may use the derogations provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 only if operators of establishments of origin and of destination and transporters of the animals that are subject to the derogations: Article 30 Cleaning and disinfection and other measures to prevent the spread of infection 1. The competent authority shall order the operators of all infected establishments and those receiving animals from infected establishments the cleaning and disinfection or, where relevant, the safe disposal of: 2. The competent authority shall approve the protocol for the cleaning and disinfection. 3. The competent authority shall supervise the cleaning and disinfection, or where relevant, the safe disposal and shall not restore or grant again disease-free status to the establishment until it considers that the cleaning and disinfection, or where relevant, the safe disposal, has been completed. 4. The competent authority may, based on a risk assessment, regard a pasture as contaminated and prohibit its use for kept animals of higher health status than that of the targeted animal population or, if epidemiologically relevant, additional animal populations, for a period of time sufficient to consider the risk of persistence of the disease agent to be negligible. Article 31 Risk mitigating measures to prevent reinfection Before or upon lifting of the disease control measures, the competent authority shall order proportionate risk mitigating measures to prevent the reinfection of the establishment taking into account relevant risk factors as indicated by the results of the epidemiological enquiry. These measures shall at least take account of: Section 3 Provisions for eradication programmes for infection with RABV Article 32 Disease control strategy of eradication programmes for infection with RABV 1. The competent authority shall, when establishing an eradication programme for infection with RABV, base it on a disease control strategy that includes: 2. The competent authority shall implement the eradication programme taking into account that it shall be: 3. The competent authority may be involved in the implementation of eradication programmes for infection with RABV in a third country or territory, to prevent the risk of spread and introduction of RABV in the territory of its Member State. Article 33 Targeted animal population for eradication programmes for infection with RABV 1. The competent authority shall apply the eradication programme for infection with RABV to the following targeted animal population: kept and wild animals of species of the following families: Carnivora, Bovidae, Suidae, Equidae, Cervidae and Camelidae. 2. The competent authority shall address the measures in the eradication programme primarily to wild foxes, being the main reservoir of RABV. 3. The competent authority shall subject other targeted animal populations than wild foxes to the measures of the eradication programme when it considers that such animals pose a significant risk. 4. The competent authority may include wild animals of species of the order Chiroptera in the targeted animal population relevant to surveillance referred to in Article 4. Article 34 Obligations of the competent authority in the context of eradication programmes for infection with RABV 1. The competent authority shall: 2. The competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, order: Article 35 Disease control measures in the event of suspicion of infection with RABV When infection with RABV is suspected, the competent authority shall: Article 36 Disease control measures in the event of confirmation of infection with RABV When infection with RABV is confirmed, the competent authority shall take measures to prevent further transmission of the disease to animals and to humans, for which: Section 4 Provisions for eradication programmes for infection with BTV Article 37 Disease control strategy of eradication programmes for infection with BTV 1. The competent authority shall, when establishing an optional eradication programme for infection with BTV, base the programme on a disease control strategy that includes: 2. The competent authority shall implement the eradication programme taking into account that: 3. By way of derogation from point (b)(ii) of paragraph 2, the competent authority may adapt the zone(s) covered by the eradication programme in accordance with: Article 38 Targeted and additional animal populations for eradication programmes for infection with BTV 1. The competent authority shall apply the eradication programme for infection with BTV to the following targeted animal population: kept animals from species of families of Antilocapridae, Bovidae, Camelidae, Cervidae, Giraffidae, Moschidae and Traguilidae. 2. The competent authority shall, when it considers it is necessary, apply the eradication programme to the following additional animal populations: wild animals from species of families of Antilocapridae, Bovidae, Camelidae, Cervidae, Giraffidae, Moschidae and Traguilidae. Article 39 Obligations of operators in the context of eradication programmes for infection with BTV 1. The operators of establishments, other than slaughterhouses, where animals from the targeted animal population referred to in Article 38(1) are kept shall: 2. The operators of slaughterhouses, where animals from the targeted animal population referred to in Article 38(1) are kept and slaughtered, shall: Article 40 Obligations of the competent authority in the context of eradication programmes for infection with BTV 1. The competent authority shall in the territory covered by an eradication programme for infection with BTV referred to in point (b) of Article 37(2): 2. By way of derogation from point (d) of paragraph 1, the competent authority may decide not to order operators to have their animals vaccinated if following a risk assessment, it duly justifies that the implementation of other measures is sufficient to eradicate the disease. 3. The competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary and if possible, establish a seasonally BTV-free area as provided for in Chapter 5 of Part II of Annex V. In that event, the competent authority shall make available to the Commission and to the other Member States: Article 41 Disease control measures in the event of suspicion of infection with BTV 1. In the event of suspicion of infection with BTV, the competent authority shall conduct an investigation to confirm or rule out the disease. 2. Pending the outcome of the investigation referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall: 3. The competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, extend the measures provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 to establishments where animals from the targeted animal population had a similar exposure to infectious vectors to that of the suspected cases. 4. The measures provided for in this Article may be withdrawn when the competent authority considers that they are no longer necessary to limit the risk of spreading the disease. Article 42 Disease control measures in the event of confirmation of infection with BTV 1. In the event of confirmation of infection with BTV, the competent authority shall: 2. In addition to measures laid down in paragraph 1 and in order to prevent the disease from spreading, the competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary: 3. The measures provided for in this Article may be withdrawn when the competent authority considers that they are no longer necessary to limit the risk of spreading the disease. Article 43 Movement of kept animals and germinal products from the targeted animal population to Member States or zones covered by eradication programmes for infection with BTV 1. The competent authority shall only authorise the introduction of animals from the targeted animal population in the territory covered by an eradication programme for infection with BTV referred to in point (b) of in Article 37(2) if they comply with at least one of the requirements set out in points 1 to 4 of Section 1 of Chapter 2 of Part II of Annex V. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the competent authority may also authorise the introduction of animals from the targeted animal population in the territory covered by the eradication programme for infection with BTV if: 3. The competent authority shall only authorise the introduction of germinal products from the targeted animal population in the territory covered by an eradication programme for infection with BTV referred to in point (b) of Article 37(2) if they comply with at least one of the requirements set out in points 1 to 3 of Section 2 of Chapter 2 of Part II of Annex V. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 3, the competent authority may also authorise the introduction of germinal products from the targeted animal population in the territory covered by an eradication programme for infection with BTV if: 5. When the competent authority receiving the animals or the germinal products uses the derogations provided for in paragraphs 2 or 4, it shall: 6. When the competent authority receiving the animals or the germinal products no longer uses the derogations provided for in paragraphs 2 or 4, it shall inform the Commission as soon as possible. Article 44 Vector protected establishment 1. The competent authority may, upon request by the operator, grant the status ‘vector protected establishment’ to establishments or facilities complying with the criteria laid down in Chapter 3 of Part II of Annex V. 2. The competent authority shall verify at the appropriate frequency, but at least at the beginning, during and at the end of the required protection period, the effectiveness of the measures carried out by means of a vector trap inside the establishment. 3. The competent authority shall immediately withdraw the status vector protected establishment when the conditions referred to in paragraph 1 are no longer complied with. Article 45 Movement of animals through Member States or zones covered by eradication programmes for infection with BTV 1. The competent authority shall only authorise movement of animals from the targeted animal population through the territory covered by an eradication programme for infection with BTV referred to in point (b) of Article 37(2) if: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the competent authority may also authorise the movement of animals from targeted animal population through the territory covered by an eradication programme for infection with BTV if the requirements laid down in points (a), (c) and (d) of Article 43(2) are complied with. CHAPTER 3 Eradication programmes for category B and C diseases of aquatic animals Section 1 General provisions Article 46 Disease control strategy for the eradication of category B and C diseases of aquatic animals 1. The competent authority shall, when establishing a compulsory eradication programme for a category B disease or an optional eradication programme for a category C disease of aquatic animals, base those programmes on a disease control strategy that includes for each disease: 2. The competent authority may include in the eradication programme coordinated measures at its common land or coastal border with other Member States or third countries to ensure that the objective of the programmes are achieved and will last. Where such coordination has not been established, the competent authority shall include in the eradication programme, if feasible, effective risk mitigating measures including intensified surveillance. Article 47 Territorial scope and animal population 1. The competent authority shall determine the scope of the eradication programme including: 2. The territory covered by the eradication programme referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 may be: 3. All establishments located within the Member State, zone or compartment covered by the eradication programme shall be included in the eradication programme. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 3 the competent authority may exclude from the eradication programme, aquaculture establishments which do not pose a significant risk to the success of that programme and which are exempted from the obligation to apply for approval. Article 48 Final and intermediate targets 1. The competent authority shall include in the eradication programme qualitative and quantitative final targets that cover all the disease specific requirements laid down in Article 72 for granting disease-free status. 2. Where this is technically possible, the competent authority implementing an eradication programme shall also include in that programme qualitative and quantitative final targets based on the health status of wild animal populations that constitute a threat to the achievement of disease-free status. 3. The competent authority shall include in the eradication programme qualitative and quantitative intermediate annual or multiannual targets to reflect progress made towards the final targets. These intermediate targets shall include: Article 49 Period of application 1. The period of application of eradication programmes for listed aquatic animal diseases are laid down in Part II of Annex VI, specifically Sections 2 and 3 of: 2. For category C diseases, the period of application of an eradication programme shall not exceed 6 years from the date of its initial approval by the Commission in accordance with Article 31(3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429. In duly justified cases, the Commission may, upon request of Member States, extend the period of application of the eradication programme for an additional 6-year period. Section 2 Requirements for Eradication programmes Article 50 Minimum requirements for an eradication programme The competent authority shall base the eradication programme for a specific category B or C disease in a Member State, zone, or compartment on: Article 51 Animal population to be included in eradication programmes for category B and C diseases 1. The competent authority shall apply the eradication programme to listed species kept in establishments within the territory of the Member State, the zone or compartment. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the competent authority may decide to exclude from the eradication programme, based on a risk assessment, establishments keeping only vector species referred to in the table set out in the Annex to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882. 3. Where technically feasible, the competent authority shall include in the eradication programme additional animal populations when such animals: Article 52 Measures to be taken in Member States, zones or compartments covered by eradication programmes 1. In order to monitor the progress of eradication programmes, the competent authority shall classify the health status of all establishments where animals from the listed species are kept according to: 2. The competent authority shall: 3. Operators shall comply with the requirements set out in points (b) to (f) of paragraph 1 so that the eradication programme can be implemented until such time as it has been successfully completed or is withdrawn. Article 53 Derogation from classification of the health status of confined establishments By way of derogation from Article 52(1), the competent authority may decide not to classify the health status of confined establishments, if the animal population kept in these confined establishments is subjected to appropriate risk mitigating measures and disease control measures to ensure that it does not constitute a risk of spreading the disease. Article 54 Vaccination The competent authority may, include in eradication programmes under its official supervision: Article 55 Disease control measures in the event of suspicion of certain diseases 1. The competent authority shall, when it suspects a case of the relevant disease in an establishment, conduct the necessary investigation. 2. Pending the outcome of the investigation referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall: 3. The competent authority shall maintain the measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 until the presence of the disease has been ruled out or confirmed. Article 56 Extension of disease control measures in the event of suspicion of certain diseases 1. The competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, extend the measures laid down in Article 55 to: 2. If the presence of the disease is suspected in wild aquatic animals, the competent authority shall, when it considers it necessary, extend the measures laid down in Article 55 to the concerned establishments. Article 57 Derogation from disease control measures in the event of suspicion of disease 1. By way of derogation from point (c) of Article 55(2) the competent authority may authorise the movement of aquaculture animals to an establishment under its official supervision provided that the following requirements are complied with: 2. When making use of the derogation laid down in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall: 3. The competent authority may use the derogation provided for in paragraph 1 only if operators of establishments of origin and of destination and transporters of the animals that are subject to the derogation: Article 58 Official confirmation of certain diseases and disease control measures 1. If a case is confirmed, the competent authority shall: 2. The minimum requirements that shall apply with regard to the establishment(s) of the restricted zone are set out in Part II of Annex VI, specifically in: 3. By way of derogation from point (c) of paragraph 1, the competent authority may decide not to establish a restricted zone: 4. The competent authority may take risk mitigating measures relating to the following activities in the restricted zone: 5. If the disease is confirmed in wild aquatic animals, the competent authority may: Article 59 Epidemiological enquiry and investigations in case of confirmation of certain diseases 1. When the disease is confirmed, the competent authority shall: 2. The competent authority shall consider the need to conduct an investigation on wild animals where the epidemiological enquiry reveals epidemiological links between kept and wild animals. 3. The competent authority shall as soon as possible inform: Article 60 Movements to or from an infected establishment and any other establishment located in the restricted zone 1. The competent authority shall in all infected establishment(s) and any other establishment(s) located in the restricted zone: 2. The competent authority shall extend the measures in points (a) to (c) of paragraph 1 to kept animals from additional animal populations if they present a risk of spreading the disease. Article 61 Derogations from the restriction of movement of animals and products of animal origin from infected establishments 1. By way of derogation from point (b) Article 60(1), the competent authority may authorise the movement of aquaculture animals to an establishment under its official supervision located within the same restricted zone provided that: 2. When making use of the derogation laid down in paragraph 1, the competent authority shall: 3. By way of derogation from point (b) Article 60(1), the competent authority may authorise the movement of aquaculture animals to other infected establishments which are not implementing an eradication programme for that specific disease provided that: 4. By way of derogation from point (b) of Article 60(1), the competent authority may authorise the movement of aquaculture animals and products of animal origin to slaughtering and processing facilities other than disease control aquatic food establishments provided that: 5. By way of derogation from point (b) of Article 60(1), the competent authority may authorise the movement of animals and products of animal origin from additional animal populations from the infected establishment(s) to other establishments without further restrictions provided that: Article 62 Removal of infected animals 1. Following confirmation of the disease, the competent authority shall in all infected establishments order, within a maximum period of time to be determined by the competent authority, the following measures in relation to aquatic animals from listed species for the relevant disease: 2. The competent authority may order, based on duly justified grounds, the slaughtering for human consumption, or in the case of molluscs or crustacea which are sold live, removal from the water of: 3. Slaughtering for human consumption or removal from the water of the animals referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out under official supervision either in the infected establishment(s) with subsequent processing in a disease control aquatic food establishment, or in a disease control aquatic food establishment, as appropriate. 4. The competent authority shall extend the measures laid down in this Article to aquaculture animals of additional animal populations when it is necessary to control the disease. 5. The competent authority may order the killing and destruction of some or all the animals referred to in paragraph 1 and animals of non-listed species in the infected establishment(s) instead of their slaughter for human consumption. 6. All animal by-products from animals that are slaughtered or killed in compliance with this Article shall be processed or disposed of as Category 1 or Category 2 material in accordance with Articles 12 or 13 of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009. Article 63 Cleaning and disinfection 1. The competent authority shall for all infected establishments order the cleaning and disinfection of the following structures and items prior to repopulation: 2. The competent authority shall approve the protocol for the cleaning and disinfection. 3. The competent authority shall supervise the cleaning and disinfection and shall not restore or grant again disease-free status to the establishments until it considers that the cleaning and disinfection has been completed. Article 64 Fallowing 1. The competent authority shall order the fallowing of all infected establishments. The fallowing shall be carried out following completion of the cleaning and disinfection process laid down in Article 63. 2. The duration of the fallowing shall be appropriate to the relevant pathogen and to the type of production system used in the infected establishments. Certain fallowing periods are laid down in Part II of Annex VI, specifically in: 3. The competent authority shall order synchronous fallowing of the infected establishments within the protection zone or where no protection zone has been established, within the restricted zone. Synchronous fallowing may also be extended to other establishments based on risk assessment. The duration of the synchronous fallowing and the extent of the area within which such fallowing shall take place are laid down in Part II of Annex VI, specifically in: Article 65 Risk mitigating measures to prevent reinfection Before or upon removal of the disease control measures, the competent authority shall order proportionate risk mitigating measures to prevent the reinfection of the establishment taking into account relevant risk factors as indicated by the results of the epidemiological enquiry. These measures shall at least take account of: CHAPTER 4 Disease-free status Section 1 Approval of disease-free status of Member States and zones Article 66 Criteria for the granting of disease-free status Disease-free status may only be granted to Member States or zones thereof when the following general and specific criteria are complied with: Article 67 Disease-free status based on the absence of listed species 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a Member State or of a zone because of the absence of the listed species for that disease are as follows: 2. The Member State shall provide documentary evidence to substantiate the fulfilment of the criteria in paragraph 1. The documentary evidence shall demonstrate the sustainability of disease-free status considering that: Article 68 Disease-free status based on the disease agent’s incapacity to survive 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a Member State or of a zone because of the disease agent’s incapacity to survive are as follows: 2. The Member State shall provide the following evidence to substantiate the fulfilment of the criteria in paragraph 1: Article 69 Disease-free status of terrestrial animals based on the incapacity to survive of listed vectors for listed diseases of terrestrial animals 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a Member State or of a zone because of the incapacity to survive of listed vectors for that listed disease are as follows: 2. The Member State shall provide the following evidence to substantiate the fulfilment of the criteria in paragraph 1: If the disease has occurred, the Member State shall provide documentary evidence that surveillance has demonstrated with a 95 % level of confidence that the prevalence rate of the disease was lower than 1 %. Article 70 Disease-free status based on historical and surveillance data 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a Member State or a zone thereof based on historical and surveillance data are as follows: 2. A Member State wishing to obtain the approval of disease-free status for its entire territory or for a zone thereof on the basis of the provisions set out in point (a) of paragraph 1 shall have implemented the following measures for an eligibility period of at least 10 years: 3. By way of derogation from point (b) of paragraph 1 the Commission may, for a period of two years following the entry of application of this Regulation, grant disease-free status to Member States or zones as regards: 4. The criteria provided for in paragraph 1 to obtain disease-free status shall only apply: 5. By way of derogation from paragraph 4, the granting of disease-free status based on historical and surveillance data shall not be subject to the maximum two-year period for the following statuses: 6. By way of derogation from point (b) of paragraph 4, the granting of disease-free status based on historical and surveillance data shall not apply to the following diseases: Article 71 Disease-free status based on eradication programmes 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a Member State or a zone based on eradication programmes are as follows: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, in the case of aquatic animals where a zone covers less than 75 % of the territory of a Member State and is not shared with another Member State or third country, disease-free status may be achieved in accordance with Article 83. Article 72 Disease specific requirements for disease-free status Disease specific requirements for the granting of disease-free status to a Member State or to a zone are provided in: Section 2 Approval of disease-free status for compartments keeping aquaculture animals Article 73 Criteria for the granting of disease-free status to compartments keeping aquaculture animals 1. Disease-free status may only be granted to a compartment keeping aquaculture animals when the following general and specific criteria are complied with: 2. The disease-free status referred to in paragraph 1 may be granted to: 3. In the case of the dependent compartments referred to in point (b) of paragraph 2, the competent authority shall: 4. When a disease-free declaration for a dependent compartment is made to the Commission in accordance with Article 83, the competent authority shall provide the assessment referred to in point (a) of paragraph 3 and details of any measure which were put in place to prevent the introduction of the disease into the compartment. The competent authority shall communicate to the Commission without delay any subsequent changes to the epidemiological factors set out in point (a) of paragraph 3 and measures taken to mitigate their impact. Article 74 Disease-free status based on the absence of listed species 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a compartment keeping aquaculture animals because of the absence of the listed species for that disease are as follows: 2. The Member State shall provide documentary evidence to substantiate the fulfilment of the criteria in paragraph 1. The documentary evidence shall demonstrate the sustainability of the disease-free status considering that: Article 75 Disease-free status based on the disease agent’s incapacity to survive 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a compartment keeping aquaculture animals because of the disease agent’s incapacity to survive are as follows: 2. The Member State shall provide the following evidence to substantiate the fulfilment of the criteria in paragraph 1: Article 76 Disease-free status based on historical and surveillance data 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a compartment keeping aquaculture animals based on historical and surveillance data are as follows: 2. A Member State wishing to obtain the approval of disease-free status for the compartment on the basis of the provisions set out in point (a) of paragraph 1 shall have implemented the following measures for an eligibility period of at least 10 years: 3. The criteria provided for in paragraph 1 shall only apply: 4. By way of derogation from point (b) of paragraph 3, the granting of disease-free status based on historical and surveillance data shall not apply to the following diseases: Article 77 Disease-free status based on eradication programmes 1. The criteria to recognise the disease-free status of a compartment keeping aquaculture animals based on eradication programmes are: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, where a compartment covers less than 75 % of the territory of a Member State and the water catchment supplying the compartment is not shared with another Member State or third country, disease-free status may be achieved in accordance with Article 83. Article 78 Disease specific requirements for disease-free status Disease-specific requirements for the granting of disease-free status to a compartment keeping aquaculture animals are provided in: Article 79 Specific requirements for compartments which are independent of the health status of the surrounding natural waters 1. In addition to the general criteria for granting disease-free status to compartments keeping aquaculture animals as set out in Article 73(1), a compartment which comprises one or more individual establishments where the health status regarding a specific disease is independent of the health status of the surrounding natural waters, may obtain disease-free status if it complies with paragraphs 2 to 6. 2. An independent compartment may comprise: 3. An independent compartment shall be supplied with water: Where such water supply originates from a source outside the establishment, the water shall be supplied directly to the establishment, and be channelled to the establishment by means which afford appropriate protection from infection. 4. There shall be natural or artificial barriers that prevent aquatic animals from entering each establishment in the compartment from the surrounding natural waters. 5. The compartment shall, where appropriate, be protected against flooding and infiltration of water from the surrounding natural waters. 6. The compartment shall comply with the disease-specific requirements referred to in Article 78. Article 80 Special provisions for compartments which comprise individual establishments which commence or recommence aquaculture activities and where the health status regarding a specific disease is independent of the health status of the surrounding natural waters 1. A new establishment which is to commence aquaculture activities is considered to be disease-free when: 2. An establishment which recommences aquaculture activities after a break and complies with paragraph 1 is considered to be disease-free without the surveillance referred to in point (a)(ii) of Article 73(1) provided: 3. An establishment which recommences its activities after the confirmation of a category B or category C disease is considered to be disease-free from the confirmed disease, provided: Section 3 Maintenance, suspension and withdrawal of disease-free status Article 81 Specific criteria on surveillance and biosecurity measures for the maintenance of disease-free status 1. The Member States, zones or compartments thereof may maintain disease-free status only if, in addition to the criteria laid down in points (a) and (c) of Article 41(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, they comply with: 2. In the case of aquatic animals, when a Member State is declared free from one or more of the listed diseases, it may discontinue targeted surveillance as referred to in points (k) to (q) of paragraph 3 and maintain its disease-free status provided that the risk of introduction of the relevant disease has been assessed and conditions conducive to clinical expression of the disease in question exist. In disease-free zones or compartments in Member States which are not declared disease-free, or in all cases where conditions conducive to clinical expression of the disease in question do not exist, targeted surveillance shall be continued as referred to in points (k) to (q) of paragraph 3. 3. The disease specific requirements as regards surveillance and biosecurity measures are provided in: Article 82 Suspension, withdrawal and restoration of disease-free status 1. If the disease has been confirmed and therefore the conditions for maintaining the disease-free status of a Member State, a zone or compartment thereof are not fulfilled, the competent authority shall: 2. If the disease has not been confirmed, but there has been a breach of one of the conditions for maintaining the disease-free status of a Member State, a zone or compartment thereof, the competent authority shall take the appropriate corrective measures and assess the risk that the health situation has changed. 3. The competent authority may where necessary, as a transitional measure, suspend the disease-free status of the Member State, a zone or compartment thereof rather than the Commission withdrawing the disease-free status. During that suspension, the competent authority shall: 4. Subject to compliance with the provisions of paragraph 3 the competent authority may restore the disease-free status of the Member State, zone or compartment thereof by lifting the suspension. Section 4 Derogations from approval by the Commission Article 83 Derogations from approval by the Commission for certain disease-free statuses for aquatic animal diseases 1. By way of derogation from the requirements to obtain approval by the Commission for disease-free status, laid down in Articles 36(4) and 37(4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429, for aquatic animal diseases of zones or compartments, such approval for zones or compartments which cover less than 75 % of the territory of a Member State, and where the water catchment supplying the zone or compartment is not shared with another Member State or third country, shall be gained in accordance with the following procedure: 2. Within the 60-day period referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1, the Commission or Member States may seek clarification or additional information in relation to the supporting evidence provided by the Member State making the provisional declaration. 3. Where written comments are made by at least one Member State, or the Commission, within the period referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1 indicating concerns relating to the evidence which supports the declaration, the Commission, the Member State which made the declaration and where relevant, the Member State which has sought clarification or additional information, shall together examine the submitted evidence in order to resolve the concerns. In such cases, the period referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1 is prolonged automatically for 60 days from the date on which the first concerns were raised. There shall be no further prolongation of this period 4. Where the process referred to in paragraph 3 fails, the provisions laid down in Articles 36(4) and 37(4) of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 shall apply. PART III TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS Article 84 Transitional provisions concerning existing disease-free status 1. The Member States and zones thereof with an approved disease-free status before the date of application of this Regulation shall be deemed to have an approved disease-free status in accordance with this Regulation for the following statuses: 2. The compartments in Member States with an approved disease-free status before the date of application of this Regulation shall be deemed to have an approved disease-free status in accordance with this Regulation for the following statuses: 3. The Member States deemed to have an approved disease-free status in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 shall ensure that the conditions of maintenance of the status conform with those laid down in this Regulation. Article 85 Transitional provisions concerning existing eradication or surveillance programmes 1. The Member States and zones thereof with an approved eradication programme or an approved surveillance programme before the date of application of this Regulation shall be deemed to have an approved eradication programme in accordance with this Regulation for the following diseases for a period of six years from the date of application of this Regulation: 2. The compartments in Member States with an approved eradication programme or an approved surveillance programme before the date of application of this Regulation shall be deemed to have an approved eradication programme in accordance with this Regulation for the following diseases for a period of six years from the date of application of this Regulation: 3. The Member States deemed to have an approved eradication programme in accordance with paragraphs 1 or 2 shall ensure that the measures in the programme conform with those laid down for eradication programmes in this Regulation. Article 86 Repeal The following acts are repealed as from 21 April 2021: Article 87 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 21 April 2021. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 17 December 2019. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 84, 31.3.2016, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on official controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products, amending Regulations (EC) No 999/2001, (EC) No 396/2005, (EC) No 1069/2009, (EC) No 1107/2009, (EU) No 1151/2012, (EU) No 652/2014, (EU) 2016/429 and (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Regulations (EC) No 1/2005 and (EC) No 1099/2009 and Council Directives 98/58/EC, 1999/74/EC, 2007/43/EC, 2008/119/EC and 2008/120/EC, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 854/2004 and (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 89/608/EEC, 89/662/EEC, 90/425/EEC, 91/496/EEC, 96/23/EC, 96/93/EC and 97/78/EC and Council Decision 92/438/EEC (Official Controls Regulation) ( OJ L 95, 7.4.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Commission Decision 2010/367/EU of 25 June 2010 on the implementation by Member States of surveillance programmes for avian influenza in poultry and wild birds ( OJ L 166, 1.7.2010, p. 22 ). ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1882 of 3 December 2018 on the application of certain disease prevention and control rules to categories of listed diseases and establishing a list of species and groups of species posing a considerable risk for the spread of those listed diseases ( OJ L 308, 4.12.2018, p. 21 ). ( 5 ) Council Directive 64/432/EEC of 26 June 1964 on animal health problems affecting intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine ( OJ 121, 29.7.1964, p. 1977/64 ). ( 6 ) Council Directive 91/68/EEC of 28 January 1991 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in ovine and caprine animals ( OJ L 46, 19.2.1991, p. 19 ). ( 7 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/1629 of 25 July 2018 amending the list of diseases set out in Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health (‘Animal Health Law’) ( OJ L 272, 31.10.2018, p. 11 ). ( 8 ) Terrestrial Animal Health Code, World Organisation for Animal Health, 2018. ( 9 ) Commission Decision 2004/558/EC of 15 July 2004 implementing Council Directive 64/432/EEC as regards additional guarantees for intra-Community trade in bovine animals relating to infectious bovine rhinotracheitis and the approval of the eradication programmes presented by certain Member States ( OJ L 249, 23.7.2004, p. 20 ). ( 10 ) The EFSA Journal (2006) 311, Opinion on the ‘Definition of a BoHV-1-free animal and a BoHV-1-free holding, and the procedures to verify and maintain this status’. ( 11 ) Council Directive 2000/75/EC of 20 November 2000 laying down specific provisions for the control and eradication of bluetongue ( OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 74 ). ( 12 ) EFSA AHAW Panel (EFSA Panel on Animal Health and Welfare), 2017. Scientific opinion on bluetongue: control, surveillance and safe movement of animals. EFSA Journal 2017; 15(3):4698, 126. ( 13 ) Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (Animal by-products Regulation ( OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Commission Decision 2000/428/EC of 4 July 2000 establishing diagnostic procedures, sampling methods and criteria for the evaluation of the results of laboratory tests for the confirmation and differential diagnosis of swine vesicular disease ( OJ L 167, 7.7.2000, p. 22 ). ( 15 ) Commission Decision 2002/106/EC of 1 February 2002 approving a Diagnostic Manual establishing diagnostic procedures, sampling methods and criteria for evaluation of the laboratory tests for the confirmation of classical swine fever ( OJ L 39, 9.2.2002, p. 71 ). ( 16 ) Commission Decision 2003/422/EC of 26 May 2003 approving an African swine fever diagnostic manual ( OJ L 143, 11.6.2003, p. 35 ). ( 17 ) Commission Decision 2006/437/EC of 4 August 2006 approving a Diagnostic Manual for avian influenza as provided for in Council Directive 2005/94/EC ( OJ L 237, 31.8.2006, p. 1 ). ( 18 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 1266/2007 of 26 October 2007 on implementing rules for Council Directive 2000/75/EC as regards control, monitoring, surveillance and restrictions on movements of certain animals of susceptible species in relation to bluetongue ( OJ L 238, 27.10.2007, p. 37 ). ( 19 ) Commission Decision 2008/896/EC of 20 November 2008 on guidelines for the purpose of the risk based animal health surveillance scheme provided for in Council Directive 2006/88/EC ( OJ L 322, 2.12.2008, p. 30 ). ( 20 ) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2015/1554 of 11 September 2015 laying down rules for the application of Directive 2006/88/EC as regards requirements for surveillance and diagnostic methods ( OJ L 247, 23.9.2015, p. 1 ). ( 21 ) ( 22 ) ( 23 ) Directive 2003/99/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 on the monitoring of zoonoses and zoonotic agents, amending Council Decision 90/424/EEC and repealing Council Directive 92/117/EEC ( OJ L 325, 12.12.2003, p. 31 ). ( 24 ) Council Directive 92/65/EEC of 13 July 1992 laying down animal health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of animals, semen, ova and embryos not subject to animal health requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 90/425/EEC ( OJ L 268, 14.9.1992, p. 54 ). ( 25 ) Council Directive 2006/88/EC of 24 October 2006 on animal health requirements for aquaculture animals and products thereof, and on the prevention and control of certain diseases in aquatic animals ( OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 14 ). ( 26 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 616/2009 of 13 July 2009 implementing Council Directive 2005/94/EC as regards the approval of poultry compartments and other captive birds compartments with respect to avian influenza and additional preventive biosecurity measures in such compartments ( OJ L 181, 14.7.2009, p. 16 ). ANNEX I SPECIFIC CASE DEFINITION OF DISEASE OF TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS Section 1 Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) Section 2 Infection with low pathogenic avian influenza viruses (LPAIV) Section 3 Infection with Newcastle disease virus (NDV) ANNEX II UNION SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME PART I AVIAN INFLUENZA SURVEILLANCE IN POULTRY AND WILD BIRDS Section 1 General approach and requirements 1. TERRITORIAL SCOPE Surveillance in poultry and wild birds must be implemented in all Member States. 2. PERIOD OF APPLICATION Until revoked. 3. GENERAL APPROACH The surveillance system must address the objectives provided for in Section 2 and must be built on a comprehensive approach including different components of surveillance activities complementing each other in poultry and wild bird populations: Section 2 Objectives for surveillance in poultry and wild birds Section 3 Early detection of HPAI in poultry Section 4 Early detection of HPAI in wild birds Section 5 Risk-based complementary surveillance for HPAI in poultry species which generally do not show significant clinical signs Section 6 risk-based surveillance in order to identify clusters of establishments infected with lpaiv and with continuous spread of LPAIV Section 7 Targeted poultry populations Section 8 Targeted Wild bird populations Targeted wild birds species, in particular migratory water birds have shown to be at higher risk of becoming infected with, and transmitting HPAI. The list of ‘wild bird targeted species’ compiled and updated in the light of the most recent knowledge is available on the website of the EURL. Section 9 Sampling and laboratory testing methods ANNEX III DIAGNOSTIC METHODS FOR THE GRANTING AND MAINTENANCE OF DISEASE-FREE STATUS FOR CERTAIN DISEASES OF TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS Section 1 Infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis Section 2 Infection with mycobacterium tuberculosis complex Section 3 Enzootic bovine leukosis Section 4 Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis (IBR/IPV) Section 5 Infection with Aujeszky’s disease virus (ADV) Section 6 Bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD) ( 1 ) I-ELISA for the detection of antibodies against BoHV-1 whole virus. Pools of up to 50 milk samples (individual or bulk milk) may be used in tests for granting and up to 100 milk samples (individual or bulk milk) may be used in tests for the maintenance of the status free from IBR/IPV. ( 2 ) B-ELISA for the detection of antibodies against BoHV-1-gB protein. When referred to tests for the detection of antibodies against whole BoHV-1 in Part IV of Annex IV this method may also be used. ( 3 ) B-ELISA for the detection of antibodies against BoHV-1-gE protein. Individual milk samples may be used when testing to proof the maintenance of the status free from IBR/IPV. The samples may be pooled whereat the number of samples per pool may be chosen based on documented evidence that the test is under all circumstances of day to day laboratory work sensitive enough to detect one single positive sample in the pool. ( 4 ) When testing is carried out to proof the maintenance of the status free from IBR/IPV individually collected samples may be pooled. The number of samples per pool may be modulated based on documented evidence that the test system is under all circumstances of day to day laboratory work sensitive enough to detect one weak positive sample in the pool of the modulated size. ( 5 ) ELISA for the detection of antibodies against whole ADV, ADV-gB protein or ADV-gD protein. For batch control of ADV-gB kits and ADV-gD kits or whole ADV kits, Community reference serum ADV 1, or sub-standards, must be scored positive at the dilution of 1:2. When referred to tests for the detection of whole ADV in Part V of Annex IV either of these tests may be used. ( 6 ) ELISA for the detection of antibodies against ADV-gE protein. For batch control, Community reference serum ADV 1, or sub-standards, must be scored positive at the dilution 1:8. ANNEX IV DISEASE-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR THE GRANTING, MAINTENANCE, SUSPENSION AND WITHDRAWAL OF THE DISEASE-FREE STATUS AT THE LEVEL OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND DISEASE-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR THE GRANTING AND MAINTENANCE OF THE DISEASE-FREE STATUS AT THE LEVEL OF MEMBER STATES OR ZONES PART I INFECTION WITH BRUCELLA ABORTUS, B. MELITENSIS AND B. SUIS CHAPTER 1 Establishment free from infection with Brucella abortus , B. melitensis and B. suis without vaccination Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status The status free from infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis without vaccination of an establishment keeping bovine, ovine or caprine animals may only be maintained if: Section 3 Suspension and restoring of the status Section 4 Withdrawal and regaining of the status CHAPTER 2 Establishment free from infection with Brucella abortus , B. melitensis and B. suis with vaccination Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status The status free from infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis with vaccination of an establishment keeping bovine, ovine or caprine animals may only be maintained if: Section 3 Suspension and restoring of the status Section 4 Withdrawal and regaining of the status CHAPTER 3 Member State or zone free from infection with Brucella abortus , B. melitensis and B. suis as regards kept bovine animals Section 1 Granting of the status as regards kept bovine animals The status free from infection with Brucella abortus , B. melitensis and B. suis as regards kept bovine animals may only be granted to a Member State or a zone if: Section 2 Maintenance of the status as regards kept bovine animals CHAPTER 4 Member State or zone free from infection with Brucella abortus , B. melitensis and B. suis as regards kept ovine and caprine animals Section 1 Granting of the status as regards kept ovine and caprine animals The status free from infection with Brucella abortus, B. melitensis and B. suis as regards kept ovine and caprine animals may only be granted to a Member State or a zone if: Section 2 Maintenance of the status as regards kept ovine and caprine animals PART II INFECTION WITH MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS COMPLEX CHAPTER 1 Establishment free from infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status Section 3 Suspension and restoring of the status Section 4 Withdrawal and regaining of the status CHAPTER 2 Member State or zone free from infection with MTBC Section 1 Granting of the status as regards kept bovine animals The status free from infection with MTBC as regards kept bovine animals may only be granted to a Member State or a zone if: Section 2 Maintenance of the status PART III ENZOOTIC BOVINE LEUKOSIS CHAPTER 1 Establishment free from enzootic bovine leukosis Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status The status free from EBL of an establishment keeping bovine animals may only be maintained if: Section 3 Suspension and restoring of the status Section 4 Withdrawal and regaining of the status CHAPTER 2 Member State or zone free from EBL Section 1 Granting of the status The status free from EBL as regards kept bovine animals may only be granted to a Member State or a zone if: Section 2 Maintenance of the status The status free from EBL as regards kept bovine animals of a Member State or a zone may only be maintained if: PART IV INFECTIOUS BOVINE RHINOTRACHEITIS/INFECTIOUS PUSTULAR VULVOVAGINITIS CHAPTER 1 Establishment free from infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status The status free from IBR/IPV may only be maintained in an establishment keeping bovine animals if: Section 3 Suspension and restoring of the status Section 4 Withdrawal and regaining of the status CHAPTER 2 Member State or zone free from IBR/IPV Section 1 Granting of the status The status free from IBR/IPV as regards kept bovine animals may only be granted to a Member State or a zone if Section 2 Maintenance of the status PART V INFECTION WITH AUJESZKY’S DISEASE VIRUS CHAPTER 1 Establishment free from infection with Aujeszky’s disease virus Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status The status free from infection with ADV of an establishment keeping porcine animals may only be maintained if: Section 3 Suspension and restoring of the status Section 4 Withdrawal and regaining of the status CHAPTER 2 Member State or zone free from infection with Aujeszky’s disease virus Section 1 Granting of the status The status free from infection with ADV as regards kept porcine animals may only be granted to a Member State or a zone if: Section 2 Maintenance of the status PART VI BOVINE VIRAL DIARRHOEA CHAPTER 1 Establishment free from bovine viral diarrhoea Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status Section 3 Suspension and restoring of the status Section 4 Withdrawal and regaining of the status CHAPTER 2 Member State or zone free from bovine viral diarrhoea Section 1 Granting of the status The status free from BVD as regards kept bovine animals may only be granted to a Member State or a zone if: Section 2 Maintenance of the status ANNEX V DISEASE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR THE GRANTING AND MAINTENANCE OF THE DISEASE-FREE STATUS AT THE LEVEL OF MEMBER STATES OR ZONES PART I INFECTION WITH RABIES VIRUS CHAPTER 1 Technical requirements for the vaccination against rabies Section 1 Vaccination of kept animals Section 2 Vaccination of wild animals CHAPTER 2 Member State or zone free from infection with rabies virus Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status The status free from infection with RABV of a Member State or a zone may only be maintained if: PART II INFECTION WITH BLUETONGUE VIRUS (SEROTYPES 1-24) CHAPTER 1 Minimum requirements for the surveillance Section 1 Surveillance for the detection of serotypes of Bluetongue virus not reported in the previous 2 years Section 2 Surveillance to determine the extent of infection with BTV Section 3 Surveillance to demonstrate absence of infection with BTV Section 4 Requirements for the active surveillance of infection with BTV Section 5 Entomological surveillance CHAPTER 2 Movement of animals and germinal products Section 1 Movement of animals Section 2 Movement of germinal products CHAPTER 3 Vector protected establishment The status of vector protected establishment may only be granted to an establishment if: CHAPTER 4 Member State or zone free from infection with BTV Section 1 Granting of the status Section 2 Maintenance of the status CHAPTER 5 Seasonally BTV-free Member State or zone PART III INFESTATION WITH VARROA SPP. Section 1 Granting of the status to a Member State or zone as free from infestation with varroa spp. The status free from infestation with Varroa spp. may only be granted to the relevant honeybee population of a Member State or of a zone if: Section 2 Maintenance of the status of a Member State or zone free from infestation with varroa spp. The status free from infestation with Varroa spp. granted to the relevant honeybee population of a Member State or of a zone may only be maintained if: PART IV STATUS FREE FROM INFECTION WITH NEWCASTLE DISEASE VIRUS- WITHOUT VACCINATION Section 1 Granting of status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus without vaccination The status free from infection with Newcastle disease virus (NDV) status without vaccination in the population of poultry and captive birds of Galliformes species may only be granted to a Member State or to a zone if for at least the past 12 months: Section 2 Maintenance of the status ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals and repealing Regulation (EC) N0 998/2003 ( OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/686 of 17 December 2019, supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the approval of germinal product establishments and the traceability and animal health requirements for movements within the Union of germinal products of certain kept terrestrial animals (see page 1 of this Official Journal). ANNEX VI SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AS REGARDS DISEASES OF AQUATIC ANIMALS PART I RISK-BASED SURVEILLANCE CHAPTER 1 Minimum requirements for risk-based surveillance in certain approved aquaculture establishments 1. General approach CHAPTER 2 Risk ranking to be applied in certain approved aquaculture establishments The risk ranking referred to in point 1.2 of Chapter 1 must as a minimum, take into account the risk factors referred to in points (a) and (b). Where relevant, points (c) to (l) will also be considered: CHAPTER 3 Frequency of risk-based animal health visits The frequency of risk-based health visits which must be carried out in certain approved establishments and approved groups of establishments depends upon the risk ranking referred to in Chapter 2 and shall be carried out as follows: PART II DISEASE- SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR DISEASE-FREE STATUS OF AQUATIC ANIMALS Part II covers the disease-specific requirements for disease-free status as regards the following listed diseases: CHAPTER 1 Eradication, disease-free status and diagnostic methods for viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) and infectious hematopoietic necrosis (IHN) Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling Health visits and sampling for the surveillance referred to in point (b)(ii) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Granting of the status free from VHS or free from IHN in Member States, zones and compartments of unknown health status The status free from VHS or free from IHN may only be granted to a Member State, a zone or a compartment with an unknown health status with regard to VHS or IHN if: Table 1.A Scheme for Member States, zones and compartments for the 2-year control period referred to in point (a)(i) which precedes the achievement of status free from VHS and status free from IHN Table 1.B Scheme for Member States, zones or compartments using a reduced sample size for the 4-year control period referred to in point (a)(ii) which precedes the achievement of status free from VHS and status free from IHN Section 3 Granting of the status free from VHS or free from IHN in Member States, zones and compartments known to be infected with either VHS or IHN Section 4 Maintenance of status free from VHS and status free from IHN Section 5 Diagnostic and sampling methods CHAPTER 2 Eradication, disease-free status and diagnostic methods for infection with HPR-deleted infectious salmon anaemia virus (HPR-deleted ISAV) Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling Health visits and sampling for the surveillance referred to in point (b)(ii) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Granting of the status free from infection with HPR-deleted ISAV in Member States, zones and compartments of unknown health status The status free from infection with HPR-deleted ISAV may only be granted to a Member State, a zone or a compartment with an unknown health status with regard to infection with HPR-deleted ISAV if all establishments and, when required, selected sampling points in wild populations selected in accordance with (b) of Section 1, have been subject to the following scheme: Table 2.A Scheme for Member States, zones and compartments for the 2-year control period which precedes the achievement of status free from infection with HPR-deleted ISAV Section 3 Granting of the status free from infection with HPR-deleted ISAV in Member States, zones and compartments known to be infected with HPR-deleted ISAV Section 4 Maintenance of status free from infection with HPR-deleted ISAV Section 5 Diagnostic and sampling methods CHAPTER 3 Eradication, disease-free status and diagnostic methods for infection with Marteilia refringens Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling Health visits and sampling for the surveillance referred to in point (b)(ii) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Granting of the status free from infection with Marteilia Refringens in Member States, zones and compartments of unknown health status Section 3 Granting of the status free from infection with Marteilia refringens in Member States, zones and compartments known to be infected with Marteilia refringens Section 4 Maintenance of status free from infection with Marteilia refringens Section 5 Diagnostic and sampling methods CHAPTER 4 Eradication, disease-free status and diagnostic methods for infection with Bonamia exitiosa Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling Health visits and sampling for the surveillance referred to in point (b)(ii) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Granting of the status free from infection with Bonamia exitiosa in Member States, zones and compartments of unknown health status Section 3 Granting of the status free from infection with Bonamia exitiosa in Member States, zones and compartments known to be infected with Bonamia exitiosa Section 4 Maintenance of status free from infection with Bonamia exitiosa Section 5 Diagnostic and sampling methods CHAPTER 5 Eradication, disease-free status and diagnostic methods for infection with Bonamia ostreae Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling Health visits and sampling for the surveillance referred to in point (b)(ii) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Granting of the status free from infection with Bonamia ostreae in Member States, zones and compartments of unknown health status Section 3 Granting of the status free from infection with Bonamia ostreae in Member States, zones and compartments known to be infected with Bonamia ostreae Section 4 Maintenance of status free from infection with Bonamia ostreae Section 5 Diagnostic and sampling methods CHAPTER 6 Eradication, disease-free status and diagnostic methods for infection with white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling Health visits and sampling for the surveillance referred to in point (b)(ii) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Granting of the status free from infection with WSSV in Member States, zones and compartments of unknown health status Section 3 Granting of the status free from infection with WSSV in Member States, zones and compartments known to be infected with WSSV Section 4 Maintenance of status free from infection with WSSV Section 5 Diagnostic and sampling methods PART III REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMONSTRATING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMMES FOR CATEGORY C DISEASES AND FOR RESTARTING THOSE PROGRAMMES AFTER A DISEASE OUTBREAK Part III covers the requirements for establishments to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme for a particular disease and the requirements to restart that surveillance programme following a disease outbreak. CHAPTER 1 Requirements for establishments to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme for VHS or IHN and requirements to re-start that programme following a disease outbreak Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling for VHS and IHN The health visits and sampling referred to in point (b)(iv) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Specific requirements to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme Section 3 Requirements to re-start a surveillance programme after a disease outbreak An establishment which has been infected with VHS or IHN, may restart a surveillance programme for these diseases provided that: Table 1 Surveillance programme for VHS/IHN CHAPTER 2 Requirements for establishments to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme for HPR-deleted ISAV and to re-start that programme after a disease outbreak Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling for infection with HPR-deleted ISAV The health visits and sampling referred to in point (b)(iv) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Specific requirements to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme Section 3 Requirements to re-start a surveillance programme after a disease outbreak An establishment which has been infected with HPR-deleted ISAV may restart a surveillance programme for that diseases provided that: CHAPTER 3 Requirements for establishments to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme for infection with Marteilia refringens and requirements to re-start that programme following a disease outbreak Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling for infection with Marteilia refringens The health visits and sampling referred to in point (b)(iv) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Specific requirements to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme Section 3 Requirements to re-start a surveillance programme after a disease outbreak An establishment which has been infected with Marteilia refringens may re-start a surveillance programme for that disease provided that: CHAPTER 4 Requirements for establishments to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme for infection with Bonamia exitiosa and to re-start that programme following a disease outbreak Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling for infection with Bonamia exitiosa The health visits and sampling referred to in point (b)(iv) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Specific requirements to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme Section 3 Requirements to re-start a surveillance programme after a disease outbreak An establishment which has been infected with Bonamia exitiosa may re-start a surveillance programme provided that: CHAPTER 5 Requirements for establishments to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme for infection with Bonamia ostreae and to re-start that programme following a disease outbreak Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling for infection with Bonamia ostreae The health visits and sampling referred to in point (b)(iv) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Specific requirements to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme Section 3 Requirements to re-start a surveillance programme after a disease outbreak An establishment which has been infected with Bonamia ostreae may re-start the surveillance programme for that disease provided that: CHAPTER 6 Requirements for establishments to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme for infection with WSSV and to re-start that programme following a disease outbreak Section 1 General requirements for health visits and sampling for infection with infection with WSSV The health visits and sampling referred to in point (b)(iv) of Article 3(2) must comply with the following requirements: Section 2 Specific requirements to demonstrate the implementation of a surveillance programme Section 3 Requirements to re-start a surveillance programme after a disease outbreak An establishment which has been infected with WSSV may re-start a surveillance programme for that disease provided that: ( 1 ) In the case of coastal zones or coastal compartments, the samples must be collected no sooner than 3 weeks after the transfer of the fish from fresh to saltwater. ( 2 ) Ovarian or seminal fluid of broodstock shall be collected at the time of maturation, in connection with stripping. ( 3 ) In the case of coastal zones or coastal compartments, the samples must be collected no sooner than 3 weeks after the transfer of the fish from fresh to saltwater. ( 4 ) Ovarian or seminal fluid of broodstock shall be collected at the time of maturation, in connection with stripping. ( 5 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in Chapter 2 of Part I other than in the case of dependent compartments where all establishments are deemed to be high risk. ( 6 ) One sample to be taken during every health visit. ( 7 ) In the case of coastal zones or coastal compartments, the samples must be collected no sooner than 3 weeks after the transfer of the fish from fresh to saltwater. ( 8 ) Samples must be collected during spring and autumn each year. ( 9 ) Shall not apply to establishments rearing only rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) or brown trout ( Salmo trutta ) or both rainbow trout and brown trout, and where the water supply is exclusively based on fresh water sources which are not populated with Atlantic salmon ( Salmo salar ). ( 10 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I other than in the case of dependent compartments where all establishments are deemed to be high risk. ( 11 ) Samples must be collected during spring and autumn when two samples are required each year ( 12 ) Samples must be collected during spring or autumn when one sample per year is required. ( 13 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I other than in the case of dependent compartments where all establishments are deemed to be high risk. ( 14 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I other than in the case of dependent compartments where all establishments are deemed to be high risk. ( 15 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I other than in the case of dependent compartments where all establishments are deemed to be high risk. ( 16 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I other than in the case of dependent compartments where all establishments are deemed to be high risk. ( 17 ) In the case of coastal zones or coastal compartments, the samples must be collected no sooner than 3 weeks after the transfer of the fish from fresh to saltwater. ( 18 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I. Maximum number of fish per pool: 10 ( 19 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I ( 20 ) Samples must be collected during spring and autumn when two samples are required each year ( 21 ) Samples must be collected during spring or autumn when only one sample is required per year ( 22 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I ( 23 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I. ( 24 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I ( 25 ) Risk level assigned to the establishment by the competent authority as set out in paragraph 1 of Chapter 2 of Part I