Avis juridique important Conclusions of the Council and the Ministers of Education meeting within the Council of 1 June 1992 on the development of environmental education Official Journal C 151 , 16/06/1992 P. 0002 - 0002 CONCLUSIONS OF THE COUNCIL AND THE MINISTERS OF EDUCATION MEETING WITHIN THE COUNCIL of 1 June 1992 on the development of environmental education (92/C 151/02) The Council and the Ministers of Education have taken note of a report presented to them by the Education Committee on the implementation of their resolution of 24 May 1988 on environmental education. They recognize that many positive actions to intensify environmental education have been carried out by the Member States and the Commission. Since the resolution was adopted in 1988 the urgency of protecting the environment at all levels has been thrown into even greater relief. There is now wider recognition, both by society and by individuals, of the importance of protecting the environment within the Community in order to bring about better living conditions and balanced and harmonious growth. Members of the public have a number of crucial roles to play: - as individuals concerned with the common duty of maintaining, protecting and improving the quality of the environment, as a contribution to the protection of human health and the safeguarding of the ecological balance, - as direct producers of pollution and waste, - as consumers of goods and services. The Dublin European Council of 1990, in its statement on environmental issues, emphasized the vital need to improve information to the public and in particular to respond to the interest of young people who are acutely aware of environmental issues. Education is of major importance in regard to environmental issues. The lines of action for environmental education set out in the 1988 resolution of the Council and the Ministers of Education continue to be relevant; these lines should be pursued and intensified. In line with the objective and the guiding principles set out in the 1988 resolution, environmental education: - should be considered an integral and essential part of every European citizen's upbringing, - should be strengthened as soon as possible at all educational levels, - should have an interdisciplinary perspective, - should be considered an important vehicle for linking education institutions to their surrounding community, enhancing pupils' and students' awareness of local environmental issues and of their region's diversity and special features. Special attention should be given to the intensification of initial and in-service training of teachers in this area. The Council and Ministers of Education take note with satisfaction that the Commission's fifth action programme refers to the need for better provision of environmental information and education. They request the Education Committee to make a further report to them on activities in implementation of the 1988 resolution by the end of 1994.