COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2015/2119 of 20 November 2015 establishing best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, for the production of wood-based panels (notified under document C(2015) 8062) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The BAT conclusions for the production of wood-based panels, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 20 November 2015. For the Commission Karmenu VELLA Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 . BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF WOOD-BASED PANELS These BAT conclusions concern the activities specified in Section 6.1(c) of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU, namely: In particular, these BAT conclusions cover the following: These BAT conclusions do not address the following activities and processes: Other reference documents which are relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless stated otherwise, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. EMISSION LEVELS ASSOCIATED WITH BAT (BAT-AELs) FOR EMISSIONS TO AIR Unless stated otherwise, the BAT-AELs for emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations expressed as mass of emitted substance per volume of waste gas under standard conditions (273,15 K, 101,3 kPa) and on a dry basis, expressed in the unit mg/Nm 3 . The reference oxygen levels are the following: The formula for calculating the emission concentration at the reference oxygen level is: The BAT-AELs for emissions to air refer to the average over the sampling period, meaning the following: Average value of three consecutive measurements of at least 30 minutes each ( 1 ) EMISSION LEVELS ASSOCIATED WITH BAT (BAT-AELs) FOR EMISSIONS TO WATER The BAT-AELs for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to values of concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of water), expressed in the unit mg/l. These BAT-AELs refer to the average of samples obtained during one year, meaning the flow-weighted average of all 24-hour flow-proportional composite samples, taken in one year with the minimum frequency set for the relevant parameter and under normal operating conditions. The formula for calculating the flow-weighted average of all 24-hour flow-proportional composite samples is: Time-proportional sampling can be used provided that sufficient flow stability can be demonstrated. All BAT-AELs for emissions to water apply at the point where the emission leaves the installation. DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS For the purpose of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: 1.1. GENERAL BAT CONCLUSIONS 1.1.1. Environmental management system Applicability The scope (e.g. level of detail) and nature of the EMS (e.g. standardised or non-standardised) will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2. Good housekeeping Description Special procedures can be defined for other than normal operating conditions, in particular: 1.1.3. Noise 1.1.4. Emissions to soil and groundwater 1.1.5. Energy management and energy efficiency 1.1.6. Odour Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where an odour nuisance in residential or other sensitive areas (e.g. recreational areas) can be expected and/or has been reported. 1.1.7. Management of waste and residues 1.1.8. Monitoring Description The surrogate parameters monitored may include: waste gas airflow; waste gas temperature; visual appearance of emissions; water flow and water temperature for scrubbers; voltage drop for electrostatic precipitators; fan speed and pressure drop across bag filters. The selection of surrogate parameters depends on the techniques implemented for the prevention and reduction of emissions. 1.2. EMISSIONS TO AIR 1.2.1. Channelled emissions Applicability Due to safety concerns, a bag filter or a cyclofilter may not be applicable when recovered wood is used as a raw material. In that case a wet abatement technique (e.g. scrubber) may be used. Table 4 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled dust emissions to air from upstream and downstream wood processing, conveying of wood materials and mat forming The associated monitoring is in BAT 14. 1.2.2. Diffuse emissions Description Effective collection and treatment of waste gases (see BAT 19) both at the press exit and along the press line for continuous presses. For existing multi-opening presses the applicability of enclosing the press may be restricted due to safety reasons. 1.3. EMISSIONS TO WATER Description Recycle process water from chip washing, cooking and/or refining in closed or open loops by treating it at the refiner plant level by mechanical removal of solids, in the most appropriate manner, or by evaporation. 1.4. DESCRIPTION OF TECHNIQUES 1.4.1. Emissions to air 1.4.2. Emissions to water ( 1 ) A more suitable measurement period may be employed for any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations, a 30-minute measurement is inappropriate. ( 2 ) EN 14961-1:2010 can be used for the classification of solid biofuels . ( 3 ) Methane monitored according to EN ISO 25140 or EN ISO 25139 is subtracted from the result when using natural gas, LPG, etc. as a fuel. ( 4 ) Not relevant when using mainly wood-derived fuels, natural gas, LPG, etc. as a fuel. ( 5 ) Including As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Hg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sb, Tl and V. ( 6 ) Relevant if contaminated recovered wood is used as fuel. ( 7 ) Relevant if SNCR is applied. ( 8 ) In the absence of an EN standard, the preferred approach is isokinetic sampling in an impinging solution with a heated probe and filter box and without probe washing, e.g. based on the US EPA M316 method. ( 9 ) Methane monitored according to EN ISO 25140 or EN ISO 25139 is subtracted from the result when using natural gas, LPG, etc. as a fuel. ( 10 ) In the absence of an EN standard, the preferred approach is isokinetic sampling in an impinging solution with a heated probe and filter box and without probe washing, e.g. based on the US EPA M316 method. ( 11 ) Sampling from bag filters and cyclofilters can be replaced by continuous monitoring of the pressure drop across the filter as an indicative surrogate parameter. ( 12 ) The measurement point is before the mixing of the flue-gas with other airstreams and only if technically feasible. ( 13 ) There is a tendency to replace COD with TOC for economic and environmental reasons. A correlation between the two parameters should be established on a site-specific basis. ( 14 ) Including As, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn. ( 15 ) Flow-proportional sampling can be replaced by another standard sampling procedure if the flow is insufficient for representative sampling. ( 16 ) Descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 1.4.1. ( 17 ) This BAT-AEL does not apply when using pine as the predominant raw material. ( 18 ) Emissions below 30 mg/Nm 3 can be achieved using UTWS dryer. ( 19 ) When using almost exclusively recovered wood, the upper end of the range may be up to 15 mg/Nm 3 . ( 20 ) Descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 1.4.1. ( 21 ) When a bag filter or a cyclofilter is not applicable, the upper end of the range can be up to 10 mg/Nm 3 . ( 22 ) Description of the technique is given in Section 1.4.1. ( 23 ) An outer piece of wood, with or without the bark removed, from the first cuts in a sawing process to render the log into lumber (timber). ( 24 ) Descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 1.4.2. ( 25 ) Descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 1.4.2. ( 26 ) Descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 1.4.2.