COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2023/2917 of 20 October 2023 on the verification activities, accreditation of verifiers and approval of monitoring plans by administering authorities pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas emissions from maritime transport, and repealing Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2072 (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on the monitoring, reporting and verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 6(8), third subparagraph, Article 7(5), second subparagraph, Article 13(6), Article 15(5) and Article 16(3) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation lays down provisions concerning the assessment of monitoring plans and the verification of emissions reports and aggregated emissions data at company level. It also lays down requirements in terms of competences and procedures. This Regulation further specifies the methods of accreditation of verifiers by national accreditation bodies and rules on information exchange. This Regulation lays down rules on approval of monitoring plans and of modifications thereto by administering authorities responsible. Article 2 Definitions For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Presumption of conformity A verifier that demonstrates conformity with the criteria laid down in the relevant harmonised standards, within the meaning of Article 2(9) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, or parts thereof, the CHAPTER II VERIFICATION ACTIVITIES SECTION 1 Assessment of monitoring plans Article 4 Information to be provided by companies 1. Companies shall provide the verifier with their ship’s monitoring plan using a template corresponding to the one set out in Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1927. If the monitoring plan is in a language other than English, they shall provide an English translation. 2. Before the start of the assessment of the monitoring plan, the company shall also provide the verifier with at least the following information: 3. For the purpose of paragraph 2, point (d), the organisation or person referred to in that point shall provide the verifier with a document clearly indicating that it has been duly mandated by the shipowner to comply with the obligations under Regulation (EU) 2015/757 and, where applicable, the ETS obligations. The document shall be signed by both the shipowner and that organisation or person. If that document is in a language other than English, an English translation shall be provided. The document shall include the following information: 4. The company shall, upon request, provide any other information deemed relevant to carry out its assessment of the plan. Article 5 Assessment of monitoring plans 1. When assessing the monitoring plan, the verifier shall address the assertions of completeness, accuracy, relevance and conformity with Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the information provided in the monitoring plan. 2. The verifier shall at least: 3. For the purpose of assessing the monitoring plan, the verifier may resort to inquiry, document inspection, observation and any other audit technique deemed appropriate. Article 6 Site visits 1. The verifier shall carry out site visits in order to gain sufficient understanding of the procedures described in the monitoring plan and validate that the information therein is accurate. 2. The verifier shall determine the location or locations of the site visit after taking into consideration the place where the critical mass of relevant data is stored, including electronic or hard copies of documents of which the originals are kept on the ship, and the place where data-flow activities and control activities are carried out. 3. The verifier shall also determine the activities to be performed and the time needed for the site visit. 4. The company shall provide the verifier with access to its sites, including to its relevant onshore locations and the relevant ship. 5. The verifier may carry out a virtual site visit provided that one of the following conditions is fulfilled: The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the monitoring plan is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2015/757. The decision to carry out a virtual site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. The verifier shall inform without undue delay the company of the decision to carry out a virtual site visit and that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. 6. The verifier may waive a site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 5 provided that the conditions laid down in paragraph 5, points (a), (b) and (c), are cumulatively fulfilled. The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the monitoring plan is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2015/757. The decision to waive a site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for waiving site visits are met. The verifier shall inform without undue delay the company of the decision to waive a site visit and that the conditions for waiving site visits are met. 7. A site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 5 shall not be waived in any of the following situations: 8. If the verifier carries out a virtual site visit pursuant to paragraph 5 or waives a site visit pursuant to paragraph 6, it shall provide justification for doing so in the internal verification documentation. Article 7 Addressing non-conformities in the monitoring plan 1. Where the verifier identifies non-conformities in the course of the assessment of the monitoring plan, it shall inform the company thereof without undue delay and request relevant corrections within a proposed timeframe. 2. The company shall correct all non-conformities communicated by the verifier and submit a revised monitoring plan to the verifier according to the agreed timeframe that allows the verifier to reassess it before the start of the reporting period. 3. The verifier shall document in the internal verification documentation, marking them as resolved, all non-conformities that have been corrected in the course of the assessment of the monitoring plan. Article 8 Independent review of the assessment of the monitoring plan 1. The verification team shall submit the internal verification documentation and draft conclusions from the assessment of the plan to an independent reviewer without delay and prior to communicating them to the company. 2. The independent reviewer shall perform a review to ensure that the monitoring plan has been assessed in accordance with this Regulation and that due professional care and judgment have been exercised. 3. The scope of the independent review shall encompass the complete assessment process described in Articles 4 to 9. 4. The verifier shall include the results of the independent review in the internal verification documentation. Article 9 Verifier’s conclusions on the assessment of the monitoring plan On the basis of the information collected during the assessment of the monitoring plan, the verifier shall without delay provide the company in writing with the conclusions reached. The conclusions shall include the following elements: SECTION 2 Verification of emissions reports and partial emissions reports Article 10 Information to be provided by companies 1. Before the start of the verification of the emissions report and of the partial emissions report, companies shall provide the verifier with the following supporting information: 2. Once the verifier has identified the specific section(s) or document(s) deemed relevant for the purpose of its verification, companies shall also provide the following supporting information: 3. Additionally, and if applicable on the basis of the monitoring method applied, verifiers may ask the company to provide: 4. In the event of a change of company, the companies involved shall exercise due diligence to provide the verifier, upon its request, with the supporting documents or information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 relating to the voyages performed under their respective responsibilities. 5. Companies shall retain the information referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 for the periods set under the 1973 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (the MARPOL Convention) and the 1988 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (the SOLAS Convention). Pending the issuance of the Document of compliance in accordance with Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757 or, for partial emissions reports, pending the issuance of the verification report, the verifier may request any of the information referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3. Article 11 Strategic analysis 1. At the beginning of the verification, the verifier shall assess the likely nature, scale and complexity of the verification tasks by carrying out a strategic analysis of all activities relevant to the ship. 2. For the purposes of understanding the activities carried out by the company, the verifier shall collect and review the information needed to assess that the verification team is sufficiently competent to carry out the verification, to determine that the time allocation indicated in the contract has been set correctly and to ensure that it is able to conduct the necessary risk analysis. That information shall include at least: 3. When reviewing the information referred to in paragraph 2, the verifier shall at least assess the following aspects: 4. When carrying out the strategic analysis, the verifier shall check the following: Article 12 Risk analysis to be carried out by verifiers 1. In addition to the elements referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the verifier shall identify and analyse all of the following: When identifying and analysing the elements referred to in the first subparagraph, the verifier shall consider the findings from the strategic analysis referred to in Article 11(1). 2. When performing the risk analysis, the verifier shall consider any areas of higher verification risk and at least the following: voyage data, fuel consumption, fuel types used, application of any derogation from Article 12(3) of Directive 2003/87/EC provided for in Articles 12(3a), 12(3b) and 12(3-e) to 12(3-b) of that Directive, greenhouse gas emissions, distance travelled, time spent at sea, cargo carried and aggregation of data in the emissions report or partial emissions report. 3. When identifying and analysing the aspects referred to in paragraph 2, the verifier shall consider the existence, completeness, accuracy, consistency, transparency and relevance of the information reported. 4. Where appropriate, in the light of the information obtained in the course of the verification, the verifier shall revise the risk analysis and modify or repeat the verification activities to be performed. Article 13 Verification plan The verifier shall draft a verification plan commensurate with the information obtained and the risks identified during the risk analysis. The verification plan shall include the following: Article 14 Verification process concerning the emissions report and partial emissions report 1. The verifier shall implement the verification plan and, on the basis of the risk analysis, verify whether the monitoring and reporting systems, as described in the monitoring plan that has been assessed as satisfactory, exist in practice and are properly implemented. To that end, the verifier shall consider carrying out the following types of processes: 2. The verifier shall verify the following: For the purposes of point (a), the verifier shall track the data flow following the sequence and interaction of the data flow activities from primary source data to the compilation of the emissions report or partial emissions report. For the purposes of points (b) and (c), the verifier may use sampling methods specific to a ship provided that, based on the risk analysis, sampling is justified. Article 15 Verification of reported data 1. The verifier shall verify the data reported in the emissions report or the partial emissions report through the following: 2. As part of the data verification referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall verify: Article 16 Verification of methods applied for missing data 1. Where methods laid down in the monitoring plan as assessed by the verifier and, where applicable, as approved by the administering authority responsible have been used to complete missing data pursuant to Part C of Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the verifier shall verify whether the methods used were appropriate for the specific situation and whether they have been applied correctly. 2. Where the methods referred to in paragraph 1 were not assessed or approved beforehand, the verifier shall verify whether the approach used by the company to complete the missing data ensures that the emissions are not underestimated and that that approach does not lead to material misstatements. Article 17 Materiality level 1. For the purpose of verifying fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions data in the emissions report and the partial emissions report, the materiality level shall be 5 % of the respective total reported for each item in the reporting period. 2. For the purpose of verifying other relevant information in the emissions report and the partial emissions report on cargo carried, transport work, distance travelled and time spent at sea, the materiality level shall be 5 % of the respective total reported for each item in the reporting period. Article 18 Site visits 1. The verifier shall carry out site visits in order to gain sufficient understanding of the company and the ship’s monitoring and reporting system as described in the monitoring plan. 2. The verifier shall determine the location or locations of the site visit on the basis of the results of the risk analysis and after taking into consideration the place where the critical mass of relevant data is stored, including electronic or hard copies of documents of which the originals are kept on the ship, and the place where data-flow activities and control activities are carried out. 3. On the basis of the outcome of a site visit to an onshore location, where it concludes that an on-board verification is needed to reduce the risk of material misstatements in the emissions report or partial emissions report, the verifier may decide to visit the ship. 4. The verifier shall also determine the activities to be performed and the time needed for the site visit. 5. The company shall provide the verifier with access to its sites, including to its relevant onshore locations and relevant ship. 6. The verifier may carry out a virtual site visit provided that, on the basis of the outcome of the risk analysis, one of the following conditions is fulfilled: The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the emissions report or partial emissions report is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2015/757. Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, point (d), the verifier shall not carry out a virtual site visit if no physical site visit has been carried out in the three reporting periods immediately preceding the current reporting period. The three-year period shall refer to three consecutive reporting periods that start after 1 January 2024, including reporting periods where virtual site visits were carried out pursuant to the first subparagraph, point (d). The decision to carry out a virtual site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. The verifier shall inform without undue delay the company of the decision to carry out a virtual site visit and that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. 7. The verifier may decide to waive a site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 6 provided that the conditions laid down in paragraph 6, points (a), (b) and (c), are cumulatively fulfilled. The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the emissions report or partial emissions report is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2015/757. The decision to waive a site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for waiving site visits are met. The verifier shall inform the company without undue delay of the decision to waive a site visit and that the conditions for waiving site visits are met. 8. A site visit as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 6 shall not be waived in any of the following situations: 9. For ships falling within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC, the company shall inform without undue delay its administering authority responsible of the verifier’s decision to waive the site visit. The administering authority responsible may object to the verifier’s decision to waive the site visit, taking into consideration all of the following elements: In case of objection, the administering authority responsible shall notify the company of the objection and the reasons for such objection within a reasonable time, but no later than two months from the date it was informed of the verifier’s decision to waive the site visit. 10. If the verifier carries out a virtual site visit pursuant to paragraph 6 or waives a site visit pursuant to paragraph 7, it shall provide justification for doing so in the internal verification documentation. Article 19 Addressing misstatements and non-conformities in the emissions report and partial emissions report 1. Where the verifier identifies misstatements or non-conformities in the course of the verification of the emissions report or partial emissions report, it shall inform the company thereof without undue delay and request relevant corrections within a reasonable deadline. The company shall correct any communicated misstatements or non-conformities. 2. The verifier shall document in the internal verification documentation, marking them as resolved, all misstatements or non-conformities that have been corrected in the course of the verification. 3. Where the company does not correct the misstatements or non-conformities referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall, before issuing the verification report, ask the company to explain the main causes of the misstatements or non-conformities. 4. The verifier shall assess whether the uncorrected misstatements, individually or together with other misstatements, have an impact on the total reported emissions or other relevant information and whether that impact leads to material misstatements. The verifier shall assess whether the uncorrected non-conformity, individually or when combined with other non-conformities, has an impact on the reported data and whether that leads to material misstatement. 5. The verifier shall consider misstatements or non-conformities which, individually or together with other misstatements, are below the materiality level set in Article 17 as material misstatements where that is justified by their scale and nature or by the particular circumstances of their occurrence. Article 20 Conclusion of the verification of the emissions report and partial emissions report To complete the verification of the emissions report and of the partial emissions report, the verifier shall: Article 21 Recommendations for improvement 1. The verifier shall communicate to the company recommendations for improvement in relation to uncorrected misstatements and non-conformities not leading to material misstatements. 2. The verifier may communicate other recommendations for improvement that it finds relevant, in the light of the outcome of the verification activities. 3. When communicating recommendations to the company, the verifier shall remain impartial vis-à-vis the company, the ship and the monitoring and reporting system. It shall not jeopardise its impartiality by giving advice or developing parts of the monitoring and reporting process pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757. 4. During verification following a year in which recommendations for improvement were made in a verification report, the verifier shall verify whether the company has implemented those recommendations for improvement and the manner in which this has been done. If the company has not implemented those recommendations, the verifier shall assess whether this increases or may increase the risk of misstatements. Article 22 Verification report of emissions report or partial emissions report 1. On the basis of the information collected, the verifier shall issue a verification report on each emissions report or partial emissions report subject to verification and transmit that verification report to the company. 2. Upon receipt of the verification report pursuant to paragraph 1, the company shall submit the verification report together with the emissions report or partial emissions report to the administering authority responsible, if applicable. The report shall be submitted using automated systems and data exchange formats. 3. The verification report shall include a statement verifying the emissions report or partial emissions report as satisfactory or unsatisfactory. 4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the emissions report or partial emissions report shall be considered to have been verified as satisfactory only if it is free of material misstatements. The emissions report or partial emissions reports shall not be verified as satisfactory in case it contains material misstatements that were not corrected before the verification report was issued. 5. The verification report shall contain the following elements: 6. The verifier shall describe the misstatements and non-conformities in sufficient detail in the verification report, including the following aspects: Article 23 Independent review of the emissions report and partial emissions report 1. The independent reviewer shall review the internal verification documentation and the draft verification report to verify that the verification process has been conducted in accordance with this Regulation and that due professional care and judgment have been exercised. 2. The scope of the independent review shall encompass the complete verification process laid down in Articles 10 to 22. 3. After the report has been authenticated in accordance with Article 20, point (e), the verifier shall include the results of the independent review in the internal verification documentation and shall notify the Commission and the ship’s flag state of whether the conditions for issuing the document of compliance are fulfilled. SECTION 3 Verification of reports at company level Article 24 Information to be provided by companies 1. Before the start of the verification of the report at company level, companies shall provide the verifier with the following information: 2. Verifiers may ask the company to provide any other information relevant to the verification of the report at company level, including a copy of the monitoring plans of ships under the company’s responsibility during the reporting period and, if applicable, evidence of the change of company including evidence for the change date. Article 25 Strategic analysis 1. At the beginning of the verification, the verifier shall assess the likely nature, scale and complexity of the verification tasks by carrying out a strategic analysis of all activities relevant to the company. 2. For the purposes of understanding the activities carried out by company, the verifier shall collect and review the information needed to assess that the verification team is sufficiently competent to carry out the verification, to determine that the time allocation indicated in the contract has been set correctly and to ensure that it is able to conduct the necessary risk analysis. The information shall include: Article 26 Risk analysis to be carried out by verifiers 1. For the purposes of assessing the completeness and consistency of the reported data pursuant to Article 14(4) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the verifier shall consider areas of higher verification risk taking into consideration elements such as: 2. Where appropriate, in the light of the information obtained in the course of the verification, the verifier shall revise the risk analysis and modify or repeat the verification activities to be performed. Article 27 Verification plan at company level The verifier shall draft a verification plan commensurate with the information obtained and the risks identified during the risk analysis. The verification plan shall include a verification programme describing the nature and scope of the verification activities and the time and manner in which they are to be carried out, and, where appropriate, a data sampling plan. Article 28 Verification process concerning the report at company level On the basis of the risk analysis, the verifier shall consider carrying out the following types of processes: Article 29 Verification of reported data at company level 1. The verifier shall assess the completeness and consistency of the data reported in the report at company level through the following: 2. As part of the data verification referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall verify: Article 30 Materiality level for reports at company level 1. For the purpose of verifying a report at company level, when the sum of all ships’ total aggregated emissions of greenhouse gases to be reported under Directive 2003/87/EC as determined at ship level in accordance with Part C, points 1.1 to 1.7, of Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 exceeds 500 000 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent, the materiality level shall be 2 % of those emissions data in the reporting period. 2. For the purpose of verifying a report at company level, when the amount referred to in paragraph 1 does not exceed 500 000 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent, the materiality level shall be 5 % of the emissions data in the reporting period. Article 31 Site visits 1. The verifier shall carry out site visits in order to verify a report at company level, in particular based on the outcome of the risk analysis pursuant to Article 26, taking into consideration the place where the critical mass of relevant data is stored and the place where data-flow activities and control activities are carried out. 2. The verifier shall also determine the activities to be performed and the time needed for the site visit. 3. The company shall provide the verifier with access to its sites, including to its relevant onshore locations and its relevant ships. 4. The verifier may carry out a virtual site visit provided that, on the basis of the outcome of the risk analysis, one of the following conditions is fulfilled: The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the report at company level is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2015/757. The decision to carry out a virtual site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for carrying out a virtual site visit are met. The verifier shall inform without undue delay the company of the decision to carry out a virtual site visit and that the conditions for carryout out a virtual site visit are met. 5. On the basis of the outcome of the risk analysis, the verifier may decide to waive a site visit referred to in paragraphs 1 and 4 provided that the conditions below are cumulatively fulfilled: The verifier shall take measures to reduce the verification risk to an acceptable level to obtain reasonable assurance that the report at company level is in conformity with Regulation (EU) 2015/757. The decision to waive a site visit shall be made after determining that the conditions for waiving the site visit are met. The verifier shall inform without undue delay the company of the decision to waive a site visit and that conditions for waiving the site visit are met. 6. For ships falling within the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC, the company shall inform without undue delay its administering authority responsible of the verifier’s decision to waive the site visit. The administering authority responsible may object to the verifier’s decision to waive the site visit, taking into consideration all of the following elements: In case of objection, the administering authority responsible shall notify the company of the objection and the reasons for such objection within a reasonable time, but no later than two months from the date it was informed of the verifier’s decision to waive the site visit. 7. If the verifier carries out a virtual site visit pursuant to paragraph 4 or waives a site visit pursuant to paragraph 5, it shall provide justification for doing so in the internal verification documentation. Article 32 Addressing misstatements and non-conformities in the report at company level 1. Where the verifier identifies misstatements or non-conformities in the report at company level in the course of its verification, it shall inform the company thereof without undue delay and request relevant corrections within a reasonable deadline. The company shall correct any communicated misstatements or non-conformities. 2. The verifier shall document, in the internal verification documentation, all misstatements or non-conformities that have been corrected in the course of the verification, marking them as resolved. 3. Where the company does not correct the misstatements or non-conformities referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall, before issuing the verification report, ask the company to explain the main causes of the misstatements or non-conformities. 4. The verifier shall assess whether the uncorrected misstatements, individually or together with other misstatements, have an impact on the total reported emissions or other relevant information and whether that impact leads to material misstatements. The verifier shall assess whether the uncorrected non-conformity, individually or when combined with other non-conformities, has an impact on the reported data and whether this leads to material misstatement. 5. The verifier shall consider misstatements or non-conformities which, individually or together with other misstatements, are below the materiality level set in Article 30 as material misstatements where that is justified by their scale and nature or by the particular circumstances of their occurrence. Article 33 Conclusions of the verification of the report at company level To complete the verification of the report at company level, the verifier shall: Article 34 Recommendations for improvement 1. The verifier shall communicate to the company recommendations for improvement in relation to uncorrected misstatements and non-conformities not leading to material misstatements. 2. The verifier may communicate other recommendations for improvement that it finds relevant, in the light of the outcome of the verification activities. 3. When communicating recommendations to the company, the verifier shall remain impartial vis-à-vis the company, the ships and the monitoring and reporting system. It shall not jeopardise its impartiality by giving advice or developing parts of the monitoring and reporting process pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757. 4. During verification following a year in which recommendations for improvement were made in a verification report, the verifier shall verify whether the company has implemented those recommendations for improvement and the manner in which that has been done. If the company has not implemented those recommendations, the verifier shall assess whether that increases or may increase the risk of misstatements. Article 35 Verification report at company level 1. On the basis of the information collected, the verifier shall issue a verification report on the report at company level subject to verification and transmit that verification report to the company. 2. Upon receipt of the verification report pursuant to paragraph 1, the company shall submit the verification report together with the report at company level to the administering authority responsible. The reports shall be submitted using automated systems and data exchange formats. 3. The verification report shall include a statement verifying the report at company level as satisfactory or unsatisfactory. 4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, the report at company level shall be considered to have been verified as satisfactory only if it is free of material misstatements. The report at company level shall not be verified as satisfactory in case it contains material misstatements that were not corrected before the verification report was issued. 5. The verification report shall contain the following elements: 6. The verifier shall describe the misstatements or non-conformities in sufficient detail in the verification report, including the following aspects: Article 36 Independent review of the report at company level 1. The independent reviewer shall review the internal verification documentation and the draft verification report to verify that the verification process has been conducted in accordance with this Regulation and that due professional care and judgment have been exercised. 2. The scope of the independent review shall encompass the complete verification process laid down in Articles 24 to 35. 3. After the report has been authenticated in accordance with Article 33, point (e), the verifier shall include the results of the independent review in the internal verification documentation. CHAPTER III REQUIREMENTS FOR VERIFIERS Article 37 Continued competence process 1. The verifier shall establish, document, implement and maintain a continued competence process to ensure that all personnel entrusted with verification activities are competent for the tasks that are allocated to them. 2. For the purposes of the competence process referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall establish, document, implement and maintain the following aspects: In evaluating the competence of the personnel pursuant to the first subparagraph, point (c), the verifier shall assess that competence against the competence criteria referred to in the first subparagraph, points (a) and (b). The process referred to in the first subparagraph, point (e), shall also include a process for assessing whether the verification team holds all the competence and personnel required to carry out verification activities for a specific company. The verifier shall develop general and specific competence criteria which are in conformity with the criteria laid down in Article 38(4) and Articles 39, 40 and 41. 3. The verifier shall monitor regularly, and at least annually, the performance of all personnel undertaking verification activities in order to confirm their continued competence. 4. The verifier shall regularly review the continued competence process referred to in paragraph 1 to ensure that: 5. The verifier shall have a system for recording the results of the activities carried out in the competence process referred to in paragraph 1. 6. A sufficiently competent evaluator shall assess the competence and performance of a shipping MRV auditor and shipping MRV lead auditor. The competent evaluator shall monitor those auditors during the verification of an emissions report or partial emissions report on the site of the company as appropriate, to determine whether they meet the competence criteria. 7. If a member of personnel fails to demonstrate that the competence criteria for a specific task allocated to that member have been fully met, the verifier shall identify and organise additional training or supervised work experience. The verifier shall monitor that member until the member demonstrates to the verifier that the member meets the competence criteria. Article 38 Verification teams 1. For each particular verification engagement, the verifier shall assemble a verification team capable of performing the verification activities referred to in Articles 4 to 36. 2. The verification team shall consist of one shipping MRV lead auditor and, where appropriate in the light of the verifier’s understanding of the complexity of the tasks to be carried out and its ability to conduct the necessary risk analysis, a suitable number of shipping MRV auditors and technical experts. 3. For the independent review of the verification activities related to a particular verification engagement, the verifier shall appoint an independent reviewer who shall not be part of the verification team. 4. Team members shall have a clear understanding of their specific role in the verification process and shall be able to communicate effectively in the language required to perform their verification tasks and to examine the information submitted by the company. 5. Where the verification team consists of one person, that person shall meet all the competence requirements for the shipping MRV auditor and the shipping MRV lead auditor and meet the requirements laid down in paragraph 4. Article 39 Competence requirements for shipping MRV auditors and shipping MRV lead auditors 1. Shipping MRV auditors shall have the competence to assess monitoring plans and verify emissions reports, partial emissions reports and reports at company level in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2015/757, Directive 2003/87/EC and this Regulation. 2. To that end, shipping MRV auditors shall have, at least: 3. In addition, sector-specific knowledge and experience of relevant aspects as specified in Annex I to this Regulation shall be taken into consideration by verifiers for the purposes of assessing monitoring plans and verifying emissions reports, partial emissions reports and reports at company level. 4. A shipping MRV lead auditor shall meet the competence requirements for a shipping MRV auditor and shall have demonstrated competence to lead a verification team and to be responsible for carrying out the verification activities in accordance with this Regulation. Article 40 Competence requirements for independent reviewers 1. The independent reviewer shall have the appropriate authority to review the draft conclusions on the assessment of the monitoring plan, the draft verification report and internal verification documentation pursuant to Articles 8, 23 and 36. 2. The independent reviewer shall meet the competence requirements applying to shipping MRV lead auditors, as referred to in Article 39(4). 3. In order to assess whether the internal verification documentation is complete and whether enough evidence has been gathered in the course of the verification activities, the independent reviewer shall have the necessary competence to: Article 41 Use of technical experts 1. When carrying out verification activities, a verifier may use technical experts to provide detailed knowledge and expertise on a specific subject matter needed to support the shipping MRV auditor and shipping MRV lead auditor in carrying out their verification activities. 2. Where the independent reviewer does not have the competence to assess a particular issue in the review process, the verifier shall request the support of a technical expert. 3. The technical expert shall have the competence and expertise required to support the shipping MRV auditor and the shipping MRV lead auditor, or the independent reviewer, where necessary, effectively on the subject matter for which knowledge and expertise of such expert is requested. In addition, the technical expert shall have a sufficient understanding of the issues referred to in Article 39. 4. The technical expert shall undertake specified tasks under the direction and full responsibility of the independent reviewer or of the shipping MRV lead auditor of the verification team in which the technical expert is operating. Article 42 Procedures for verification activities 1. Verifiers shall establish, document, implement and maintain one or more procedures and processes for the verification activities described in Articles 4 to 36. 2. When establishing and implementing such procedures and processes, the verifier shall carry out the activities in accordance with the harmonised standard pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 concerning requirements for greenhouse gas validation and verification bodies for use in accreditation or other forms of recognition ( 13 ) . 3. Verifiers shall establish, document, implement and maintain a quality management system to ensure consistent development, implementation, improvement and review of the procedures and processes in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in paragraph 2. The quality management system shall include the following: 4. In addition, verifiers shall establish the following procedures, processes and arrangements in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in paragraph 2: Article 43 Internal verification documentation 1. The verifier shall prepare and compile internal verification documentation containing at least: 2. The internal verification documentation shall be drafted in such a way that the independent reviewer referred to in Articles 8, 23 and 36 and the national accreditation body are able to assess whether the verification has been performed in accordance with this Regulation. 3. The verifier shall, upon request, provide the administering authority responsible with access to the internal verification documentation and other relevant information to facilitate an evaluation of the verification by the administering authority responsible. The administering authority responsible may set a timeframe within which the verifier shall provide access to that documentation. Article 44 Records and communication 1. Verifiers shall maintain and manage records to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation, including as regards the competence and impartiality of their personnel. 2. A verifier shall, on a regular basis, make information available to the company in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in Article 42(2). 3. Verifiers shall safeguard the confidentiality of information obtained in the course of the verification, in accordance with the harmonised standard referred to in Article 42(2). Article 45 Impartiality and independence 1. A verifier shall be independent from the company and impartial in carrying out its verification activities. To ensure independence and impartiality, the verifier and any part of the same legal entity shall not be a company as defined in Article 3, point (d), of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the owner of such a company or owned by such a company, nor shall the verifier have relations with the company that could affect its independence and impartiality. The verifier shall also be independent from bodies that trade emission allowances under the greenhouse gas emission allowances trading system established pursuant to Article 19 of Directive 2003/87/EC. 2. Verifiers shall be organised in such a way as to safeguard their objectivity, independence and impartiality. For the purposes of this Regulation, the relevant requirements laid down in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 42(2) shall apply. 3. Verifiers shall not carry out verification activities for a company that poses an unacceptable risk to their impartiality or in respect of which they have a conflict of interests. The verifier shall not use personnel or contracted persons in the assessment of a monitoring plan or in the verification of an emissions report, partial emissions report or report at company level that involves an actual or potential conflict of interest. The verifier shall also ensure that the activities of personnel or organisations do not affect the confidentiality, objectivity, independence and impartiality of the verification. For this purpose, the verifier shall monitor the risks to impartiality and take appropriate action to address those risks. 4. An unacceptable risk to impartiality or a conflict of interests shall be considered to have arisen, inter alia, where a verifier, or any part of the same legal entity, provides: 5. A conflict of interest for a verifier in the relations between it and the company shall be considered to have arisen in particular in either of the following cases: For the purposes of the first subparagraph, point (b), the verifier’s impartiality shall be considered compromised where the relations between the verifier and the consultancy body, technical assistance body or the other organisation are based on common ownership, common governance, common management or personnel, shared resources, common finances, common contracts or marketing and common payment of sales commission or other inducement for the referral of new clients. 6. Verifiers shall not outsource the independent review or the issuance of the verification reports. 7. Where verifiers outsource other verification activities, they shall meet the relevant requirements laid down in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 42(2). However, contracting individuals to carry out verification activities shall not constitute outsourcing for the purposes of the first subparagraph if the verifier, when contracting those persons, takes full responsibility for the verification activities performed by contracted personnel. When contracting individuals for carrying out verification activities, the verifier shall require those individuals to sign a written agreement that they comply with the procedures of the verifier and that there is no conflict of interest in carrying out those verification activities. 8. Verifiers shall establish, document, implement and maintain a process to ensure their continuous impartiality and independence, and those of the parts of the same legal entity, of other organisations referred to in paragraph 5, and of all personnel and contracted persons involved in the verification. That process shall include a mechanism to safeguard the impartiality and independence of the verifier and meet the relevant requirements laid down in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 42(2). 9. When verifying the same company as in the previous year, the verifier shall assess the risk to impartiality and take measures to reduce the risk to impartiality. 10. If the shipping MRV lead auditor undertakes annual verifications of reports at company level for a period of six consecutive years for a given company, the shipping MRV lead auditor shall take a three consecutive years break from providing verification of reports at company level for that same company. The six years maximum period includes verifications of reports at company level performed for the company starting after the entry into force of this Regulation. CHAPTER IV ACCREDITATION OF VERIFIERS Article 46 Accreditation of verifiers 1. Where no specific provisions concerning the accreditation of verifiers are laid down in this Regulation or Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply. 2. With respect to the minimum requirements for accreditation and the requirements for accreditation bodies, the harmonised standard pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 concerning general requirements for accreditation bodies accrediting conformity assessment bodies ( 14 ) shall apply. Article 47 Scope of accreditation The scope of accreditation of verifiers shall cover the assessment of monitoring plans and the verification of emissions reports, partial emissions reports and reports at company level. Article 48 Objectives of the accreditation process In the course of the accreditation process and of the annual surveillance of accredited verifiers, in accordance with Articles 50 to 55, national accreditation bodies shall assess whether the verifier and its personnel undertaking verification activities: Article 49 Requests for accreditation 1. Requests for accreditation shall contain the information required on the basis of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 2. In addition, prior to the start of the assessment referred to in Article 50, the verifier applying for accreditation (‘the applicant’) shall make available to the national accreditation body information on the following aspects: Article 50 Assessment 1. For the purposes of the assessment referred to in Article 48, the assessment team appointed in accordance with Article 57 shall, at least: 2. The assessment team shall carry out the activities outlined in paragraph 1 in compliance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 3. The assessment team shall report its findings and any non-conformities to the applicant and request a response, in accordance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 4. The applicant shall take corrective action to address any non-conformities reported pursuant to paragraph 3 and submit a response with an indication of what action it has taken, or plans to take within a time set by the national accreditation body, to resolve them. 5. The national accreditation body shall review the response that the applicant submits pursuant to paragraph 4. 6. Where the national accreditation body finds the applicant’s response or the action taken to be insufficient or ineffective, it shall ask the applicant to submit further information or take further action. 7. The national accreditation body may also request evidence of, or carry out a follow-up assessment to assess, the actual implementation of the corrective action. Article 51 Decision on accreditation and accreditation certificate 1. When preparing and taking the decision on whether to grant, extend or renew the accreditation of an applicant, the national accreditation body shall take into account the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 2. Where the national accreditation body has decided to grant or renew an applicant’s accreditation, it shall issue an accreditation certificate to that effect. The accreditation certificate shall be granted for all verification activities pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757. 3. The accreditation certificate shall contain at least the information required on the basis of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 4. The accreditation certificate shall be valid for a period not exceeding five years after the date on which the national accreditation body has issued that certificate. Article 52 Annual surveillance 1. The national accreditation body shall carry out annual surveillance of each verifier to which it has issued an accreditation certificate. That surveillance shall comprise, at least: 2. The national accreditation body shall carry out the first surveillance of a verifier in accordance with paragraph 1 within 12 months of the date on which its accreditation certificate was issued. 3. The surveillance planning shall allow the national accreditation body to assess representative samples of the verifier’s activities within the scope of the accreditation certificate and of the staff involved in the verification activities, in accordance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 4. On the basis of the results of the surveillance, the national accreditation body shall decide whether to confirm the continuation of accreditation. 5. Where a verifier carries out verification for a company assigned to the administering authority in respect of a shipping company of a Member State other than the Member State of the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier, the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier may ask the national accreditation body of that other Member State to carry out surveillance activities on its behalf and under its responsibility. Article 53 Reassessment 1. Before the expiry of an accreditation certificate which it has issued, the national accreditation body shall reassess the verifier in question to determine whether the validity of the certificate can be extended. 2. The reassessment planning shall ensure that the national accreditation body assesses a representative sample of the verifier’s activities covered by the certificate. 3. In planning and carrying out the reassessment, the national accreditation body shall satisfy the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). Article 54 Extraordinary assessment 1. The national accreditation body may conduct an extraordinary assessment of the verifier at any time to ensure that it continues to meet the requirements of this Regulation. 2. In order to enable the national accreditation body to assess the need for an extraordinary assessment, the verifier shall inform that body forthwith of any significant changes relevant to its accreditation concerning any aspect of its status or operation. Those significant changes shall include changes mentioned in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). Article 55 Administrative measures 1. The national accreditation body may suspend or withdraw the accreditation of a verifier where the verifier does not meet the requirements of this Regulation. 2. The national accreditation body shall suspend or withdraw the accreditation of a verifier where the verifier so requests. 3. The national accreditation body shall establish, document, implement and maintain a procedure for the suspension and the withdrawal of the accreditation in line with the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 4. The national accreditation body shall suspend a verifier’s accreditation where the verifier has: 5. The national accreditation body shall withdraw a verifier’s accreditation where: 6. Decisions of a national accreditation body to suspend or withdraw an accreditation in accordance with paragraphs 1, 4 and 5 shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the procedures established by Member States pursuant to Article 5(5) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. 7. Decisions of a national accreditation body to suspend or withdraw accreditation shall take effect upon being notified to the verifier. The national accreditation body shall consider the impact on activities carried out prior to those decisions in the light of the nature of the non-compliance. 8. The national accreditation body shall terminate the suspension of an accreditation certificate where it has received satisfactory information and concludes that the verifier meets the requirements of this Regulation. CHAPTER V REQUIREMENTS FOR NATIONAL ACCREDITATION BODIES Article 56 Requirements for national accreditation bodies 1. Where no specific provisions concerning the requirements for national accreditation bodies are laid down in this Regulation or Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply. 2. For the purposes of this Regulation, national accreditation bodies appointed pursuant to Article 4(1) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall carry out their functions in accordance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). Article 57 Assessment team 1. The national accreditation body shall appoint an assessment team for each assessment carried out under the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 46(2). 2. An assessment team shall consist of a lead assessor responsible for carrying out an assessment in accordance with this Regulation and, where necessary, a suitable number of assessors or technical experts with relevant knowledge and experience for the specific scope of accreditation. 3. An assessment team shall include, at least, one person with the following skills: Article 58 Competence requirements for assessors 1. Assessors shall have the competence to carry out the activities under Articles 50 to 55. To that end, the assessor shall: 2. In addition to the competence requirements set out in paragraph 1, lead assessors shall demonstrate competence to lead an assessment team and be responsible for carrying out an assessment in accordance with this Regulation. 3. In addition to the competence requirements set out in paragraph 1, internal reviewers and persons taking decisions on the granting, extending or renewing of an accreditation shall have sufficient knowledge and experience to evaluate the accreditation. Article 59 Technical experts 1. The national accreditation body may include technical experts in the assessment team to provide detailed knowledge and expertise on a specific subject matter needed to support the lead assessor or assessor. 2. A technical expert shall have the competence required to support the lead assessor and assessor effectively on the subject matter for which knowledge and expertise of such expert is requested. In addition, the technical expert shall: 3. Technical experts shall undertake specified tasks under the direction and full responsibility of the lead assessor of the assessment team in question. Article 60 Complaints Where the national accreditation body has received a complaint concerning the verifier from the administering authority in respect of a shipping company, the company, the flag State concerned for ships flying the flag of a Member State, or other interested parties, the national accreditation body shall, within a reasonable time but no later than three months from the date of its receipt: Article 61 Peer evaluation 1. Where national accreditation bodies are subject to regular peer evaluation in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall implement appropriate peer evaluation criteria and an effective and independent peer evaluation process in order to assess whether: The criteria shall include competence requirements for peer evaluators and peer evaluation teams that are specific to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 and to the system for greenhouse gas emission allowances trading established by Directive 2003/87/EC. 2. The body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall publish the outcome of the peer evaluation of a national accreditation body referred to in paragraph 1 and communicate it to the Commission, the national authorities responsible for the national accreditation bodies in the Member States, and the administering authorities in respect of a shipping company or the focal point referred to in Article 64 of this Regulation. 3. Notwithstanding Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, where a national accreditation body has successfully undergone a peer evaluation organised by the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 prior to the entry into force of this Regulation, the national accreditation body shall be exempted from undergoing a new peer evaluation following the entry into force of this Regulation if it can demonstrate conformity with this Regulation. To that end, the national accreditation body concerned shall submit a request and the necessary documentation to the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. The body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall decide whether the conditions for granting an exemption have been met. The exemption shall apply for a period not exceeding three years from the date of notification of the decision to the national accreditation body. Article 62 Mutual recognition of verifiers Notwithstanding Article 11(2) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, where a national accreditation body has not undergone the complete peer evaluation process, Member States shall accept the accreditation certificates of verifiers accredited by that national accreditation body provided that the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 has started a peer evaluation for that national accreditation body and that it has not identified any non-compliance of the national accreditation body with this Regulation. Article 63 Monitoring of services delivered Where a Member State has established, in the course of an inspection carried out in accordance with Article 31(4) of Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 15 ) , that a verifier is not complying with this Regulation, the administering authority in respect of a shipping company or national accreditation body of that Member State shall inform the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier. The national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier shall treat the communication of that information as a complaint within the meaning of Article 60 and shall take appropriate action and respond to the administering authority in respect of a shipping company or the national accreditation body in accordance with Article 67(2), second subparagraph. CHAPTER VI INFORMATION EXCHANGE Article 64 Information exchange and focal points 1. The Member State shall establish an effective exchange of appropriate information and effective cooperation between their national accreditation body and the administering authority in respect of a shipping company. 2. Where more than one authority is designated pursuant to Article 18 of Directive 2003/87/EC in a Member State, that Member State shall authorise one of those authorities to be the focal point for the exchange of information, for coordinating the cooperation referred to in paragraph 1, and for the activities referred to in Articles 64 to 71. Article 65 Accreditation work programme and management report 1. By 31 December of each year, the national accreditation body shall make available an accreditation work programme to the administering authority in respect of a shipping company of each Member State containing the list of verifiers accredited by that national accreditation body. The accreditation work programme shall contain the following information in relation to each verifier: Where changes occur in the information referred to in the first subparagraph, the national accreditation body shall submit to the administering authority in respect of a shipping company an updated work programme by 31 January of each year. 2. Following the submission of the accreditation work programme in accordance with paragraph 1, the administering authority in respect of a shipping company shall provide the national accreditation body with any relevant information, including any applicable national legislation and guidelines. 3. By 1 June of each year, the national accreditation body shall make available a management report to the administering authority in respect of a shipping company. The management report shall contain the following information in relation to each verifier that has been accredited by that national accreditation body: Article 66 Information exchange on administrative measures If the national accreditation body has imposed administrative measures on the verifier pursuant to Article 55 or if a suspension of the accreditation has been terminated or a decision on appeal has reversed the decision of a national accreditation body to impose administrative measures referred to in Article 55, the national accreditation body shall inform the administering authority in respect of a shipping company and the national accreditation body of each Member State thereof. Article 67 Information exchange by the administering authority in respect of a shipping company 1. The administering authority responsible shall annually communicate to the national accreditation body which has accredited the verifier carrying out verification for a company under its responsibility at least the following: 2. Where the information referred to in paragraph 1 provides evidence that the administering authority in respect of a shipping company has identified issues in the reported data that did not fulfil the requirements under Regulation (EU) 2015/757, Directive 2003/87/EC, Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1927, Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1928 or this Regulation, the national accreditation body shall treat the communication of that information as a complaint by the administering authority in respect of a shipping company concerning that verifier within the meaning of Article 60. The national accreditation body shall take appropriate action to address such information and respond to the administering authority in respect of a shipping company within a reasonable time, but no later than three months from the date of its receipt. The national accreditation body shall inform the administering authority in respect of a shipping company in its response of the action taken by it and, where relevant, the administrative measures imposed on the verifier. Article 68 Information exchange on surveillance 1. Where the national accreditation body of the Member State responsible for a company for which the verifier carries out verification has been requested, pursuant to Article 52(5), to carry out surveillance activities, that national accreditation body shall report its findings to the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier, unless otherwise agreed between both national accreditation bodies. 2. The national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier shall take the findings referred to in paragraph 1 into account when assessing whether the verifier meets the requirements of this Regulation. 3. Where the findings referred to in paragraph 1 show evidence that the verifier is not complying with this Regulation, the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier shall take appropriate action pursuant to this Regulation and shall inform the national accreditation body that has carried out surveillance activities of: Article 69 Information exchange with a Member State where the verifier is established Where a verifier has been granted accreditation by a national accreditation body in a Member State other than the Member State in which the verifier is established, the accreditation work programme and the management report referred to in Article 65 shall also be provided to the administering authority in respect of a shipping company of the Member State in which the verifier is established. Article 70 Databases of accredited verifiers 1. National accreditation bodies shall set up and manage a database which shall be publicly available and contain the following information: 2. Any change in the status of verifiers shall be communicated to the Commission by using a relevant standardised template. 3. The body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall facilitate and harmonise access to the national databases to enable efficient and cost-effective communication between national accreditation bodies, verifiers, companies and administering authorities in respect of a shipping company. The body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 may merge those databases into a single and centralised database. Article 71 Notification by verifiers 1. For the purposes of enabling the national accreditation body to draft the accreditation work programme and the management report referred to in Article 65, a verifier shall, by 15 November of each year, send the following information to the national accreditation body that has accredited that verifier: 2. Where changes occur in the information referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall notify those changes to the accreditation body within a timeframe agreed with that national accreditation body. CHAPTER VII APPROVAL OF MONITORING PLANS BY ADMINISTERING AUTHORITIES SECTION 1 Approval of monitoring plans Article 72 General rules for the approval of monitoring plans by administering authorities responsible For the purpose of approving monitoring plans pursuant to Article 6(8) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, each administering authority responsible shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the monitoring plans are in compliance with the requirements set out in Article 6 and Annexes I and II to that Regulation, taking due account of the verifier’s conclusions on the assessment of monitoring plans. Article 73 Information to be provided by companies to the administering authorities responsible The company shall provide the administering authority responsible with the verifier’s conclusions of the assessment of the monitoring plan and any additional information that enables it to carry out the approval procedures. Article 74 Approval process 1. The administering authority responsible shall notify the company of the approval of the monitoring plan without undue delay, using automated systems and data exchange formats. 2. Where the administering authority responsible does not approve the monitoring plan, it shall inform the company thereof without undue delay, explaining the reasons for the non-approval in order to allow the company to revise its monitoring plan. The company concerned shall revise its monitoring plan accordingly. The company shall submit the revised monitoring plan for a reassessment by the verifier, together with the reasons for the non-approval by the administering authority responsible. Once the revised monitoring plan has been assessed by the verifier as being in conformity with the requirements laid down in Articles 6 and 7 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the company shall resubmit it for approval to the administering authority responsible. SECTION 2 Approval of modifications to monitoring plans Article 75 General rules for the approval of modifications to monitoring plans by administering authorities responsible 1. The company shall submit without undue delay its modified monitoring plan to the administering authority responsible once it has received a notification from the verifier that the monitoring plan is in conformity, or, as far as modifications of the monitoring plan pursuant to Article 7(2), point (a), of Regulation (EU) 2015/757 are concerned, once it has notified the verifiers in accordance with Article 7(3) of that Regulation. 2. For the purposes of approving modifications to monitoring plans pursuant to Article 7(5) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, each administering authority responsible shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the modified monitoring plans are in compliance with the requirements set out in Article 6 and Annexes I and II to that Regulation, taking due account of the verifier’s conclusions on the assessment of monitoring plans. Article 76 Information to be provided by companies to administering authorities responsible 1. The company shall provide the administering authority responsible with the conclusions of the assessment of the modified monitoring plan and any additional information that enables it to carry out the approval procedures. 2. With regards to modifications pursuant to Article 7(2), point (a), of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the company shall submit to the administering authority responsible evidence of the change of company, as well as indication of whether the monitoring plan had been approved by the administering authority responsible before the change of company, with supporting evidence, in case that administering authority is not the same. Article 77 Approval process 1. The administering authority responsible shall notify the company of the approval of the modified monitoring plan without undue delay, using automated systems and data exchange formats. 2. Where the administering authority responsible does not approve the monitoring plan, it shall inform the company thereof without undue delay, explaining the reasons for the non-approval in order to allow the company to revise its monitoring plan. The company concerned shall revise its monitoring plan accordingly. The company shall submit the revised monitoring plan for a reassessment by the verifier, together with the reasons for the non-approval by the administering authority responsible. Once the revised monitoring plan has been assessed as being in conformity with the requirements laid down in Articles 6 and 7 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the company shall resubmit it for approval to the administering authority responsible. Article 78 Implementation and record-keeping of modifications 1. Before receiving approval of the modified monitoring plan by the administering authority responsible in accordance with Article 77, the company may carry out monitoring and reporting using the modified monitoring plan where monitoring in accordance with the original monitoring plan would lead to incomplete emission data. In case of doubt, the company shall use in parallel both the modified and the original monitoring plan to carry out all monitoring and reporting in accordance with both plans, and it shall keep records of both monitoring results. 2. Upon receipt of approval in accordance with Article 77, the company shall only use the data relating to the modified monitoring plan and carry out all monitoring and reporting using only the modified monitoring plan from the date from which that version of the monitoring plan is applicable. 3. The company shall keep records of all modifications of the monitoring plan. Concerning each modification, the record shall contain: Article 79 Repeal 1. Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2072 is repealed with effect from 1 January 2024. 2. Article 80 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall apply from 1 January 2024. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 20 October 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 55 . ( 2 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2072 of 22 September 2016 on the verification activities and accreditation of verifiers pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the monitoring, reporting and verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport ( OJ L 320, 26.11.2016, p. 5 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/957 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 amending Regulation (EU) 2015/757 in order to provide for the inclusion of maritime transport activities in the EU Emissions Trading System and for the monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions of additional greenhouse gases and emissions from additional ship types ( OJ L 130, 16.5.2023, p. 105 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC ( OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 ). ( 5 ) Regulation (EC) No 336/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 February 2006 on the implementation of the International Safety Management Code within the Community and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 3051/95 ( OJ L 64, 4.3.2006, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/2599 of 22 November 2023 laying down rules for the application of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the administration of shipping companies by administering authorities in respect of a shipping company ( OJ L, 2023/2599, 23.11.2023, ELI: ). ( 7 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2849 of 12 October 2023 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the rules for reporting and submission of the aggregated emissions data at company level ( OJ L, 2023/2849, 15.12.2023, ELI: ). ( 8 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 ( OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30 ). ( 9 ) Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services ( OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37 ). ( 10 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1927 of 4 November 2016 on templates for monitoring plans, emissions reports and documents of compliance pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council on monitoring, reporting and verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport ( OJ L 299, 5.11.2016, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1928 of 4 November 2016 on determination of cargo carried for categories of ships other than passenger, ro-ro and container ships pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the monitoring, reporting and verification of carbon dioxide emissions from maritime transport ( OJ L 299, 5.11.2016, p. 22 ). ( 12 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1122 of 12 March 2019 supplementing Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the functioning of the Union Registry ( OJ L 177, 2.7.2019, p. 3 ). ( 13 ) ISO 14065:2020 on general principles and requirements for bodies validating and verifying environmental information. ( 14 ) ISO/IEC 17029:2019 on Conformity assessment – General principles and requirements for validation and verification bodies, referred to in Annex II to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2020/1835 of 3 December 2020 on the harmonised standards for accreditation and conformity assessment ( OJ L 408, 4.12.2020, p. 6 ). ( 15 ) Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on services in the internal market ( OJ L 376, 27.12.2006, p. 36 ). ANNEX I MARINE-SECTOR-SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERIENCE REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 39(3) For the purposes of Article 39(3), knowledge and experience of the following shall be taken into consideration: ( 1 ) Regulation 22, Annex VI to MARPOL Convention. ( 2 ) Revised technical Code on Control of Emission of Nitrogen Oxides from Marine Diesel Engines, (Resolution MEPC.176(58), as amended by resolution MEPC.177(58)). ( 3 ) Regulation 14, Annex VI to MARPOL Convention. ( 4 ) Regulation 18, Annex VI to MARPOL Convention. ( 5 ) Regulation 22, Annex VI to MARPOL Convention. ( 6 ) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82 ). ANNEX II CORRELATION TABLE ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)