DIRECTIVE 2006/7/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 15 February 2006 concerning the management of bathing water quality and repealing Directive 76/160/EEC THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 175(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 2 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 3 ) , Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty ( 4 ) , in the light of the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee on 8 December 2005, Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Purpose and scope 1. This Directive lays down provisions for: 2. The purpose of this Directive is to preserve, protect and improve the quality of the environment and to protect human health by complementing Directive 2000/60/EC. 3. This Directive shall apply to any element of surface water where the competent authority expects a large number of people to bathe and has not imposed a permanent bathing prohibition, or issued permanent advice against bathing (hereinafter bathing water). It shall not apply to: Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply: CHAPTER II QUALITY AND MANAGEMENT OF BATHING WATER Article 3 Monitoring 1. Member States shall annually identify all bathing waters and define the length of the bathing season. They shall do so for the first time before the start of the first bathing season after 24 March 2008. 2. Member States shall ensure that monitoring of the parameters set out in Annex I, column A, takes place in accordance with Annex IV. 3. The monitoring point shall be the location within the bathing water where: 4. A monitoring calendar for each bathing water shall be established before the start of each bathing season and for the first time before the start of the third full bathing season after the entry into force of this Directive. Monitoring shall take place no later than four days after the date specified in the monitoring calendar. 5. Member States may introduce monitoring of the parameters set out in Annex I, column A, during the first full bathing season following the entry into force of this Directive. In that case, monitoring shall take place with the frequency specified in Annex IV. The results of such monitoring may be used to build up the sets of bathing water quality data referred to in Article 4. As soon as Member States introduce monitoring under this Directive, monitoring of the parameters set out in the Annex to Directive 76/160/EEC may cease. 6. Samples taken during short-term pollution may be disregarded. They shall be replaced by samples taken in accordance with Annex IV. 7. During abnormal situations, the monitoring calendar referred to in paragraph 4 may be suspended. It shall be resumed as soon as possible after the end of the abnormal situation. New samples shall be taken as soon as possible after the end of the abnormal situation to replace samples that are missing due to the abnormal situation. 8. Member States shall report any suspension of the monitoring calendar to the Commission, giving the reasons for the suspension. They shall provide such reports on the occasion of the next annual report provided for in Article 13 at the latest. 9. Member States shall ensure that the analysis of bathing water quality takes place in accordance with the reference methods specified in Annex I and the rules set out in Annex V. However, Member States may permit the use of other methods or rules if they can demonstrate that the results obtained are equivalent to those obtained using the methods specified in Annex I and the rules set out in Annex V. Member States that permit the use of such equivalent methods or rules shall provide the Commission with all relevant information about the methods or rules used and their equivalence. Article 4 Bathing water quality assessment 1. Member States shall ensure that sets of bathing water quality data are compiled through the monitoring of the parameters set out in Annex I, column A. 2. Bathing water quality assessments shall be carried out: However, a Member State may decide to carry out bathing water quality assessments on the basis of the set of bathing water quality data compiled in relation to the preceding three bathing seasons only. If it so decides, it shall notify the Commission beforehand. It shall also notify the Commission if it subsequently decides to revert to carrying out assessments on the basis of four bathing seasons. Member States may not change the applicable assessment period more than once every five years. 3. Sets of bathing water data used to carry out bathing water quality assessments shall always comprise at least 16 samples or, in the special circumstances referred to in Annex IV, paragraph 2, 12 samples. 4. However, provided that either: a bathing water quality assessment may be carried out on the basis of a set of bathing water quality data relating to fewer than four bathing seasons if: 5. Member States may subdivide or group together existing bathing waters in the light of bathing water quality assessments. They may group existing bathing waters together only if these waters: Article 5 Classification and quality status of bathing waters 1. As a result of the bathing water quality assessment carried out in accordance with Article 4, Member States shall, in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex II, classify bathing water as: 2. The first classification according to the requirements of this Directive shall be completed by the end of the 2015 bathing season. 3. Member States shall ensure that, by the end of the 2015 bathing season, all bathing waters are at least ‘sufficient’. They shall take such realistic and proportionate measures as they consider appropriate with a view to increasing the number of bathing waters classified as ‘excellent’ or ‘good’. 4. However, notwithstanding the general requirement of paragraph 3, bathing waters may temporarily be classified as ‘poor’ and still remain in compliance with this Directive. In such cases, Member States shall ensure that the following conditions are satisfied: Article 6 Bathing water profiles 1. Member States shall ensure that bathing water profiles are established in accordance with Annex III. Each bathing water profile may cover a single bathing water or more than one contiguous bathing waters. Bathing water profiles shall be established for the first time by 24 March 2011. 2. Bathing water profiles shall be reviewed and updated as provided for in Annex III. 3. When establishing, reviewing and updating bathing water profiles, adequate use shall be made of data obtained from monitoring and assessments carried out pursuant to Directive 2000/60/EC that are relevant for this Directive. Article 7 Management measures in exceptional circumstances Member States shall ensure that timely and adequate management measures are taken when they are aware of unexpected situations that have, or could reasonably be expected to have, an adverse impact on bathing water quality and on bathers' health. Such measures shall include information to the public and, if necessary, a temporary bathing prohibition. Article 8 Cyanobacterial risks 1. When the bathing water profile indicates a potential for cyanobacterial proliferation, appropriate monitoring shall be carried out to enable timely identification of health risks. 2. When cyanobacterial proliferation occurs and a health risk has been identified or presumed, adequate management measures shall be taken immediately to prevent exposure, including information to the public. Article 9 Other parameters 1. When the bathing water profile indicates a tendency for proliferation of macro-algae and/or marine phytoplankton, investigations shall be undertaken to determine their acceptability and health risks and adequate management measures shall be taken, including information to the public. 2. Bathing waters shall be inspected visually for pollution such as tarry residues, glass, plastic, rubber or any other waste. When such pollution is found, adequate management measures shall be taken, including, if necessary, information to the public. Article 10 Cooperation on transboundary waters Wherever a river basin gives rise to transboundary impacts on bathing water quality, the Member States involved shall cooperate as appropriate in implementing this Directive, including through the appropriate exchange of information and joint action to control those impacts. CHAPTER III EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION Article 11 Public participation Member States shall encourage public participation in the implementation of this Directive and shall ensure the provision of opportunities for the public concerned: This shall relate, in particular, to the establishment, review and updating of lists of bathing waters in accordance with Article 3(1). Competent authorities shall take due account of any information obtained. Article 12 Information to the public 1. Member States shall ensure that the following information is actively disseminated and promptly made available during the bathing season in an easily accessible place in the near vicinity of each bathing water: 2. Member States shall use appropriate media and technologies, including the Internet, to disseminate actively and promptly the information concerning bathing waters referred to in paragraph 1 and also the following information in several languages, when appropriate: The list referred to in point (a) shall be available each year before the start of the bathing season. The results of the monitoring referred to in point (b) shall be made available on the Internet upon completion of the analysis. 3. The information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be disseminated as soon as it is available and with effect from the start of the fifth bathing season after 24 March 2008. 4. Member States and the Commission shall, wherever possible, provide information to the public using geo-referenced technology and present it in a clear and coherent manner, in particular through the use of signs and symbols. Article 13 Reports 1. Member States shall provide the Commission with the results of the monitoring and with the bathing water quality assessment for each bathing water, as well as with a description of significant management measures taken. Member States shall provide this information annually by 31 December in relation to the preceding bathing season. They shall begin providing it once the first bathing water quality assessment has been carried out in accordance with Article 4. 2. Member States shall notify the Commission annually before the start of the bathing season of all waters identified as bathing waters, including the reason for any change compared to the preceding year. They shall do so for the first time before the start of the first bathing season after 24 March 2008. 3. When monitoring of bathing water has started under this Directive, annual reporting to the Commission in accordance with paragraph 1 shall continue to take place pursuant to Directive 76/160/EEC until a first assessment can be made under this Directive. During that period, parameter 1 of the Annex to Directive 76/160/EEC shall not be taken into account in the annual report, and parameters 2 and 3 of the Annex to Directive 76/160/EEC shall be assumed to be equivalent to parameters 2 and 1 of column A of Annex I to this Directive. 4. The Commission shall publish an annual summary report on bathing water quality in the Community, including bathing water classifications, conformity with this Directive and significant management measures undertaken. The Commission shall publish this report by 30 April every year, including via the Internet. When establishing the report the Commission shall, wherever possible, make best use of data collection, assessment and presentation systems under related Community legislation, in particular Directive 2000/60/EC. CHAPTER IV FINAL PROVISIONS Article 14 Report and review 1. The Commission shall, by 2008, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council. The report shall have particular regard to: 2. Member States shall, by the end of 2014, submit written observations to the Commission on that report including on the need for any further research or assessments which may be required to assist the Commission in its review of this Directive under paragraph 3. 3. In the light of the report, the Member States' written observations and an extended impact assessment and bearing in mind experience gained from implementing this Directive, the Commission shall, no later than 2020, review this Directive with particular regard to the parameters for bathing water quality, including whether it would be appropriate to phase out the ‘sufficient’ classification or modify the applicable standards, and shall present if necessary appropriate legislative proposals in accordance with Article 251 of the Treaty. Article 15 Technical adaptations and implementing measures 1. It shall be decided in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 16(2): 2. The Commission shall present a draft of the measures to be taken in accordance with paragraph 1(b) with respect to Article 12(1)(a) by 24 March 2010. Before doing so, it shall consult representatives of Member States, regional and local authorities, relevant tourist and consumer organisations and other interested parties. After the adoption of relevant rules, it shall publicise them via the Internet. Article 16 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. The period laid down in Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at three months. 3. The Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure. Article 17 Repeal 1. Directive 76/160/EEC is hereby repealed with effect from 31 December 2014. Subject to paragraph 2, this repeal shall be without prejudice to Member States' obligations concerning the time limits for transposition and application set out in the repealed Directive. 2. As soon as a Member State has taken all necessary legal, administrative and practical measures to comply with this Directive, this Directive will be applicable, replacing Directive 76/160/EEC. 3. Article 18 Implementation 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 24 March 2008. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof. When Member States adopt these measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the texts of the main provisions of national law that they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 19 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. Article 20 Addressees This Directive is addressed to Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 15 February 2006. For the European Parliament The President J. BORRELL FONTELLES For the Council The President H. WINKLER ( 1 ) OJ C 45 E, 25.2.2003, p. 127 . ( 2 ) OJ C 220, 16.9.2003, p. 39 . ( 3 ) OJ C 244, 10.10.2003, p. 31 . ( 4 ) Opinion of the European Parliament of 21 October 2003 ( OJ C 82 E, 1.4.2004, p. 115 ). Council Common Position of 20 December 2004 ( OJ C 111 E, 11.5.2005, p. 1 ) and Position of the European Parliament of 10 May 2005 (not yet published in the Official Journal). European Parliament Legislative Resolution of 18 January 2006 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and Council Decision of 20 December 2005. ( 5 ) OJ L 242, 10.9.2002, p. 1 . ( 6 ) OJ L 31, 5.2.1976, p. 1 . Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 807/2003 ( OJ L 122, 16.5.2003, p. 36 ). ( 7 ) OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 . Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 284, 31.10.2003, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) OJ L 375, 31.12.1991, p. 1 . Directive as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003. ( 9 ) OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1 . Directive as amended by Decision No 2455/2001/EC ( OJ L 331, 15.12.2001, p. 1 ). ( 10 ) OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26 . ( 11 ) OJ L 156, 25.6.2003, p. 17 . ( 12 ) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 . ( 13 ) OJ L 175, 5.7.1985, p. 40 . Directive as last amended by Directive 2003/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 156, 25.6.2003, p. 17 ). ANNEX I For inland waters For coastal waters and transitional waters ( *1 ) Based upon a 95‐percentile evaluation. See Annex II. ( *2 ) Based upon a 90‐percentile evaluation. See Annex II. ( *3 ) Based upon a 95‐percentile evaluation. See Annex II. ( *4 ) Based upon a 90‐percentile evaluation. See Annex II. ANNEX II Bathing water assessment and classification 1. Poor quality Bathing waters are to be classified as ‘poor’ if, in the set of bathing water quality data for the last assessment period ( 1 ) , the percentile values ( 2 ) for microbiological enumerations are worse ( 3 ) than the ‘sufficient’ values set out in Annex I, column D. 2. Sufficient quality Bathing waters are to be classified as ‘sufficient’: 3. Good quality Bathing waters are to be classified as ‘good’: 4. Excellent quality Bathing waters are to be classified as ‘excellent’: ( 1 ) ‘Last assessment period’ means the last four bathing seasons or, when applicable, the period specified in Article 4(2) or (4). ( 2 ) Based upon percentile evaluation of the log 10 normal probability density function of microbiological data acquired from the particular bathing water, the percentile value is derived as follows: The upper 90‐percentile point of the data probability density function is derived from the following equation: upper 90‐percentile = antilog (μ + 1,282 σ). The upper 95‐percentile point of the data probability density function is derived from the following equation: upper 95‐percentile = antilog (μ + 1,65 σ). ( 3 ) ‘Worse’ means with higher concentration values expressed in cfu/100 ml. ( 4 ) ‘Better’ means with lower concentration values expressed in cfu/100 ml. ANNEX III The bathing water profile In the case of bathing waters previously classified as ‘excellent’, the bathing water profiles need be reviewed and, if necessary, updated only if the classification changes to ‘good’, ‘sufficient’ or ‘poor’. The review is to cover all aspects mentioned in paragraph 1. In the event of significant construction works or significant changes in the infrastructure in or in the vicinity of the bathing water, the bathing water profile is to be updated before the start of the next bathing season. The information referred to in paragraph 1(a) and (b) is to be provided on a detailed map whenever practicable. Other relevant information may be attached or included if the competent authority considers it appropriate. ANNEX IV Bathing water monitoring One sample is to be taken shortly before the start of each bathing season. Taking account of this extra sample and subject to paragraph 2, no fewer than four samples are to be taken and analysed per bathing season. Sampling dates are to be distributed throughout the bathing season, with the interval between sampling dates never exceeding one month. In the event of short-term pollution, one additional sample is to be taken to confirm that the incident has ended. This sample is not to be part of the set of bathing water quality data. If necessary to replace a disregarded sample, an additional sample is to be taken seven days after the end of the short-term pollution. ANNEX V Rules on the handling of samples for microbiological analyses 1. Sampling point Where possible, samples are to be taken 30 centimetres below the water's surface and in water that is at least one metre deep. 2. Sterilisation of sample bottles Sample bottles are: 3. Sampling The volume of the sampling bottle/container is to depend on the quantity of water needed for each parameter to be tested. The minimum content is generally 250 ml. Sample containers are to be of transparent and non-coloured material (glass, polyethene or polypropylene). In order to prevent accidental contamination of the sample, the sampler is to employ an aseptic technique to maintain the sterility of the sample bottles. There is no further need for sterile equipment (such as sterile surgical gloves or tongs or sample pole) if this is done properly. The sample is to be clearly identified in indelible ink on the sample and on the sampling form. 4. Storage and transport of samples before analysis Water samples are to be protected at all stages of transport from exposure to light, in particular direct sunlight. The sample is to be conserved at a temperature of around 4 o C, in a cool box or refrigerator (depending on climate) until arrival at the laboratory. If the transport to the laboratory is likely to take more than four hours, then transport in a refrigerator is required. The time between sampling and analysis is to be kept as short as possible. It is recommended that samples be analysed on the same working day. If this is not possible for practical reasons, then the samples shall be processed within no more than 24 hours. In the meantime, they shall be stored in the dark and at a temperature of 4 o C ± 3 o C.