REGULATION (EU) 2023/2631 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 22 November 2023 on European Green Bonds and optional disclosures for bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and for sustainability-linked bonds (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 114 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: TITLE I SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation: Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: TITLE II REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE OF THE DESIGNATION ‘EUROPEAN GREEN BOND’ OR ‘EUGB’ CHAPTER 1 Bond-related requirements Article 3 Designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’ The designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’ shall be used only for bonds that comply with the requirements set out in this Title. Article 4 Use of the proceeds of European Green Bonds 1. Before the maturity of a European Green Bond, the proceeds of such a bond shall be allocated in full, in accordance with the taxonomy requirements, to one or more of the following categories (the ‘gradual approach’): By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, issuers may deduct issuance costs from the proceeds of the European Green Bond before allocating those proceeds. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, issuers may allocate proceeds from one or more outstanding European Green Bonds to a portfolio of fixed assets or financial assets in accordance with the taxonomy requirements (the ‘portfolio approach’). Where issuers allocate proceeds in accordance with the first subparagraph of this paragraph, they shall demonstrate in the allocation reports referred to in Article 11 that the total value of the assets referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in their portfolio exceeds the total value of their portfolio of outstanding European Green Bonds. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, a sovereign or a third-country issuer which is a State, a member of a federation in the case of a federal State, or a regional or municipal entity, may also allocate the proceeds of European Green Bonds it has issued to tax relief, subsidies, intermediate consumption, current transfers within a general government, current international cooperation or other types of public expenditure, provided that the proceeds are allocated in accordance with the taxonomy requirements. Article 5 Flexibility in the use of the proceeds of European Green Bonds 1. By way of derogation from Article 4(1), issuers may allocate up to 15 % of the proceeds of a European Green Bond to economic activities that comply with the taxonomy requirements, with the exception of the technical screening criteria, provided that those activities are: 2. Where an issuer allocates the proceeds of a European Green Bond in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, it shall describe in the European Green Bond factsheet referred to in Article 10 the activities concerned and the estimated percentage of the proceeds intended to finance such activities as a total and also per activity. 3. Where an issuer allocates the proceeds of a European Green Bond to economic activities referred to in paragraph 1, point (a), it shall ensure that those activities meet, where applicable, the generic criteria for ‘do no significant harm’ set out in Appendices A, B, C and D to Annex I to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139. 4. Where an issuer allocates the proceeds of a European Green Bond to the activities referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), it shall on a best efforts basis ensure that those activities meet the relevant technical screening criteria. Article 6 Financial assets 1. The proceeds of financial assets shall be allocated only to the uses set out in Article 4(1), or, where applicable, to the uses set out in Article 4(2) and (3). 2. The proceeds of financial assets may be allocated to other, subsequent financial assets, provided that: Article 7 CapEx plans 1. Where the uses of proceeds referred to in Article 4(1), first subparagraph, points (b) and (c), relate to economic activities that will meet the taxonomy requirements, the issuer shall publish a CapEx plan. 2. The CapEx plan shall specify a deadline, occurring before the European Green Bond reaches maturity, by which all the capital and operating expenditure funded by the European Green Bond are to be taxonomy aligned. 3. The issuer shall, within 60 days of the deadline specified in the CapEx plan, obtain an assessment from an external reviewer of the taxonomy alignment of the capital and operating expenditure that are included in that CapEx plan and funded by the proceeds of the European Green Bond. Article 8 Application of the technical screening criteria and grandfathering 1. Where issuers allocate the proceeds of European Green Bonds to the uses set out in Article 4(1) and (3), they shall ensure that: 2. Where issuers allocate proceeds in accordance with the portfolio approach, issuers shall include in their portfolio only those assets whose underlying economic activity is aligned with any technical screening criteria which were applicable at any point during the seven years prior to the date of publication of the allocation report. 3. Where the proceeds of an outstanding bond are at risk of not being aligned with paragraph 1, point (b)(ii), the issuer shall draw up, submit to external review by an external reviewer and publish a plan for aligning them to the extent possible with the amended technical screening criteria and for mitigating to the extent possible the negative consequences of the lack of full alignment with the amended technical screening criteria. The issuer shall publish that plan before expiry of the period set out in paragraph 1, point (b). 4. Alignment with the relevant technical screening criteria shall be demonstrated in the allocation report referred to in Article 11. Article 9 Exclusion of non-cooperative jurisdictions for tax purposes The competent authorities referred to in Article 44(1) of this Regulation shall not approve a prospectus issued by a jurisdiction listed in Annex I to the Council conclusions on the revised EU list of non-cooperative jurisdictions for tax purposes, by a high-risk country listed in the Annex to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1675, or by issuers established in those jurisdictions or countries, where that prospectus refers to this Regulation or to the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’. CHAPTER 2 Transparency and external review requirements Article 10 European Green Bond factsheet and pre-issuance review 1. Prior to issuing a European Green Bond, issuers shall: 2. The European Green Bond factsheet referred to in paragraph 1 may relate to more than one European Green Bond issuance. 3. The pre-issuance review referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), shall contain: Article 11 Allocation reports and post-issuance review of allocation reports 1. For every 12-month period until the date of full allocation of the proceeds of their European Green Bond and, where applicable, until the completion of the CapEx plan, issuers of European Green Bonds shall draw up a European Green Bond allocation report using the template set out in Annex II, demonstrating that the proceeds of the European Green Bond, from its issuance date until the end of the period referred to in the report, have been allocated in accordance with Articles 4 to 8. The first 12-month period shall begin on the issuance date. By way of derogation from the second subparagraph, issuers may set the end date of the first reporting period as the last day of the calendar year or of the financial year of issuance. 2. The allocation reports shall contain, where applicable, information on the progress made in the implementation of the CapEx plan. Issuers shall, in their annual allocation reports, publish the reasons for any delay or deviation that has a significant impact on the implementation of the CapEx plan. 3. The allocation reports may relate to more than one issuance of European Green Bonds. 4. Issuers of European Green Bonds shall obtain a post-issuance review by an external reviewer of the allocation report drawn up after the full allocation of the proceeds of the European Green Bond. 5. Where, following the publication of the allocation report in accordance with Article 15(1), point (d), the allocation of proceeds is corrected, the issuers of the European Green Bonds concerned shall amend the allocation report and obtain a post-issuance review by an external reviewer of that amended allocation report, without undue delay. 6. By way of derogation from paragraph 4, every allocation report by issuers that allocate the proceeds of one or more European Green Bonds to a portfolio of assets shall be subject to a post-issuance review by an external reviewer. The external reviewer shall pay particular attention to those assets that were not included in any previously published allocation report. Such post-issuance review shall not be required where, during the period covered by the allocation report, no change in allocation was made to the portfolio of assets and no asset in the portfolio was changed or was itself subject to a change in allocation, compared to the period covered by the previous allocation report. In such cases, a statement regarding the absence of post-issuance review due to the absence of such changes shall be included in the corresponding allocation report. 7. Issuers of European Green Bonds shall ensure that the annual allocation reports and, where applicable, any post-issuance review required by this Article are made public within 270 days of the end of every 12-month period referred to in paragraph 1. Within that period of 270 days, issuers shall ensure that the external reviewer has at least 90 days to review an allocation report. 8. The post-issuance review referred to in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of this Article shall contain the following: Article 12 European Green Bond impact report 1. Issuers of European Green Bonds shall, after the full allocation of the proceeds and at least once during the lifetime of those bonds, draw up and make public a European Green Bond impact report on the environmental impact of the use of the bond proceeds, using the template set out in Annex III. 2. The European Green Bond impact report may relate to more than one issuance of European Green Bonds. 3. Issuers of European Green Bonds may seek a review by an external reviewer of the impact report. Such impact report reviews shall contain the following: Article 13 Sovereign issuers 1. A sovereign shall obtain post-issuance reviews of its European Green Bonds from: 2. Where a sovereign obtains a post-issuance review from an external reviewer and a State auditor, the State auditor shall review the allocation of the bond proceeds and the external reviewer shall ascertain whether the economic activities funded through the bond align with the taxonomy requirements. Article 14 Prospectus for European Green Bonds 1. In order to use the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’, the issuer shall publish a prospectus pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 that meets the following conditions: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’ may be used for bonds covered by Article 1(2), points (b) and (d), of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129. 3. For the purposes of this Regulation, the term ‘regulated information’ referred to in Article 19(1), point (c), of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, shall be construed as including the information contained in the European Green Bond factsheet referred to in Article 10 of this Regulation. 4. Where a prospectus is published pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, that prospectus shall include a summary of the CapEx plan. That summary shall list the projects carried out by the issuer that are the most significant, measured as a share of the total capital expenditure covered by the CapEx plan, and shall specify the type, sector, location and expected finalisation year of those projects. Article 15 Publication on the issuer’s website and notification to ESMA and competent authorities 1. Issuers of European Green Bonds shall publish on their websites and make available, free of charge and in accordance with Article 21(3) and (4) of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, until at least 12 months have elapsed after the maturity of those bonds, the following, including any amendments or corrections thereto: By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, point (d), where a post-issuance review of a European Green Bond allocation report takes place, that allocation report shall be published without undue delay after the post-issuance review is obtained. 2. The information contained in the documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a), (d) and (f), shall be provided, at the choice of the issuer, either in a language customary in the sphere of international finance, or: 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2 of this Article, where a prospectus for the European Green Bond is to be published pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, the information contained in the documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a), (d) and (f), of this Article shall be provided in the language or languages of that prospectus. 4. Where applicable, issuers shall notify the competent authorities referred to in Article 44(1) and (2), of the publication of each of the documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, of this Article without undue delay after each publication. 5. Issuers shall notify ESMA of the publication of all documents referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, within 30 days of their publication. CHAPTER 3 Conditions for the use of the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’ in respect of securitisation bonds Article 16 Application of the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’ to securitisation bonds 1. In the case of a securitisation bond designated as ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, point (a), 3. Where the securitised exposures are created by multiple originators, the following shall apply: Article 17 Exclusion of bonds issued for the purpose of synthetic securitisation Bonds issued for the purpose of synthetic securitisation shall not be eligible to use the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’. Article 18 Exclusions of certain securitised exposures 1. For the purposes of this Regulation, securitised exposures shall not comprise exposures financing the exploration, mining, extraction, production, processing, storage, refining or distribution, including transportation, and trade of fossil fuels. 2. Exposures financing electricity generation from fossil fuels, co-generation of heat/cool and power from fossil fuels, or production of heat/cool from fossil fuels, where the activity meets the criteria for ‘do no significant harm’ set out in Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139, may be included in the pool of securitised exposures for the purposes of this Regulation. 3. The originator shall explain the extent to which paragraph 1 of this Article has been complied with in the European Green Bond factsheet referred to in Article 10. 4. Upon the request of the competent authority referred to in Article 44, the originator shall demonstrate compliance with paragraph 1 of this Article. Article 19 Additional disclosure requirements in the case of securitisation 1. In the case of a securitisation bond designated as ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’, the prospectus published pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 shall include a statement that the bond is a securitisation bond and that the originator is responsible for fulfilling the commitments undertaken in the prospectus regarding the use of proceeds. 2. In order to provide transparency about the environmental characteristics of the securitised exposures, information about the following shall be included in the prospectus on a best efforts basis and to the best of the originator’s ability, on the basis of the available data: 3. The information included in the prospectus in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article shall also be included in the European Green Bond factsheet referred to in Article 10 and, on the basis of yearly updates to be carried out by the originator, in the European Green Bond allocation report referred to in Article 11. TITLE III OPTIONAL DISCLOSURE TEMPLATES FOR BONDS MARKETED AS ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE AND FOR SUSTAINABILITY-LINKED BONDS Article 20 Pre-issuance disclosures for issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable or of sustainability-linked bonds 1. By 21 December 2024, the Commission shall publish guidelines establishing templates for voluntary pre-issuance disclosures for issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and of sustainability-linked bonds. 2. The templates referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall indicate whether the issuer intends to use an external reviewer and the common template for periodic disclosures referred to in Article 21. 3. For issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable, the templates referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall include, in addition to the indication referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, at least the following elements, which shall reflect the issuer’s intent based on available data at the time of the bond issuance: 4. For issuers of sustainability-linked bonds, the templates referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall include, in addition to the indication referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, at least the following elements, which shall reflect the issuer’s intent based on available data at the time of the bond issuance: Article 21 Periodic post-issuance disclosures for issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable or of sustainability-linked bonds 1. Issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and of sustainability-linked bonds may make periodic disclosures of post-issuance information by means of common templates. Where an issuer makes periodic disclosures of post-issuance information in accordance with the first subparagraph of this paragraph, Article 44 shall apply until the maturity of the bond. 2. For an issuer of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable, the templates referred to in paragraph 1 shall include at least the following elements: 3. For an issuer of sustainability-linked bonds, the templates referred to in paragraph 1 shall include at least the following elements: 4. The Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 68 by 21 December 2024 to supplement this Regulation by establishing the content, methodologies and presentation of the information to be disclosed in the templates referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article. When drafting that delegated act, the Commission shall take into account the information on environmental, social and governance aspects that is required to be disclosed under other relevant legislative acts, including Regulation (EU) 2017/1129, in order to avoid overlapping disclosures for issuers. When drafting that delegated act, the Commission shall also consider the information needs of financial market participants subject to the disclosure requirements of Regulation (EU) 2019/2088. TITLE IV EXTERNAL REVIEWERS FOR EUROPEAN GREEN BONDS CHAPTER 1 Conditions for the external review of European Green Bonds Article 22 Registration 1. External reviewers for European Green Bonds shall, before taking up their activities, be registered with ESMA. 2. External reviewers registered with ESMA shall meet the conditions for registration set out in Article 23(2) at all times. 3. State auditors shall not be subject to Titles IV and V of this Regulation. Article 23 Application for registration as an external reviewer for European Green Bonds 1. An application for registration as an external reviewer for European Green Bonds shall contain the following information: 2. ESMA shall register an applicant as an external reviewer only where the following conditions are met: When assessing the conditions set out in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, ESMA may take into account whether the applicant, where it has provided services pursuant to Articles 69 and 70, used best efforts to comply with Articles 24 to 38. For that purpose, ESMA may require the applicant to provide it with the necessary information. 3. Within 20 working days of receipt of an application, ESMA shall assess whether the application is complete. Where the application is not complete, ESMA shall notify the applicant thereof and shall set a deadline by which the applicant is to provide additional information. Where the application is complete, ESMA shall notify the applicant thereof. 4. Within 45 working days of receipt of a complete application, ESMA shall register or refuse to register the applicant. ESMA may extend the period referred to in the first subparagraph by 15 working days where the applicant intends to outsource certain external review activities. 5. ESMA shall notify the applicant in writing of the registration of that applicant as an external reviewer, or of its refusal to register the applicant. A decision to register or to refuse to register an applicant shall provide reasons and shall take effect on the fifth working day after its adoption. 6. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria referred to in paragraph 2, first subparagraph, points (a) and (b). ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2024. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. 7. ESMA shall develop draft implementing technical standards to specify the standard forms, templates and procedures for the provision of the information referred to in paragraph 1. When developing the draft implementing technical standards, ESMA shall take into account digital means of registration. ESMA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2024. Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 24 Material changes relevant for the registration 1. An external reviewer shall notify ESMA of any material changes in the information provided in accordance with Article 23(1) before such changes are implemented. Where ESMA objects to such material changes, it shall inform the external reviewer within 45 working days of the notification of those changes and shall state the reasons for its objection. The changes referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall not be implemented if ESMA objects within that period. 2. ESMA shall develop draft implementing technical standards to specify the standard forms, templates and procedures for the provision of the information referred to in paragraph 1. When developing the draft implementing technical standards ESMA shall take into account digital means of registration. ESMA shall submit those draft implementing technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2025. Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 25 Language regime An applicant shall submit the application for registration referred to in Article 23 in one of the official languages of the institutions of the Union. Regulation No 1 of 15 April 1958 ( 22 ) shall apply mutatis mutandis to any other communication between ESMA and the applicant and its staff. CHAPTER 2 Organisational requirements, processes and documents concerning governance Article 26 General principles 1. External reviewers shall employ appropriate systems, resources and procedures to comply with their obligations under this Regulation. 2. External reviewers shall monitor and evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of their systems, resources and procedures established in accordance with this Regulation at least annually and take appropriate measures to address any deficiencies in that regard. 3. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for assessing the appropriateness, adequacy and effectiveness of the systems, resources and procedures of external reviewers referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2025. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 27 Senior management and members of the board 1. The senior management and the members of the board of the external reviewer shall, respectively, ensure or oversee the following: 2. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for assessing the sound and prudent management of the external reviewer referred to in paragraph 1, point (a), and the management of conflicts of interest referred to in paragraph 1, point (c). ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2024. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 28 Analysts and employees of external reviewers, and other persons directly involved in the assessment activities of external reviewers 1. External reviewers shall ensure that their analysts and employees, and any other natural person whose services are placed at their disposal or under their control and who are directly involved in assessment activities, have the necessary knowledge, experience and training for the duties assigned. 2. External reviewers shall ensure that the persons referred to in paragraph 1 are not allowed to initiate or participate in negotiations regarding fees or payments with any assessed entity, related third party or any person directly or indirectly linked to the assessed entity by control. 3. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for assessing the appropriateness of the knowledge, experience and training of the persons referred to in paragraph 1. ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2024. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 29 Compliance function 1. External reviewers shall establish and maintain a permanent, independent and effective compliance function for the activities performed under this Regulation. 2. External reviewers shall ensure that the compliance function complies with the following: 3. The findings of the compliance function shall be made available to a supervisory body or an administrative body of the external reviewer. 4. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for assessing whether the compliance function has the authority to discharge its responsibilities properly and independently as referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), and the criteria for assessing whether the compliance function has the necessary resources and expertise and has access to all relevant information as referred to in paragraph 2, point (b). ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2025. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 30 Internal policies and procedures 1. External reviewers shall adopt and implement internal due diligence policies and procedures that ensure their business interests do not impair the independence or accuracy of the assessment activities. 2. External reviewers shall adopt and implement sound administrative and accounting procedures, internal control mechanisms and effective control and safeguard arrangements for information processing systems. 3. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for assessing the soundness of the administrative and accounting procedures and of the internal control mechanisms as well as the effectiveness of the control and safeguard arrangements for information processing systems referred to in paragraph 2. ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2025. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 31 Assessment methodologies and information used for reviews 1. External reviewers shall adopt and implement measures to ensure that their reviews provide an opinion based on a thorough analysis of all information available to them and that, according to their methodologies, is relevant to their analysis. 2. External reviewers shall make publicly available the key steps taken in their reasoning to arrive at the conclusions of each of their reviews. 3. External reviewers shall use information of sufficient quality and from reliable sources when providing reviews. 4. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for assessing whether the information referred to in paragraph 3 is of sufficient quality and whether the sources referred to in that paragraph are reliable. ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2025. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 32 Errors in assessment methodologies or in their application 1. External reviewers that become aware of errors in their assessment methodologies or in their application that have a material impact on a review shall immediately notify and explain those errors to ESMA and the issuers of the affected European Green Bonds. 2. External reviewers shall address errors in a timely manner and publish the errors referred to in paragraph 1 on their websites, together with, where relevant, a revised and corrected review as soon as possible. The revised documents shall state the reasons for the changes. Article 33 Outsourcing 1. External reviewers that outsource their assessment activities to third-party service providers shall ensure that any such third-party service provider has the ability and the capacity to perform those assessment activities reliably and professionally. Those external reviewers shall also ensure that the outsourcing does not materially impair the quality of their internal control and ESMA’s ability to supervise the compliance of those external reviewers with this Regulation. 2. External reviewers shall not outsource all their assessment activities or their compliance function. 3. External reviewers shall notify ESMA of the assessment activities that they intend to outsource, including a specification of the level of human and technical resources needed to carry out each of those activities and the reasons for such outsourcing. 4. External reviewers that outsource assessment activities shall ensure that such outsourcing does not reduce or impair the ability of the members of the external reviewer’s senior management or management body to perform their function or roles. 5. External reviewers shall ensure that third-party service providers cooperate and comply with any supervisory requests from ESMA in connection with any outsourced assessment activities. 6. External reviewers shall remain responsible for any outsourced activity and shall adopt measures to ensure the following: For the purposes of the first subparagraph, point (e), external reviewers shall obtain information about the business continuity arrangements of third-party service providers, assess their quality and request improvements to such arrangements where necessary. 7. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria for: ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2024. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 34 Record-keeping requirements 1. External reviewers shall keep adequate records of the following: 2. The records and documents referred to in paragraph 1 shall be kept until at least five years have elapsed after the maturity of the bond concerned and shall be made available to ESMA upon its request. 3. Where ESMA has withdrawn the registration of an external reviewer in accordance with Article 59(1), that external reviewer shall ensure that the records and documents are kept for five additional years. Records and documents which set out the respective rights and obligations of the external reviewer and the issuer of the European Green Bond under an agreement to provide assessment services shall be retained for the duration of the relationship with that issuer. Article 35 Conflicts of interest and confidentiality of information 1. External reviewers shall identify, eliminate or manage, and disclose in a transparent manner in their reviews, any actual or potential conflicts of interest that concern any of the following: 2. Before entering into a contract with an issuer for the provision of services, the external reviewer shall conduct a pre-contractual assessment of whether there is an actual or potential conflict of interest, and shall document that assessment. The external reviewer shall update the pre-contractual assessment and the relating documentation when a material change to the risk of a conflict of interest arises after the conclusion of the contract between the external reviewer and the issuer. The external reviewer shall not issue a review where it identifies an actual conflict of interest and the external reviewer is not able to implement measures to eliminate or manage that conflict of interest. 3. Fees charged by external reviewers for assessment services shall not depend on the result of the reviews, or on any other result or outcome of the work performed. 4. Analysts, employees of the external reviewer and any other person contractually related to the external reviewers and directly involved in assessment activities shall be bound by the obligation of professional secrecy. 5. External reviewers shall ensure that their analysts and employees or any other natural person contractually related to the external reviewers and directly involved in assessment activities comply with the following: Article 36 Provision of other services External reviewers that provide services other than assessment activities shall ensure that those other services do not create conflicts of interest with their assessment activities concerning European Green Bonds. Such external reviewers shall disclose in their reviews any other services provided for the assessed entity or any related third party. CHAPTER 3 Reviews Article 37 In their reviews, external reviewers shall not refer to ESMA or any competent authority in a way that could indicate or suggest that ESMA or any competent authority endorses or approves that review or any assessment activities of the external reviewer. Article 38 Publication of reviews 1. External reviewers shall publish and make available on their websites, free of charge, the following: 2. The reviews shall remain publicly available on the website of the external reviewer until at least the maturity of the bond concerned. 3. External reviewers that decide to discontinue providing a review shall provide information about the reasons for that decision on their websites, without delay following such decision. CHAPTER 4 Provision of services by third-country external reviewers Article 39 General provisions 1. A third-country external reviewer may provide its services in accordance with this Regulation to issuers of European Green Bonds where that third-country external reviewer is registered in the register of third-country external reviewers kept by ESMA in accordance with Article 67. 2. ESMA shall register a third-country external reviewer that has applied for the provision of external reviewer services in accordance with this Regulation throughout the Union in accordance with paragraph 1 (the ‘applicant third-country external reviewer’) only where the following conditions are met: 3. Where a third-country external reviewer is registered in accordance with this Article, no additional requirements shall be imposed on the third-country external reviewer in respect of matters covered by this Regulation. 4. The applicant third-country external reviewer shall submit its application to ESMA, using the forms and templates referred to in Article 23(7), after the adoption by the Commission of a decision referred to in Article 40(1) in relation to the third country in which that applicant third-country external reviewer is registered or authorised. 5. The applicant third-country external reviewer shall provide ESMA with all information that is necessary for its registration. 6. Within 20 working days of receipt of an application, ESMA shall assess whether the application is complete. Where the application is not complete, ESMA shall notify the applicant third-country external reviewer thereof and shall set a deadline by which the applicant third-country external reviewer is to provide additional information. Where the application is complete, ESMA shall notify the applicant third-country external reviewer thereof. 7. Within 45 working days of receipt of a complete application, ESMA shall register or refuse to register the applicant third-country external reviewer. ESMA may extend the period referred to in the first subparagraph by 15 working days where the applicant third-country external reviewer intends to outsource certain external review activities. 8. ESMA shall notify the applicant third-country external reviewer in writing of the registration of that third-country external reviewer, or of the refusal to register the applicant third-country external reviewer. Such decision to register or to refuse to register an applicant third-country external reviewer shall provide reasons and shall take effect on the fifth working day after its adoption. 9. Third-country external reviewers shall, before providing any service in relation to issuers of European Green Bonds established in the Union, offer to submit any disputes relating to those services to the jurisdiction of a court of a Member State or an arbitral tribunal with a seat in a Member State. Article 40 Equivalence decision 1. The Commission may adopt a decision in relation to a third country stating that the legal and supervisory frameworks of that third country ensure the following: 2. The Commission may consider the organisational and business conduct framework of a third country to have equivalent effect to the requirements of this Regulation where, within that framework, entities providing external review services are subject to the following: 3. ESMA shall establish cooperation arrangements with the relevant competent authorities of third countries whose legal and supervisory frameworks have been recognised as effectively equivalent in accordance with paragraph 1. Such arrangements shall specify the following: 4. A third-country external reviewer established in a country whose legal and supervisory framework has been recognised to be effectively equivalent in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article, and which is registered in the register referred to in Article 67, shall be able to provide the services covered by the registration to issuers of European Green Bonds throughout the Union. 5. A third-country external reviewer shall no longer use the rights under Article 39 where the Commission revokes its decision referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in relation to that third country. Article 41 Withdrawal of registration of third-country external reviewer 1. ESMA shall withdraw the registration of a third-country external reviewer by removing that external reviewer from the register referred to in Article 67 where it has well-founded reasons, based on documentary evidence, to believe that, in the provision of the services under this Regulation in the Union the third-country external reviewer: 2. ESMA shall take a decision pursuant to paragraph 1 after: 3. ESMA shall inform the Commission without delay of a decision taken pursuant to paragraph 1 and shall publish its decision on its website. 4. In the event of the withdrawal of the registration of a third-country external reviewer, the Commission shall assess whether the conditions under which a decision pursuant to Article 40(1) has been adopted continue to exist in relation to the third country concerned. Article 42 Recognition of a third-country external reviewer 1. Until the adoption of a decision pursuant to Article 40(1), a third-country external reviewer may provide its services in accordance with this Regulation provided that the third-country external reviewer acquires recognition from ESMA in accordance with this Article. 2. A third-country external reviewer who intends to obtain recognition as referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article (the ‘third-country external reviewer seeking recognition’) shall comply with the requirements laid down in Articles 23 to 38 and Articles 54 to 56. 3. A third-country external reviewer seeking recognition shall have a legal representative established in the Union. That legal representative shall: 4. An application for recognition from ESMA as referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain all information necessary to satisfy ESMA that the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition has implemented all necessary arrangements to fulfil the requirements referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 and shall, where applicable, indicate the competent authority responsible for supervision of the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition in the third country. 5. Within 30 working days of receipt of an application for recognition, ESMA shall assess whether the application is complete. Where the application is not complete, ESMA shall notify the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition thereof and shall set a deadline by which the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition is to provide additional information. Where the application is complete, ESMA shall notify the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition thereof. 6. Within 45 working days of receipt of a complete application for recognition, ESMA shall verify that the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 and 3 are fulfilled. ESMA may extend the period referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph by 15 working days where the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition intends to outsource certain external review activities. 7. ESMA shall notify the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition in writing of its decision to recognise or to refuse to recognise the third-country external reviewer seeking recognition as a third-country external reviewer. A decision to recognise or to refuse to recognise a third-country external reviewer seeking recognition shall provide reasons and shall take effect on the fifth working day after its adoption. 8. ESMA shall suspend or, where appropriate, withdraw the recognition granted in accordance with paragraph 7 where it has well-founded reasons, based on documentary evidence, to consider that the third-country external reviewer is acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the interests of users of its services or the orderly functioning of markets, or has seriously infringed this Regulation, or that the third-country external reviewer made false statements or used any other irregular means to obtain recognition. 9. ESMA shall develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the information and the form and content of the application referred to in paragraph 4. ESMA shall submit those draft regulatory technical standards to the Commission by 21 December 2025. Power is delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation by adopting the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 43 Endorsement of services under this Regulation provided in a third country 1. An external reviewer established in the Union registered in accordance with Article 23 may apply to ESMA for an authorisation of an endorsement of the services provided by a third-country external reviewer on an ongoing basis in the Union, provided that the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. An external reviewer who submits an application referred to in paragraph 1 (the ‘endorsing external reviewer’) shall provide all information that is necessary to satisfy ESMA that, at the time of application, all conditions referred to in that paragraph are fulfilled. 3. ESMA shall assess whether the application referred to in paragraph 1 is complete within 20 working days of receipt of the application. Where the application is not complete, ESMA shall notify the endorsing external reviewer accordingly and shall set a deadline by which the endorsing external reviewer is to provide additional information. Where the application is complete, ESMA shall notify the endorsing external reviewer accordingly. Within 45 working days of receipt of the complete application, ESMA shall examine the application and adopt a decision to authorise or refuse the endorsement. ESMA shall notify the endorsing external reviewer of its decision. The decision shall provide reasons and shall take effect on the fifth working day after its adoption. 4. Services provided under this Regulation by a third-country external reviewer whose services have been endorsed shall be considered to be services provided by the endorsing external reviewer. The endorsing external reviewer shall not use the endorsement with the intention of avoiding the requirements of this Regulation. 5. The endorsing external reviewer shall remain fully responsible for the services provided under this Regulation by the third-country external reviewer whose services have been endorsed and for compliance with this Regulation. 6. Where ESMA has well-founded reasons to consider that the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 are no longer fulfilled, it shall have the power to require the endorsing external reviewer to cease the endorsement. 7. The endorsing external reviewer shall publish the information referred to in Article 38 on its website. 8. The endorsing external reviewer shall report to ESMA annually on the services it has endorsed during the previous 12 months. TITLE V SUPERVISION BY COMPETENT AUTHORITIES AND ESMA CHAPTER 1 Competent authorities Article 44 Supervision by competent authorities 1. The competent authority of the home Member State designated pursuant to Article 31 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 shall supervise the following: 2. Competent authorities designated in accordance with Article 29(5) of Regulation (EU) 2017/2402 shall supervise the compliance of originators with their obligations under Title II, Chapter 2, and Articles 18 and 19 of this Regulation. 3. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, competent authorities shall not supervise issuers of European Green Bonds that are covered by Article 1(2), points (b) and (d), of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129. Article 45 Powers of competent authorities 1. In order to fulfil their duties under this Regulation, competent authorities shall have, in accordance with national law, at least the following supervisory and investigatory powers: Where necessary under national law, the competent authorities may ask the relevant judicial authority to decide on the use of the powers referred to in the first subparagraph. 2. Competent authorities shall exercise their functions and powers referred to in paragraph 1 in any of the following ways: 3. Member States shall ensure that appropriate measures are in place so that competent authorities have all the supervisory and investigatory powers that are necessary to fulfil their duties. 4. A person making information available to a competent authority pursuant to this Regulation shall not be considered to be infringing any restriction on the disclosure of information imposed by contract or by any legislative, regulatory or administrative provision, and shall not be subject to liability of any kind for making such information available to a competent authority. Article 46 Cooperation between competent authorities 1. Competent authorities shall cooperate with each other for the purposes of this Regulation. They shall exchange information without undue delay and cooperate in investigation, supervision and enforcement. Member States that have chosen, in accordance with Article 49(5), to lay down criminal penalties for infringements of this Regulation shall ensure that appropriate measures are in place so that competent authorities have all the necessary powers to liaise with judicial authorities within their jurisdiction to receive specific information related to criminal investigations or legal proceedings initiated for alleged infringements of this Regulation and provide the same to other competent authorities to fulfil their obligation to cooperate with each other for the purposes of this Regulation. 2. A competent authority may refuse to act on a request for information or a request to cooperate with an investigation only in any of the following exceptional circumstances: 3. Competent authorities may request assistance from the competent authority of another Member State with regard to on-site inspections or investigations. Where a competent authority receives a request from a competent authority of another Member State to carry out an on-site inspection or an investigation, it may do any of the following: 4. In the case of a securitisation bond, where a competent authority referred to in Article 44(2) finds, or has reason to believe, that an obligation under Title II, Chapter 2, or Article 18 or 19 has not been complied with, it shall inform the competent authority of the Member State of the entity or entities suspected of such non-compliance of its findings in a sufficiently detailed manner. Upon receipt of that information, the competent authority of the Member State of the entity suspected of the non-compliance shall, within 15 working days, take any necessary action to address the non-compliance identified and notify the other competent authority involved. When a competent authority referred to in Article 44(2) disagrees with another competent authority regarding the procedure or content of its action or inaction, it shall notify all other competent authorities involved about its disagreement without undue delay. 5. The competent authorities may bring the matter to the attention of ESMA in situations where a request for cooperation, in particular to exchange information, has been rejected or has not been acted upon within a reasonable time. Without prejudice to Article 258 TFEU, ESMA may in such situations act in accordance with the power conferred on it by Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. 6. ESMA may develop draft regulatory technical standards to specify the information to be exchanged in accordance with paragraph 1. Power is delegated to the Commission to adopt the regulatory technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. 7. ESMA may develop draft implementing technical standards to establish standard forms, templates and procedures for the purposes of the cooperation and exchange of the information referred to in paragraph 1. Power is conferred on the Commission to adopt the implementing technical standards referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 47 Professional secrecy 1. All information exchanged between the competent authorities under this Regulation that concerns business or operational conditions and other economic or personal affairs shall be confidential and shall be subject to professional secrecy, except where the competent authority states, when it exchanges such information with another competent authority, that such information may be disclosed or where such disclosure is necessary for legal proceedings. 2. The obligation of professional secrecy shall apply to all persons who work or who have worked for the competent authority or for any third party to whom the competent authority has delegated its powers. Information subject to professional secrecy shall not be disclosed to any other person or authority except by virtue of Union or national law. Article 48 Precautionary measures 1. A competent authority of the host Member State that has clear and demonstrable grounds for believing that irregularities have been committed by an issuer of a European Green Bond or that such an issuer has infringed this Regulation shall transmit those findings to the competent authority of the home Member State and to ESMA. 2. Where, despite the measures taken by the competent authority of the home Member State, an issuer of a European Green Bond persisted in infringing this Regulation, the competent authority of the host Member State, after informing the competent authority of the home Member State and ESMA, shall take all appropriate measures to protect investors and shall inform the Commission and ESMA thereof without undue delay. 3. A competent authority that disagrees with any of the measures taken by another competent authority pursuant to paragraph 2 may bring the matter to the attention of ESMA. ESMA may act in accordance with the powers conferred on it by Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 49 Administrative penalties and other administrative measures 1. Without prejudice to the supervisory and investigatory powers of competent authorities pursuant to Article 45, and the right of Member States to provide for and impose criminal penalties, Member States shall, in accordance with national law, provide for competent authorities to have the power to impose administrative penalties and take other appropriate administrative measures which shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Those administrative penalties and other administrative measures shall apply to: 2. Member States may decide not to lay down rules concerning the power of competent authorities to impose administrative penalties and take other appropriate administrative measures as referred to in paragraph 1 where the infringements referred to in point (a) or (b) of that paragraph are already subject to criminal penalties in their national law by 21 December 2024. Where they so decide, Member States shall notify to the Commission and to ESMA, in detail, the relevant parts of their criminal law. 3. By 21 December 2024, Member States shall notify to the Commission and to ESMA, in detail, the rules referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. They shall notify the Commission and ESMA without delay of any subsequent amendment thereto. 4. Member States shall, in accordance with national law, ensure that competent authorities have the power to impose the following administrative penalties and other administrative measures in relation to the infringements referred to in paragraph 1, point (a): For the purposes of the first subparagraph, point (e), where the legal person is a parent undertaking or a subsidiary of a parent undertaking which is required to prepare consolidated financial statements in accordance with Directive 2013/34/EU, the relevant total annual turnover shall be the total annual turnover or the corresponding type of income in accordance with the applicable Union law in the field of accounting according to the most recent available consolidated accounts approved by the management body of the ultimate parent undertaking. 5. Member States may provide for additional penalties or measures and for higher levels of administrative fines than those provided for in this Regulation. Article 50 Exercise of supervisory powers and powers to impose penalties 1. When determining the type and level of administrative penalties and other administrative measures, the competent authorities shall take into account all relevant circumstances including, where appropriate: 2. In the exercise of their powers to impose administrative penalties and other administrative measures under Article 49, competent authorities shall cooperate closely to ensure that the exercise of their supervisory and investigative powers and the administrative penalties and other administrative measures that they impose are effective and appropriate. They shall coordinate their action in order to avoid duplication and overlaps when exercising their supervisory and investigative powers and when imposing administrative penalties and other administrative measures in cross-border cases. Article 51 Right of appeal Member States shall ensure that decisions taken under this Regulation are properly reasoned and subject to a right of appeal before a court. Article 52 Publication of decisions 1. A decision imposing an administrative penalty or other administrative measure for an infringement of this Regulation shall be published by competent authorities on their official websites immediately after the person subject to that decision has been informed of that decision. The publication shall include information on the type and nature of the infringement and the identity of the persons responsible. That obligation shall not apply to decisions imposing measures that are of an investigatory nature. 2. Where the publication of the identity of the legal persons, or of the identity or personal data of natural persons, is considered by the competent authority to be disproportionate following a case-by-case assessment conducted on the proportionality of the publication of such data, or where such publication would jeopardise the stability of financial markets or an ongoing investigation, competent authorities shall do one of the following: In the case of a decision to publish an administrative penalty or other administrative measure on an anonymous basis, as referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph, the publication of the relevant data may be deferred for a reasonable period where it is expected that within that period the reasons for anonymous publication will cease to exist. 3. Where the decision to impose an administrative penalty or other administrative measure is under appeal before the relevant court or administrative body, the competent authority referred to in Article 44(1) and (2) shall also publish, immediately, on its official website such information and any subsequent information on the outcome of such appeal. Moreover, any decision annulling a previous decision to impose an administrative penalty or other administrative measure shall also be published. 4. Competent authorities shall ensure that any publication in accordance with this Article shall remain on their official website for a period of at least five years after its publication. Personal data contained in the publication shall be limited to what is necessary for the purposes of the specific case and shall be kept on the official website of the competent authority only for the period which is necessary in accordance with the applicable data protection rules. Article 53 Reporting of administrative penalties and other administrative measures to ESMA 1. Competent authorities shall, on an annual basis, provide ESMA with aggregate information regarding all administrative penalties and other administrative measures imposed in accordance with Article 49. ESMA shall publish that information in an annual report. 2. Where Member States have chosen, in accordance with Article 49(5), to lay down criminal penalties for the infringements of the provisions referred to therein, their competent authorities shall provide ESMA annually with anonymised and aggregated data regarding all criminal investigations undertaken and criminal penalties imposed. ESMA shall publish data on criminal penalties imposed in an annual report. 3. A competent authority that has disclosed administrative penalties, other administrative measures or criminal penalties to the public shall simultaneously report those penalties or measures to ESMA. 4. Competent authorities shall inform ESMA of all administrative penalties or other administrative measures imposed but not published in accordance with Article 52(2), first subparagraph, point (c), including any appeal in relation thereto and the outcome thereof. Member States shall ensure that competent authorities receive information and the final judgment in relation to any criminal penalty imposed and submit it to ESMA. ESMA shall maintain a central database of penalties communicated to it solely for the purposes of exchanging information between competent authorities. That database shall be accessible only to competent authorities and shall be updated on the basis of the information provided by the competent authorities. CHAPTER 2 Article 54 Requests for information 1. ESMA may, by simple request or by a decision, require the following persons to provide all information that is necessary to carry out its duties under this Regulation: 2. When sending a simple request for information under paragraph 1, ESMA shall: 3. When requiring the provision of information by decision under paragraph 1, ESMA shall: 4. The persons referred to in paragraph 1 or their representatives and, in the case of legal persons or associations having no legal personality, the persons authorised to represent them by law, shall provide the information requested. Duly authorised lawyers may provide the information on behalf of their clients. The latter shall remain fully responsible if the information provided proves to be incomplete, incorrect or misleading. 5. ESMA shall, without delay, send a copy of the simple request or of its decision referred to in paragraph 1 to the competent authority of the Member State where the persons to whom such request or decision is addressed are domiciled or established. Article 55 General investigations 1. In order to carry out its duties under this Regulation, ESMA may conduct necessary investigations of persons referred to in Article 54(1). To that end, the officials and other persons authorised by ESMA shall be empowered to: 2. The officials of and other persons authorised by ESMA for the purposes of the investigations referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall exercise their powers upon production of a written authorisation specifying the subject matter and purpose of the investigation. That authorisation shall also indicate the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 61 where the production of the required records, data, procedures or any other material, or the answers to questions asked of the persons referred to in Article 54(1), are not provided or are incomplete, and the fines provided for in Article 60 where the answers to questions asked of the persons referred to in Article 54(1) prove to be incorrect or misleading. 3. The persons referred to in Article 54(1) shall submit to investigations initiated on the basis of a decision of ESMA. The decision shall specify the subject matter and purpose of the investigation, the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 61, the legal remedies available under Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 and the right to have the decision reviewed by the Court of Justice. 4. Within a reasonable time before the investigation, ESMA shall inform the competent authority referred to in Article 44 of the Member State where the investigation is to be carried out of the investigation and of the identity of the authorised persons. Officials of the competent authority concerned shall, upon the request of ESMA, assist those authorised persons in carrying out their duties. Officials of the competent authority concerned may also attend the investigations upon request. 5. If a request for records of telephone or data traffic referred to in paragraph 1, point (e), requires a competent authority to obtain the authorisation of a judicial authority in accordance with national law, ESMA shall apply for such authorisation. ESMA may also apply for such authorisation as a precautionary measure. 6. Where an authorisation as referred to in paragraph 5 is applied for, the national judicial authority shall verify that the decision of ESMA is authentic and that the coercive measures envisaged are neither arbitrary nor excessive having regard to the subject matter of the investigations. In its verification of the proportionality of coercive measures, the national judicial authority may ask ESMA for detailed explanations, in particular relating to the grounds ESMA has for suspecting that an infringement of this Regulation has taken place and the seriousness of the suspected infringement and the nature of the involvement of the person subject to the coercive measures. However, the national judicial authority shall not review the necessity of the investigation or demand that it be provided with the information on ESMA’s file. The lawfulness of ESMA’s decision shall be subject to review only by the Court of Justice following the procedure set out in Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 56 On-site inspections 1. In order to carry out its duties under this Regulation, ESMA may conduct all necessary on-site inspections at the business premises, land or property of the legal persons referred to in Article 54(1). Where the proper conduct and efficiency of the inspection so require, ESMA may carry out the on-site inspection without prior announcement. 2. The officials of and other persons authorised by ESMA to conduct an on-site inspection may enter any business premises, land or property of the legal persons subject to an investigation decision adopted by ESMA and shall have all the powers referred to in Article 55(1). They shall also have the power to seal any business premises, property and books or records for the period of, and to the extent necessary for, the inspection. 3. The officials of and other persons authorised by ESMA to conduct an on-site inspection shall exercise their powers upon production of a written authorisation specifying the subject matter and purpose of the inspection and the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 61 where the persons concerned do not submit to the inspection. In good time before the inspection, ESMA shall give notice of the inspection to the competent authority of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted. 4. The persons referred to in Article 54(1) shall submit to on-site inspections ordered by a decision of ESMA. The decision shall specify the subject matter and purpose of the inspection, appoint the date on which it is to begin and indicate the periodic penalty payments provided for in Article 61, the legal remedies available under Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 as well as the right to have the decision reviewed by the Court of Justice. ESMA shall take such decisions after consulting the competent authority of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted. 5. Officials of, as well as those authorised or appointed by, the competent authority of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted shall, at the request of ESMA, actively assist the officials of, and other persons authorised by, ESMA. To that end, they shall enjoy the powers set out in paragraph 2. Officials of that competent authority may also attend the on-site inspections upon request. 6. ESMA may require competent authorities of the Member State where the inspection is to be conducted to carry out on its behalf specific investigatory tasks and on-site inspections as provided for in this Article and in Article 55(1). To that end, the competent authorities shall enjoy the same powers as ESMA as set out in this Article and in Article 55(1). 7. Where the officials of, and other accompanying persons authorised by, ESMA find that a person opposes an inspection ordered pursuant to this Article, the competent authority of the Member State concerned shall afford them the necessary assistance, requesting, where appropriate, the assistance of the police or of an equivalent enforcement authority, to enable them to conduct their on-site inspection. 8. If the on-site inspection provided for in paragraph 1 or the assistance provided for in paragraph 7 requires authorisation by a judicial authority pursuant to applicable national law, ESMA shall apply for such authorisation. ESMA may also apply for such authorisation as a precautionary measure. 9. Where authorisation as referred to in paragraph 8 is applied for, the national judicial authority shall verify that ESMA’s decision is authentic and that the coercive measures envisaged are neither arbitrary nor excessive having regard to the subject matter of the inspection. In its verification of the proportionality of the coercive measures, the national judicial authority may ask ESMA for detailed explanations, in particular relating to the grounds ESMA has for suspecting that an infringement of this Regulation has taken place, as well as to the seriousness of the suspected infringement and the nature of the involvement of the person who is subject to the coercive measures. However, the national judicial authority shall not review the necessity of the investigation or demand that it be provided with the information on ESMA’s file. The lawfulness of ESMA’s decision shall be subject to review only by the Court of Justice following the procedure set out in Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010. Article 57 Exercise of the powers referred to in Articles 54, 55 and 56 The powers conferred on ESMA, any of its officials or any other person authorised by ESMA pursuant to Article 54, 55 or 56 shall not be used to require the disclosure of information or documents that are subject to legal privilege. Article 58 Exchange of information 1. Competent authorities referred to in Article 44, ESMA, and other relevant authorities shall, without undue delay, provide one another with the information required for the purposes of carrying out their duties under this Regulation. 2. Competent authorities referred to in Article 44, ESMA, other relevant authorities and other bodies or natural and legal persons receiving confidential information in the exercise of their duties under this Regulation, shall use such information only in the course of their duties. Article 59 Supervisory measures by ESMA 1. Where, in accordance with Article 63(8), ESMA finds that a person has committed an infringement listed in Article 60(1), it shall adopt a decision to take one or more of the following actions: 2. ESMA shall withdraw the registration or the recognition of an external reviewer in any of the following circumstances: Where ESMA withdraws the registration or recognition of the external reviewer, it shall provide full reasons in its decision. The withdrawal shall have immediate effect. 3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, ESMA shall take into account the nature and seriousness of the infringement, having regard to the following criteria: 4. Without undue delay, ESMA shall notify any action taken pursuant to paragraph 1 to the person responsible for the infringement, and shall communicate it to the competent authorities of the Member States and to the Commission. It shall publicly disclose any such action on its website within 10 working days of the date when the decision as referred to in paragraph 1 was adopted. The disclosure to the public referred to in the first subparagraph shall include the following: Article 60 1. ESMA shall adopt a decision imposing a fine in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article where, in accordance with Article 63(8), it finds that an external reviewer or any of the persons referred to in Article 54(1) has, by intent or negligence, committed one or more of the following infringements: An infringement shall be considered to have been committed intentionally if ESMA finds objective factors which demonstrate that a person acted deliberately to commit the infringement. 2. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, the minimum amount of the fine referred to in paragraph 1 shall be EUR 20 000. The maximum amount shall be EUR 200 000. When determining the level of a fine pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, ESMA shall take into account the criteria set out in Article 59(3). 3. Where a person has committed an infringement listed in paragraph 1 and directly or indirectly benefited financially from the infringement, the amount of the fine shall be at least equal to that financial benefit. 4. Where an act or omission constitutes a combination of several infringements, ESMA shall apply a single fine. That fine shall be the highest of the applicable fines for that act or omission. Article 61 Periodic penalty payments 1. ESMA shall, by decision, impose a periodic penalty payment in order to compel: 2. The periodic penalty payment shall be imposed for each day of delay. 3. The amount of the periodic penalty payments shall be 3 % of the average daily turnover in the preceding business year, or, in the case of natural persons, 2 % of the average daily income in the preceding calendar year. It shall be calculated from the date stipulated in the decision imposing the periodic penalty payment. 4. A periodic penalty payment shall be imposed for a maximum period of six months following the notification of ESMA’s decision. Following the end of the period, ESMA shall review the measure. Article 62 Disclosure, nature, enforcement and allocation of fines and periodic penalty payments 1. ESMA shall disclose to the public every fine and periodic penalty payment that has been imposed pursuant to Articles 60 and 61, unless such disclosure to the public would seriously jeopardise the financial markets or cause disproportionate damage to the parties involved. Such disclosure shall not contain personal data within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 23 ) . 2. Fines and periodic penalty payments imposed pursuant to Articles 60 and 61 shall be of an administrative nature. 3. Fines and periodic penalty payments imposed pursuant to Articles 60 and 61 shall be enforceable. For the purposes of enforcement of fines and periodic penalty payments, ESMA shall apply the rules of civil procedure in force in the Member State or third country in which the fine or periodic penalty payment is enforced. 4. The amounts of the fines and periodic penalty payments shall be allocated to the general budget of the Union. 5. Where ESMA decides to impose no fine or penalty payment upon closing an investigation, it shall inform the European Parliament, the Council, the Commission, and the competent authorities of the Member State concerned accordingly and shall set out the reasons for its decision. Article 63 Procedural rules for taking supervisory measures and imposing fines 1. Where, in carrying out its duties under this Regulation, ESMA finds that there are serious indications of the possible existence of facts liable to constitute one or more of the infringements listed in Article 60(1), ESMA shall appoint an independent investigating officer within ESMA to investigate the matter. The investigating officer shall not be involved or have been involved in the direct or indirect supervision or registration process of the external reviewer concerned and shall perform his or her functions independently from ESMA’s Board of Supervisors. 2. The investigating officer shall investigate the alleged infringements, taking into account any comments submitted by the persons subject to investigation, and shall submit a complete file with his or her findings to ESMA’s Board of Supervisors. 3. In order to carry out his or her tasks, the investigating officer may exercise the power to require information in accordance with Article 54 and to conduct investigations and on-site inspections in accordance with Articles 55 and 56. When using those powers, the investigating officer shall comply with Article 57. 4. Where carrying out his or her tasks, the investigating officer shall have access to all documents and information gathered by ESMA in its supervisory activities. 5. Upon completion of his or her investigation and before submitting the file with his or her findings to ESMA’s Board of Supervisors, the investigating officer shall give the persons subject to an investigation the opportunity to be heard on the matters being investigated. The investigating officer shall base his or her findings only on facts on which the persons subject to investigation have had the opportunity to comment. 6. The rights of defence of the persons concerned shall be fully respected during investigations under this Article. 7. Upon submission of the file with his or her findings to ESMA’s Board of Supervisors, the investigating officer shall notify that fact to the persons who are subject to investigations. The persons subject to investigations shall be entitled to have access to the file, subject to the legitimate interest of other persons in the protection of their professional secrets. The right of access to the file shall not extend to confidential information affecting third parties. 8. On the basis of the file containing the investigating officer’s findings and, when requested by the persons concerned, after having heard those persons in accordance with Article 64, ESMA shall decide if one or more of the infringements listed in Article 60(1) has been committed by the persons subject to an investigation, and in such a case, shall take a supervisory measure in accordance with Article 59 and impose a fine in accordance with Article 60. 9. The investigating officer shall not participate in the deliberations of ESMA’s Board of Supervisors or in any other way intervene in its decision-making process. 10. The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 68 by 21 December 2024 to supplement this Regulation by further specifying the procedure for the exercise of ESMA’s power to impose fines or periodic penalty payments, including provisions on the rights of defence, temporal provisions, the collection of fines or periodic penalty payments, and detailed rules on the limitation periods for the imposition and enforcement of penalties. 11. ESMA shall refer matters for criminal prosecution to the relevant national authorities where, in carrying out its duties under this Regulation, it finds that there are serious indications of the possible existence of facts liable to constitute criminal offences. In addition, ESMA shall refrain from imposing fines or periodic penalty payments where a prior acquittal or conviction arising from identical facts, or from facts which are substantially the same, has acquired the force of res judicata as the result of criminal proceedings under national law. Article 64 Hearing of the persons subject to decisions pursuant to Articles 59, 60 and 61 1. Before taking any decision pursuant to Articles 59, 60 and 61, ESMA shall give the persons subject to such a decision the opportunity to be heard on ESMA’s findings. ESMA shall base its decisions only on findings on which those persons have had the opportunity to comment. 2. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply if urgent action pursuant to Article 59 is needed in order to prevent significant and imminent damage to the financial system. In such a case, ESMA may adopt an interim decision and shall give the persons concerned the opportunity to be heard as soon as possible after taking its decision. 3. The rights of defence of the persons subject to a decision of ESMA shall be fully respected during the respective proceedings. Those persons shall be entitled to have access to ESMA’s file, subject to the legitimate interest of other persons in the protection of their professional secrets. The right of access to the file shall not extend to confidential information or internal preparatory documents of ESMA. Article 65 Review by the Court of Justice The Court of Justice shall have unlimited jurisdiction to review decisions whereby ESMA has imposed a fine or a periodic penalty payment pursuant to this Regulation. It may annul, reduce or increase the fine or periodic penalty payment imposed. Article 66 Registration, recognition and supervisory fees 1. ESMA shall charge fees to external reviewers for the expenditure relating to their registration, recognition and supervision and for any costs that ESMA may incur in carrying out its tasks under this Regulation. 2. The total fees charged by ESMA to the applicant external reviewers, registered external reviewers or recognised external reviewers in accordance with this Regulation shall cover the administrative costs incurred by ESMA in its activities in relation to the registration and supervision of all external reviewers. Concurrently, any fee shall be proportionate to the turnover of the external reviewer concerned. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, external reviewers whose annual turnover is below a certain amount may be exempted from the obligation to pay a fee, as further specified in the delegated act to be adopted by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 3. 3. The Commission shall adopt a delegated act, in accordance with Article 68 by 21 December 2024 to supplement this Regulation by specifying, in particular, the type of fees, the matters in respect of which fees are due, the amount of the fees and the manner in which they are to be paid. When drafting the delegated act, the Commission shall specify the threshold of the annual turnover of external reviewers at group level below which no fee is to be charged, and shall also specify the manner in which the annual turnover is to be calculated for the purposes of applying that threshold. 4. Prior to the adoption of the delegated act referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission shall consult ESMA regarding the fees referred to in that paragraph. Article 67 ESMA register of external reviewers and third-country external reviewers 1. ESMA shall maintain on its website a publicly accessible register that lists the following: 2. The register shall contain contact details of external reviewers, their websites and the dates on which the decisions of ESMA concerning those external reviewers take effect. 3. For third-country external reviewers, the register shall also contain information on the services that third-country external reviewers provide and the contact details of the competent authority responsible for their supervision in the third country. TITLE VI DELEGATED ACTS Article 68 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Articles 21(4), 63(10) and 66(3) shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period from 20 December 2023. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Articles 21(4), 63(10) and 66(3) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect on the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Inter-institutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making. 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Articles 21(4), 63(10) and 66(3) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within three months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by three months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. TITLE VII FINAL PROVISIONS Article 69 Transitional provisions concerning external reviewers 1. An external reviewer that intends to provide services in accordance with this Regulation from 21 December 2024 until 21 June 2026, shall provide such services only after notifying ESMA to that effect and providing the information referred to in Article 23(1). 2. Until 21 June 2026 the external reviewers referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall use best efforts to comply with Articles 24 to 38, with the exception of the requirements laid down in the implementing acts referred to in Article 24(2) and the delegated acts referred to in Articles 26(3), 27(2), 28(3), 29(4), 30(3), 31(4) and 33(7). 3. After 21 June 2026 the external reviewers referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall provide services in accordance with this Regulation only after registering in accordance with Article 23, provided that they comply with Article 22 and Articles 24 to 38 as supplemented by the delegated acts referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. Article 70 Transitional provisions concerning third-country external reviewers 1. A third-country external reviewer that intends to provide services in accordance with this Regulation from 21 December 2024 until 21 June 2026, shall provide such services only after notifying ESMA to that effect and providing the information referred to in Article 23(1). 2. The third-country external reviewers referred to in paragraph 1 shall: 3. ESMA may, at any time from 21 December 2024 until 21 June 2026, enforce compliance by third-country external reviewers in respect of paragraph 2, point (b), by imposing supervisory measures in accordance with Title V. Article 71 Review 1. By 21 December 2028 and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall, after consulting ESMA and the Platform on Sustainable Finance established by Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the application of this Regulation. That report shall evaluate, to the extent possible, at least the following: 2. The reports referred to in paragraph 1 shall, where appropriate, be accompanied by a legislative proposal, including as regards disclosures for issuers of bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and of sustainability-linked bonds. 3. By 21 December 2026, the Commission shall publish a report on the need to regulate sustainability-linked bonds, accompanied by a legislative proposal, where appropriate. 4. The Commission shall, by 31 December 2024 and every three years thereafter, publish a report to inform issuers of European Green Bonds about the review conducted pursuant to Article 19(5), third subparagraph, of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, including the consistency of the technical screening criteria with the criteria laid down in Article 10(2) of that Regulation, taking into account the grandfathering rules laid down in Article 8 of this Regulation. 5. By 21 December 2028 EBA, in close cooperation with ESMA and the European Supervisory Authority (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority) (EIOPA) established by Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 25 ) (known collectively as the ‘European Supervisory Authorities’ or the ‘ESAs’), shall publish a report on the feasibility of extending the eligibility to use the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’ for the purpose of synthetic securitisations. 6. By 21 December 2029, the Commission may, based on the report referred to in paragraph 5, submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council. The Commission’s report may be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal. 7. By 21 December 2028 and, where appropriate, every three years thereafter, the ESAs shall, through the Joint Committee referred to in Article 54 of Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010, (EU) No 1094/2010 and (EU) No 1095/2010, publish a report on the evolution of the market for securitisation bonds. Those reports shall assess, among others, whether the volume of taxonomy-aligned assets has increased sufficiently for the purpose of reviewing the application of the use-of-proceeds rules for securitisation bonds whose issuers seek to use the designation ‘European Green Bond’ or ‘EuGB’. 8. The Commission shall, based on the report referred to in paragraph 7, submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council. The Commission’s report shall be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal. Article 72 Entry into force and application 1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . 2. This Regulation shall apply from 21 December 2024. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2 of this Article, Articles 20, 21(4), 23(6) and (7), 24(2), 26(3), 27(2), 28(3), 29(4), 30(3), 31(4), 33(7), 42(9), 46(6) and (7), 49(1), (2) and (3), 63(10), 66(3), and Articles 68, 69 and 70 shall apply from 20 December 2023. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 2 of this Article, Article 40, Article 42(1) to (8) and Article 43 shall apply from 21 June 2026. 5. Member States shall take the necessary measures to comply with Articles 45 and 49 by 21 December 2024. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 22 November 2023. For the European Parliament The President R. METSOLA For the Council The President P. NAVARRO RÍOS ( 1 ) OJ C 152, 6.4.2022, p. 105 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 5 October 2023 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 23 October 2023. ( 3 ) Council Decision (EU) 2016/1841 of 5 October 2016 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( OJ L 282, 19.10.2016, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) OJ C 76, 9.3.2020, p. 23 . ( 5 ) OJ C 415, 13.10.2021, p. 22 . ( 6 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 ( OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13 ). ( 7 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139 of 4 June 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing the technical screening criteria for determining the conditions under which an economic activity qualifies as contributing substantially to climate change mitigation or climate change adaptation and for determining whether that economic activity causes no significant harm to any of the other environmental objectives ( OJ L 442, 9.12.2021, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178 of 6 July 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council by specifying the content and presentation of information to be disclosed by undertakings subject to Articles 19a or 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU concerning environmentally sustainable economic activities, and specifying the methodology to comply with that disclosure obligation ( OJ L 443, 10.12.2021, p. 9 ). ( 9 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on the prospectus to be published when securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading on a regulated market, and repealing Directive 2003/71/EC ( OJ L 168, 30.6.2017, p. 12 ). ( 10 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1675 of 14 July 2016 supplementing Directive (EU) 2015/849 of the European Parliament and of the Council by identifying high-risk third countries with strategic deficiencies ( OJ L 254, 20.9.2016, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-related disclosures in the financial services sector ( OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC ( OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision 2009/78/EC ( OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 12 ). ( 14 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1 ). ( 15 ) Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision 2009/77/EC ( OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 84 ). ( 16 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/2402 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2017 laying down a general framework for securitisation and creating a specific framework for simple, transparent and standardised securitisation, and amending Directives 2009/65/EC, 2009/138/EC and 2011/61/EU and Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No 648/2012 ( OJ L 347, 28.12.2017, p. 35 ). ( 17 ) Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on specific requirements regarding statutory audit of public-interest entities and repealing Commission Decision 2005/909/EC ( OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 77 ). ( 18 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ( 19 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by the Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ( 20 ) OJ C 27, 19.1.2022, p. 4 . ( 21 ) Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments and amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU ( OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 349 ). ( 22 ) Regulation No 1 of 15 April 1958 determining the languages to be used by the European Economic Community ( OJ 17, 6.10.1958, p. 385/58 ). ( 23 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC ( OJ L 295, 21.11.2018, p. 39 ). ( 24 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) ( OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1 ). ( 25 ) Regulation (EU) No 1094/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing Commission Decision 2009/79/EC ( OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 48 ). ANNEX I EUROPEAN GREEN BOND FACTSHEET [In the case of a securitisation bond, ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/2631 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 November 2023 on European Green Bonds and optional disclosures for bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and for sustainability-linked bonds ( OJ L, 2023/2631, 30.11.2023, ELI: ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 ( OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC ( OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical domains ( OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ANNEX II EUROPEAN GREEN BOND ANNUAL ALLOCATION REPORT [where the allocation report is revised, the title shall reflect this] [In the case of a securitisation bond, Table A: Taxonomy alignment of proceeds information for bonds making use of the gradual approach to the allocation of bond proceeds [The information in the table below shall be provided at least at the level of the economic activity and ideally at the level of the project or group of projects. Confidentiality agreements, competitive considerations or a large number of underlying qualifying projects and similar considerations may justify limiting the amount of detail that is made available. Where bond proceeds are allocated to expenditure as referred to in Article 4(3) the information may be provided at programme level.] The information in the table below covers the period from the issuance of the bond concerned up to the reporting date. Totals: Table B: Taxonomy alignment of proceeds information for bonds making use of the portfolio approach to the allocation of bond proceeds [The information in the table below shall be provided at least at the level of the economic activity, and ideally at the level of the project or group of projects. Confidentiality agreements, competitive considerations or a large number of underlying qualifying projects and similar considerations may justify limiting the amount of detail that is made available. Some or all of the required information may be given outside of the table format.] The information in the table below covers the reporting period. ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/2631 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 November 2023 on European Green Bonds and optional disclosures for bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and for sustainability-linked bonds ( OJ L, 2023/2631, 30.11.2023, ELI: ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 ( OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC ( OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical domains ( OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ANNEX III EUROPEAN GREEN BOND IMPACT REPORT [Where the impact report is revised, the title shall reflect this.] [In the case of a securitisation bond, ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/2631 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 November 2023 on European Green Bonds and optional disclosures for bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and for sustainability-linked bonds ( OJ L, 2023/2631, 30.11.2023, ELI: ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 ( OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC ( OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19 ). ANNEX IV CONTENTS OF PRE-ISSUANCE, POST-ISSUANCE OR IMPACT REPORT REVIEWS [In the case of a securitisation bond, ( 1 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/2631 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 November 2023 on European Green Bonds and optional disclosures for bonds marketed as environmentally sustainable and for sustainability-linked bonds ( OJ L, 2023/2631, 30.11.2023, ELI: ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 ( OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13 ). ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)