Avis juridique important 88/428/Euratom: Commission Opinion of 1 July 1988 concerning the Neckar II (GKN II) nuclear power station (Federal Republic of Germany) (Only the German text is authentic) Official Journal L 208 , 02/08/1988 P. 0033 - 0033 COMMISSION OPINION of 1 July 1988 concerning the Neckar II (GKN II) nuclear power station (Federal Republic of Germany) (Only the German text is authentic) (88/428/Euratom) The general data concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Neckar II nuclear power station (GKN II) were provided by the German Government to the Commission, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, by letter received 5 January 1988. In the course of the meeting of the group of experts set up pursuant to the Treaty, which took place on 15 March 1988, in Brussels, the representatives of the German Government provided further complementary information and details. On the basis of the data thus obtained and having consulted the group of experts, whose report is appended, the Commission drew up the following opinion: 1. The distance from the installation to the closest point on the territory of another Member State, France, is approximately 70 km. 2. In normal operation of the power station its liquid and gaseous effluent discharges are not liable to give rise to significant exposure of the population of other Member States. 3. Solid radioactive wastes are to be stored only temporarily on the power station site prior to transport to a Federal storage or disposal facility. Similarly, irradiated fuel elements are to be stored only temporarily at the station site prior to transfer to a reprocessing facility. 4. In the case of unplanned discharges of radioactive substances which might arise in accident conditions of the type and magnitude considered in the general data, doses liable to be received in other Member States will not be significant from the point of view of health. The Federal Republic has signed agreements with France concerning the exchange of information in the event of nuclear accidents; these agreements allow for hypothetical accidents, having radiological consequences more severe than those presented in the general data, to be taken into account. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the discharge of radioactive effluents from the Neckar II nuclear power station is not liable, either in normal operation or in the case of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the general data to result in radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. This opinion is addressed to the Federal Republic of Germany. Done at Brussels, 30 June 1988. For the Commission Stanley CLINTON DAVIS Member of the Commission