COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2023/443 of 8 February 2023 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 as regards the emission type approval procedures for light passenger and commercial vehicles (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2007 on type approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions from light passenger and commercial vehicles (Euro 5 and Euro 6) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 5(3) and 14(3) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 is amended as follows: Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 1 September 2023. However, from 1 March 2023, national authorities shall not refuse to grant EU type approval for a new type of vehicle or grant extension for an existing type of vehicle, or prohibit registration, placing on the market or entry into service of a new vehicle, where the vehicle concerned complies with this regulation, if a manufacturer so requests. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 8 February 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 171, 29.6.2007, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 of 1 June 2017 supplementing Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council on type-approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions from light passenger and commercial vehicles (Euro 5 and Euro 6) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information, amending Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, Commission Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 and Commission Regulation (EU) No 1230/2012 and repealing Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 ( OJ L 175, 7.7.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the approval and market surveillance of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No 595/2009 and repealing Directive 2007/46/EC ( OJ L 151, 14.6.2018, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Valverde Morales, V., Giechaskiel, B. and Carriero, M., Real Driving Emissions: 2018-2019 assessment of Portable Emissions Measurement Systems (PEMS) measurement uncertainty, EUR 30099 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2020, ISBN 978-92-76-16364-0, doi:10.2760/684820, JRC114416. ( 5 ) Giechaskiel, B., Valverde Morales, V. and Clairotte, M., Real Driving Emissions (RDE): 2020 assessment of Portable Emissions Measurement Systems (PEMS) measurement uncertainty, EUR 30591 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2021, ISBN 978-92-76-30230-8, doi:10.2760/440720, JRC124017. ( 6 ) Global technical regulation No 15 on Worldwide harmonized Light vehicles Test Procedure. ( 7 ) UN Regulation No 154 – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of light duty passenger and commercial vehicles with regards to criteria emissions, emissions of carbon dioxide and fuel consumption and/or the measurement of electric energy consumption and electric range (WLTP) ( OJ L 290, 10.11.2022, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/392 of 4 March 2021 on the monitoring and reporting of data relating to CO 2 emissions from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/631 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Commission Implementing Regulations (EU) No 1014/2010, (EU) No 293/2012, (EU) 2017/1152 and (EU) 2017/1153 ( OJ L 77, 5.3.2021, p. 8 ). ANNEX I List of Annexes and Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 are amended a follows: ( 1 ) Specific test procedures for hydrogen vehicles and flex fuel biodiesel vehicles will be defined at a later stage. ( 2 ) Particulate mass and particle number limits and respective measurement procedures shall apply only to vehicles with direct injection engines. ( 3 ) When a bi-fuel vehicle is combined with a flex fuel vehicle, both test requirements are applicable. ( 4 ) Only NO x emissions shall be determined when the vehicle is running on hydrogen. ( 5 ) Particulate mass and particle number limits and respective measurement procedures shall not apply. ( 6 ) The particle number RDE test only applies to vehicles for which Euro 6 PN emission limits are defined in Table 2 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007. ( 7 ) For applicability of measured components to fuels and vehicle technology and therefore measurement procedures, see the emission limits as defined in Table 2 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007. ( 8 ) An actual test may not be necessary, see UN Regulation No 24 for details. ( 9 ) Only if there is combustion engine operation during a valid CD Type 1 test for CoP verification ( 10 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/631 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 setting CO 2 emission performance standards for new passenger cars and for new light commercial vehicles, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011 ( OJ L 111, 25.4.2019, p. 13 ). ( *1 ) representative vehicle is tested for the road load matrix family ( 11 ) In case the value of d nec changes following the review of 2024, a different character will be assigned to the vehicles types approved with the revised d nec .” ( *2 ) a tolerance of +/– 10 per cent is permitted for volume and weight ( 12 ) For OVC-HEV, specify for charge-sustaining and for charge-depleting operating conditions. ( 13 ) Indicate as applicable. ( 14 ) Calculated from aligned CO 2 values. ( *3 ) In the case that the OBFCM signal can only be read-out to 2 decimal places, the third decimal place shall be introduced as a zero. ( 15 ) In accordance with Annex XXII. ( 16 ) In accordance with Annex XXII. ( 17 ) In accordance with Annex XXII. ( 18 ) Indicate for each pollutant the highest among the average test results of VH, VL (if applicable) and VM (if applicable). ( 19 ) Delete where not applicable (there are cases where nothing needs to be deleted when more than one entry is applicable). ( 20 ) Indicate as applicable. ( 21 ) If ‘yes’ then the six last lines are not applicable. ( *4 ) a tolerance of +/– 10 per cent is permitted for volume and weight ( 22 ) Correction as referred to in Annex B6 - Appendix 2 of UN Regulation No 154 for ICE vehicles, K CO 2 for HEVs. ( 23 ) Correction as referred to in Appendix 2 of Annex B6 to UN Regulation No 154 for ICE vehicles, and Appendix 2 of Annex B6 to UN Regulation No 154 for HEVs (K CO 2 ). ( 24 ) If ‘yes’ then the six last lines are not applicable. ( 25 ) As defined in point 4.2. of Appendix 1 of Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2018/858. ( 26 ) The dimension defined in point 6.3 of Standard ISO 612:1978. ( 27 ) As defined in point 4.2. of Appendix 1 of Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2018/858. ( 28 ) The dimension defined in point 6.3 of Standard ISO 612:1978. ANNEX II ‘ANNEX II In-service conformity methodology 1. INTRODUCTION This Annex sets out the in-service conformity (ISC) methodology for checking compliance against the emission limits for tailpipe (including low temperature) and evaporative emissions throughout the normal life of the vehicle. 2. PROCESS DESCRIPTION Figure 1 Illustration of the in-service conformity process (where GTAA refers to the granting type- approval authority, OEM refers to the manufacturer, and Other Actors are defined as: TAA refers to type approval authorities other than the one granting the relevant type approval, TS refer to technical services, EC to the Commission, and third parties that meet the requirements laid down in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/163) 3. ISC FAMILY DEFINITION An ISC family shall be composed of the following vehicles: 4. INFORMATION GATHERING AND INITIAL RISK ASSESSMENT The granting type approval authority and other actors shall gather all relevant information on possible emission non-compliances relevant for deciding which ISC families to check in a particular year. They shall take into account in particular, information indicating vehicle types with high emissions in real driving conditions. That information shall be obtained by appropriate methods, which may include remote sensing, simplified on-board emissions monitoring systems (SEMS) and testing with PEMS. The number and importance of exceedances observed during such testing may be used to prioritise ISC testing. As part of the information provided for the ISC checks, each manufacturer shall report to the granting type approval authority on emission-related warranty claims, and any emission-related warranty repair works performed or recorded during servicing, in accordance with a format agreed between the granting type approval authority and the manufacturer at type approval. The information shall detail the frequency and nature of faults for emissions-related components and systems by ISC family. The ISC reports shall be filed at least once a year for each ISC family for the duration of the period during which in-service conformity checks are to be performed in accordance with Article 9(3). The ISC reports shall be made available upon request. On the basis of the information referred to in the first and second paragraphs, the granting type approval authority shall make an initial assessment of the risk of an ISC family to not comply with the in-service conformity rules and on that basis shall take a decision on which families to test and which types of tests to perform under the ISC provisions. Additionally, the granting type approval authority may randomly choose ISC families to test. Other actors shall take into account the information collected according to the first paragraph in order to prioritise testing. Additionally, they may randomly choose ISC families to test. 5. ISC TESTING The manufacturer shall perform ISC testing for tailpipe emissions comprising at least the Type 1 test for all ISC families. The manufacturer may also perform Type 1a, Type 4 and Type 6 tests for all or part of the ISC families. The manufacturer shall report to the granting type-approval authority all results of the ISC testing using the Electronic Platform for in-service conformity described in point 5.9, or other appropriate means where this is not possible. The granting type approval authority shall check an appropriate number of ISC families each year, as set out in point 5.4. The granting type approval authority shall include all results of the ISC testing in the Electronic Platform for in-service conformity described in point 5.9. Other actors may perform checks on any number of ISC families each year. They shall report to the granting type approval authority all results of the ISC testing using the Electronic Platform for in-service conformity described in point 5.9, or other appropriate means where this is not possible. 5.1. Quality assurance of testing The granting type approval authority shall annually audit the ISC checks performed by the manufacturer. The granting type approval authority may also audit the ISC checks performed by third parties. The audit shall be based on the information provided by the manufacturers, or third parties, which shall include at least the detailed ISC report in accordance with Appendix 3. The granting type approval authority may require the manufacturers, or third parties to provide additional information. 5.2. Disclosure of tests results The granting type approval authority shall communicate the results of the compliance assessment and remedial measures for a particular ISC family to other actors which provided test results for that family as soon as they become available. The results of the tests, including the detailed data for all vehicles tested, may only be disclosed to the public after the publication by the granting type approval authority of the annual report or the results of an individual ISC procedure or after the closure of the statistical procedure (see point 5.10.) without a result. If the results of the ISC tests undertaken by other actors are published, reference shall be made to the annual report by the granting type approval authority which included them. 5.3. Types of tests ISC testing shall only be performed on vehicles selected in accordance with Appendix 1. ISC testing with the Type 1 test shall be performed in accordance with Annex XXI. ISC testing with the Type 1a test shall be performed in accordance with Annex IIIA, Type 4 tests shall be performed in accordance with Appendix 2 to this Annex and Type 6 tests shall be performed in accordance with Annex VIII. 5.4. Frequency and scope of ISC testing The time period between commencing two in-service conformity checks by the manufacturer for a given ISC family shall not exceed 24 months. The frequency of ISC testing performed by the granting type approval authority shall be based on a risk assessment methodology consistent with the international standard ISO 31000:2018 — Risk Management — Principles and guidelines which shall include the results of the initial assessment made according to point 4. Each granting type approval authority shall perform both the Type 1 and Type 1a tests on a minimum of 5 % of the ISC families per manufacturer per year or at least two ISC families per manufacturer per year, where available. The requirement for testing a minimum of 5 % or at least two ISC families per manufacturer per year shall not apply to small volume manufacturers. The granting type approval authority shall ensure the widest possible coverage of ISC families and vehicle age in a particular in-service conformity family in order to ensure compliance according to Article 9, paragraph 3. The granting type approval authority shall complete the statistical procedure for each ISC family it has started within 12 months. Type 4 or Type 6 ISC tests shall have no minimum frequency requirements. 5.5. Funding for ISC testing by the granting type approval authorities The granting type approval authority shall ensure that sufficient resources are available to cover the costs for in-service conformity testing. Without prejudice to national law, those costs shall be recovered by fees that can be levied on the manufacturer by the granting type approval authority. Such fees shall cover ISC testing of up to 5 % of the in-service conformity families per manufacturer per year or at least two ISC families per manufacturer per year. 5.6. Testing plan When performing testing for ISC, the granting type approval authority shall draft a testing plan. In the case of Type 1a testing, that plan shall include testing to check ISC compliance under a wide range of conditions in accordance with Annex IIIA. 5.7. Selection of vehicles for ISC testing The information gathered shall be sufficiently comprehensive to ensure that in-service performance can be assessed for vehicles that are properly maintained and used. The tables in Appendix 1 shall be used to decide whether the vehicle can be selected for the purposes of ISC testing. During the check against the tables in Appendix 1, some vehicles may be declared as faulty and not tested during ISC, when there is evidence that parts of the emission control system were damaged. The same vehicle may be used to perform and establish reports from more than one type of tests (Type 1, Type 1a, Type 4, Type 6) but only the first valid test of each type shall be taken into account for the statistical procedure. 5.7.1. General requirements The vehicle shall belong to an ISC family as described in point 3 and shall comply with the checks set out in the table in Appendix 1. It shall be registered in the Union and have been driven in the Union for at least 90 % of its driving time. The emissions testing may be done in a different geographical region from that where the vehicles have been selected. In case of ISC testing conducted by the manufacturer, with the agreement of the granting type approval authority, vehicles registered in a non-EU country may be tested, if they belong to the same ISC family and are accompanied by a certificate of conformity. The vehicles selected shall be accompanied by a maintenance record which shows that the vehicle has been properly maintained and has been serviced in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations with only original parts used for the replacement of emissions related parts. Vehicles exhibiting indications of abuse, improper use that could affect its emissions performance, tampering or conditions that may lead to unsafe operation shall be excluded from ISC. The vehicles shall not have undergone aerodynamic modifications that cannot be removed prior to testing. A vehicle shall be excluded from ISC testing if the information stored in the on-board computer shows that the vehicle was operated after a fault code was displayed and a repair was not carried out in accordance with manufacturer specifications. A vehicle shall be excluded from ISC testing if the fuel from the vehicle tank does not meet the applicable standards laid down in Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) or if there is evidence or record of fuelling with the wrong type of fuel. 5.7.2. Vehicle Examination and Maintenance Diagnosis of faults and any normal maintenance necessary in accordance with Appendix 1 shall be performed on vehicles accepted for testing, prior to or after proceeding with ISC testing. The following checks shall be carried out: OBD checks (performed before or after the test), visual checks for lit malfunction indicator lamps, checks on air filter, all drive belts, all fluid levels, radiator and fuel filler cap, all vacuum and fuel system hoses and electrical wiring related to the after-treatment system for integrity; checks on ignition, fuel metering and pollution control device components for maladjustments and/or tampering. If the vehicle is within 800 km of a scheduled maintenance service, that service shall be performed. The window washer fluid shall be removed before the Type 4 test and replaced with hot water. A fuel sample shall be collected and kept in accordance with the requirements of Annex IIIA for further analysis in case of fail. All faults shall be recorded. When the fault is on the pollution control devices then the vehicle shall be reported as faulty and not be used further for testing, but the fault shall be taken into account for the purposes of the compliance assessment performed in accordance with point 6.1. 5.8. Sample size When manufacturers apply the statistical procedure set out in point 5.10 for the Type 1 test, the number of sample lots shall be set on the basis of the annual sales volume of an in-service family in the Union, as described in the following table: Table 1 Number of sample lots for ISC testing with Type 1 tests Each sample lot shall include enough vehicle types, in order to ensure that at least 20 % of the total registrations of this PEMS family in Europe for the previous year are covered. In case the same PEMS family is shared between more brands, then all brands shall be tested. When a family requires more than one sample lot to be tested, the vehicles in the second and third sample lots shall select vehicles used in different ambient and/or typical use conditions from those selected for the first sample. 5.9. Use of the Electronic Platform for in-service conformity and access to data required for testing The Commission shall set up an electronic platform in order to facilitate the exchange of data between on the one side, the manufacturers, other actors and on the other side the granting type approval authority and the taking of the decision on the sample fail or pass. The manufacturer shall complete the package on Testing Transparency referred to in Article 5 (12) in the format specified in Tables 1 and 2 of Appendix 5 and in Table 2 in this point and transmit it to the type-approval authority which grants the emission type-approval. Table 2 of Appendix 5 shall be used in order to allow the selection of vehicles from the same family for testing and along with Table 1 of Appendix 5 provide sufficient information for vehicles to be tested. Once the electronic platform referred to in the first paragraph becomes available, the type-approval authority which grants the emission type-approval shall upload the information in Tables 1 and 2 of Appendix 5 to this platform within 5 working days of receiving it. All information in Tables 1 and 2 of Appendix 5 shall be accessible to the public in an electronic form free of charge. The following information shall also be part of the package on Testing Transparency and shall be provided by the manufacturer free-of-charge within 5 working days of the request by other actors. Table 2 Sensitive information 5.10. Statistical Procedure 5.10.1. General The verification of in-service conformity shall rely on a statistical method following the general principles of sequential sampling for inspection by attributes. The minimum sample size for a pass result is three vehicles, and the maximum cumulative sample size is ten vehicles for the Type 1 and Type 1a tests. For the Type 4 and Type 6 tests a simplified method may be used, where the sample shall consist of three vehicles and shall be considered a fail if all three vehicles fail to pass the test, and a pass if all three vehicles pass the test. In cases where two out of three passed or failed, the type approval authority may decide to conduct further tests or proceed with assessing the compliance in accordance with point 6.1. Test results shall not be multiplied by deterioration factors. For vehicles that have a Declared Maximum RDE Values reported in point 48.2 of the Certificate of Conformity, as described in Annex VIII of Regulation (EU) 2020/683 which is lower than the emission limits set out in Table 2 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007, the conformity shall be checked against these Declared Maximum RDE Values. If the sample is found not to conform with the Declared Maximum RDE Values, the granting type approval authority shall require the manufacturer to take corrective actions. Prior to the performance of the first ISC test, the manufacturer, or other actors shall notify the intent of performing in-service conformity testing of a given vehicle family to the granting type approval authority. Upon this notification, the granting type approval authority shall open a new statistical folder to process the results for each relevant combination of the following parameters for that particular party/or that pool of parties: vehicle family, emissions test type and pollutant. Separate statistical procedures shall be opened for each relevant combination of those parameters. The granting type approval authority shall incorporate in each statistical folder only the results provided by the relevant party. The granting type approval authority shall keep a record of the number of tests performed, the number of failed and passed tests and other necessary data to support the statistical procedure. Whereas more than one statistical procedure can be open at the same time for a given combination of test type and vehicle family, a party shall only be allowed to provide test results to one open statistical procedure for a given combination of test type and vehicle family. Each test shall be reported only once and all tests (valid, not valid, fail or pass, etc.) shall be reported. Each ISC statistical procedure shall remain open until an outcome is reached when the statistical procedure arrives to a pass or fail decision for the sample in accordance with point 5.10.5. However, if an outcome is not reached within 12 months of the opening of a statistical folder, the granting type approval authority shall close the statistical folder unless it decides to complete testing for that statistical folder within the following 6 months. The functions described above shall be executed directly in the Electronic Platform once the relevant functions are available. 5.10.2. Pooling of ISC results Test results from other actors may be pooled for the purposes of a common statistical procedure. The pooling of test results shall require the written consent from all the interested parties providing test results to a pool of results, and a notification to the type approval authorities, and to the electronic platform when available, prior to the start of testing. One of the parties shall be designated as leader of the pool and be responsible for data reporting and communication with the granting type approval authority. 5.10.3. Pass/Fail/Invalid outcome for a single test An ISC emissions test shall be considered as “passed” for one or more pollutants when the emissions result is equal or below the emission limit set out in Table 2 of Annex I of Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 for that type of test. An emissions test shall be considered as “failed” for one or more pollutants when the emissions result is greater than the corresponding emission limit for that type of test. Each failed test result shall increase the “f” count (see point 5.10.5) by 1 for that statistical instance. An ISC emissions test shall be considered invalid if it does not respect the requirements of the tests referred to in point 5.3. Invalid test results shall be excluded from the statistical procedure and the test shall be repeated with the same vehicle in order to have a valid test. The results of all ISC tests shall be submitted to the granting type approval authority within ten working days from the execution of each test on a single vehicle. The test results shall be accompanied by a comprehensive test report at the end of the tests. The results shall be incorporated in the sample in chronological order of execution. The granting type approval authority shall incorporate all valid emission test results to the relevant open statistical procedure until a “sample fail” or a “sample pass” outcome is reached in accordance with point 5.10.5. 5.10.4. Treatment of Outliers The presence of outlying results in the sample statistical procedure may lead to a “fail” outcome in accordance with the procedures described below: Outliers shall be categorised as mild, intermediate or extreme. An emissions test result shall be considered as a mild outlier if it is more than the applicable emission limit but less than 1,3 times the applicable emission limit. The presence of a mild outlier only counts in the number of failed results in point 5.10.5. below. An emissions test result shall be considered as an intermediate outlier if it is equal or greater than 1,3 times the applicable emission limit. The presence of two such outliers in a sample shall lead to a fail of the sample. An emissions result shall be considered as an extreme outlier if it is equal or greater than 2,5 times the applicable emission limit. The presence of one such outlier in a sample shall lead to a fail of the sample. In such case, the plate number of the vehicle shall be communicated to the manufacturer and to the granting type approval authority. This possibility shall be communicated to the vehicle owners before testing. 5.10.5. Pass/Fail decision for a sample For the purposes of deciding on a pass/fail result for the sample, “p” is the count of passed results, and “f” is the count of failed results. Each passed test result shall increase the “p” count by 1 and each failed test result shall increase the “f” count by 1 for the relevant open statistical procedure. Upon the incorporation of valid emission test results to an open instance of the statistical procedure, the type approval authority shall perform the following actions: The decision depends on the cumulative sample size “n”, the passed and failed result counts “p” and “f”, as well as the number of intermediate and/or extreme outliers in the sample. For the decision on a pass/fail of an ISC sample the granting type approval authority shall use the decision chart in Figure 2 for vehicles based on types approved as of 1 January 2020 and the decision chart in Figure 2.a for vehicles based on types approved until 31 December 2019. The charts indicate the decision to be taken for a given cumulative sample size “n” and failed count result “f”. Two decisions are possible for a statistical procedure for a given combination of vehicle family, emissions test type and pollutant: “Sample pass” outcome shall be reached when the applicable decision chart from Figure 2 or Figure 2.a gives a “PASS” outcome for the current cumulative sample size “n” and the count of failed results “f”. “Sample fail” decision shall be reached, for a given cumulative sample size “n”, when at least one of the following conditions is fulfilled: If no decision is reached, the statistical procedure shall remain open and further results shall be incorporated into it until a decision is reached or the procedure is closed in accordance with point 5.10.1. Figure 2 Decision chart for the statistical procedure for vehicles based on types approved as of 1 January 2020 (where “UND” means undecided) Figure 2.a Decision chart for the statistical procedure for vehicles type approved until 31 December 2019 (where “UND” means undecided) 5.10.6. ISC for completed vehicles and multistage special purpose vehicles The manufacturer of the base vehicle shall determine the allowed values for the parameters listed in Table 3. The allowed Parameter Values for each family shall be recorded in the information document of the emissions type approval (see Appendix 3 to Annex I) and in the Transparency list 1 of Appendix 5. The final-stage manufacturer shall only be allowed to use the base vehicle emission values if the completed vehicle remains within the allowed Parameter Values. The parameter values for each final vehicle shall be recorded in its Certificate of Conformity. Table 3 Allowed Parameter Values for multistage and multistage special purpose vehicles to use the base vehicle emission type approval If a completed or multistage special purpose vehicle is tested and the result of the test is below the applicable emission limit, the vehicle shall be considered as a pass for the ISC family for the purposes of point 5.10.3. If the result of the test on a completed or multistage special purpose vehicle exceeds the applicable emission limits but is not higher than 1,3 times the applicable emission limits, the tester shall examine whether that vehicle complies with the values in Table 3. Any non-compliance with these values shall be reported to the granting type approval authority. If the vehicle does not comply with those values, the granting type approval authority shall investigate the reasons for the non-compliance and take the appropriate measures regarding the manufacturer of the completed or multistage special purpose vehicle to restore conformity, including the withdrawal of the type-approval. If the vehicle complies with the values in Table 3, it shall be considered as a flagged vehicle for the in-service conformity family for the purposes of point 6.1. If the result of the test exceeds 1,3 times the applicable emission limits, shall be considered as a fail for the in-service conformity family for the purposes of point 6.1., but not as an outlier for the relevant ISC family. If the completed or multistage special purpose vehicle does not comply with the values in Table 3, this shall be reported to the granting type approval authority, who shall investigate the reasons for the non-compliance and take the appropriate measures regarding the manufacturer of the completed or multistage special purpose vehicle to restore conformity, including the withdrawal of the type-approval. 6. COMPLIANCE ASSESSMENT 7. REMEDIAL MEASURES 8. ANNUAL REPORT BY THE GRANTING TYPE APPROVAL AUTHORITY The granting type approval authority shall make available on a publicly accessible website, free of charge and without the need for the user to reveal their identity or sign up, a report with the results of all the finalised ISC investigations of the previous year, at the latest by the 31 March of each year. In case some ISC investigations of the previous year are still open by that date, they shall be reported as soon as the investigation is finalised. The report shall contain at least the items listed in Appendix 4. Appendix 1 Criteria for vehicle selection and failed vehicles decision The vehicle survey shall be used in order to select properly maintained and used vehicles for testing in ISC. Vehicles that have one or more of the exclusion criteria below shall be excluded from testing or otherwise repaired and then selected. Selection of Vehicles for In-Service Conformity Emissions Testing Appendix 2 Rules for performing type 4 tests during in-service conformity Type 4 tests for in-service conformity shall be performed in accordance with Annex VI (or Annex VI of Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 where applicable), with the following exceptions: Appendix 3 ISC Report The following information shall be included in the detailed ISC report: Appendix 4 Annual ISC Report by the granting type approval authority A. Quick overview and main conclusions B. ISC activities performed by the manufacturer in the previous year: C. ISC activities performed by the other actors in the previous year: D. ISC activities performed by the granting type approval authority in the previous year: E. Assessment of the yearly expected emissions decrease due to any ISC remedial measures F. Lessons Learned (including for performance of instruments used) G. Report of other invalid tests Appendix 5 Transparency Lists Table 1 Transparency List 1 Table 2 Transparency list 2 ( 1 ) Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 1998 relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending Council Directive 93/12/EEC ( OJ L 350, 28.12.1998, p. 58 ). ANNEX III ‘ANNEX IIIA 1. ABBREVIATIONS Abbreviations refer generically to both the singular and the plural forms of abbreviated terms. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.1. For the purposes of this Annex, the following definitions shall apply in terms of generic issues : 2.2. For the purposes of this Annex, the following definitions shall apply in terms of test equipment : Figure 1 Definition of accuracy, precision and reference value Figure 2 Definition of delay, rise, transformation and response times 2.3. For the purposes of this Annex, the following definitions shall apply in terms of vehicle characteristics and driver : 2.4. For the purposes of this Annex, the following definitions shall apply in terms of Calculations 2.5. For the purposes of this Annex, the following definitions shall apply in terms of other items 2.6. For the purposes of this Annex, the following definitions shall apply in terms of Testing Procedure 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 3.1. Compliance requirements For vehicle types approved according to this Annex, the final RDE emission results calculated according to this Annex at any possible RDE test performed in accordance with the requirements of this Annex, shall not be higher than any of the relevant Euro 6 emission limits laid down in Table 2 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007. The manufacturer shall confirm compliance with this Regulation by completing the RDE compliance certificate set out in Appendix 12. The manufacturer may declare compliance with lower emission limits by declaring lower values called “Declared Maximum RDE”, either for NOx or PN or both, in the Manufacturer’s RDE certificate of compliance found in Appendix 12 and the Certificate of Conformity of each vehicle. These Declared Maximum RDE values shall be used for checking the compliance of cars when applicable, including for tests performed during In-service Conformity and Market Surveillance. The RDE performance shall be demonstrated by performing the necessary tests in the PEMS test family on the road operated over their normal driving patterns, conditions and payloads. The necessary tests shall be representative for vehicles operated on their real driving routes, with their normal load. The requirements of emission limits shall be fulfilled for the urban operation and the complete PEMS trip. The RDE tests required by this Annex provide a presumption of conformity. The presumed conformity may be reassessed by additional RDE tests. Verification of compliance shall be made in accordance with the rules of in-service conformity. 3.2. Facilitation of PEMS testing Member States shall ensure that vehicles can be tested with PEMS on public roads in accordance with the procedures under their own national law, while respecting local road traffic legislation and safety requirements. Manufacturers shall ensure that vehicles can be tested with PEMS. This shall include: 3.3. Selection of vehicles for PEMS testing PEMS tests shall not be required for each “ vehicle type with regards to Real Driving Emissions ”. Several vehicle emission types may be put together by the vehicle manufacturer to form a “ PEMS test family ” in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 3.3.1., which shall be validated in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 3.4. Symbols, parameters and units 3.3.1. PEMS test family building A PEMS test family shall comprise finished vehicles of a manufacturer with similar emission characteristics. Vehicle emission types may be included in a PEMS test family only as long as the vehicles within a PEMS test family are identical with respect to the characteristics in all the administrative and technical criteria listed below. 3.3.1.1. Administrative criteria 3.3.1.2. Technical criteria 3.3.1.3. Extension of a PEMS test family An existing PEMS test family may be extended by adding new vehicle emission types to it. The extended PEMS test family and its validation must also fulfil the requirements of paragraphs 3.3. and 3.4. This may require the PEMS testing of additional vehicles to validate the extended PEMS test family according to paragraph 3.4. 3.3.1.4. Alternative PEMS test family definition As an alternative to the provisions of paragraph 3.3.1.1 and 3.3.1.2. the vehicle manufacturer may define a PEMS test family that is identical to a single vehicle emission type or a single WLTP IP-family. In this case, only one vehicle has to be tested from the family in either a hot or a cold test, at the choice of the authority and there is no need to validate the PEMS test family as in paragraph 3.4. 3.4. Validation of a PEMS test family 3.4.1. General requirements for validating a PEMS test family 3.4.2. For each validation, the applicable responsibilities are considered to be borne by the manufacturer of the vehicles in the respective family, regardless of whether this manufacturer was involved in the PEMS test of the specific vehicle emission type. 3.4.3. Selection of vehicles for PEMS testing when validating a PEMS test family When selecting vehicles from a PEMS test family, it shall be ensured that the following technical characteristics relevant for pollutant emissions are covered by a PEMS test. A particular vehicle selected for testing can be representative for different technical characteristics. For the validation of a PEMS test family, vehicles shall be selected for PEMS testing as follows: 3.5. Reporting for type approval 3.6. Rounding requirements: Rounding of data in the data exchange file, defined in Appendix 7, section 10, is not permitted. In the pre-processing file, the data may be rounded to the same order of magnitude of the accuracy of the measurement of a respective parameter. The intermediate and final emission test results, as calculated in Appendix 11, shall be rounded in one step to the number of places to the right of the decimal point indicated by the applicable emission standard plus one additional significant figure. Preceding steps in the calculations shall not be rounded. 4. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTRUMENTATION The instrumentation used for RDE tests shall comply with the requirements in Appendix 5. If requested by the authorities, the tester shall provide proof that the instrumentation used complies with the requirements in Appendix 5. 5. TEST CONDITIONS Only an RDE test fulfilling the requirements of this Section shall be accepted as valid. Tests performed outside the test conditions specified in this Section shall be considered as invalid, unless specified otherwise. 5.1. Ambient conditions The test shall be conducted under the ambient conditions laid down in this section. The ambient conditions become ‘extended’ when at least one of the temperature or altitude conditions is extended. The factor for extended conditions as defined in paragraph 7.5. shall only be applied once even if both conditions are extended in the same time period. Notwithstanding the opening paragraph of this section, if a part of the test or the entire test is performed outside of extended conditions, the test shall be invalid only when final emissions as calculated in Appendix 11, are greater than the applicable emission limits. The conditions are as follows: For type approvals with character EA as in Table 1, Appendix 6 of Annex I: For type approvals with character EB and EC as in Table 1, Appendix 6 of Annex I: 5.2. Dynamic conditions of trip The dynamic conditions encompass the effect of road grade, head wind and driving dynamics (accelerations, decelerations) and auxiliary systems upon energy consumption and emissions of the test vehicle. The validity of the trip for the dynamic conditions shall be checked after the test is completed, using the recorded data. This verification shall be conducted in 2 steps: 5.3. Vehicle condition and operation 5.3.1. Vehicle condition The vehicle, including the emission related components, shall be in good mechanical condition and shall have been run in and driven at least 3 000 km before the test. The mileage and the age of the vehicle used for RDE testing shall be recorded. All vehicles, and in particular OVC-HEVs vehicles may be tested in any selectable mode, including battery charge mode. On the basis of technical evidence provided by the manufacturer and with the agreement of the responsible authority, the dedicated driver-selectable modes for very special limited purposes shall not be considered (e.g. maintenance mode, race driving, crawler mode). All remaining modes used for driving may be considered and the pollutant emissions limits shall be fulfilled in all these modes. Modifications that affect the vehicle aerodynamics are not permitted, with the exception of the PEMS installation. The tyre types and pressure shall be according to the vehicle's manufacturer recommendations. The tyre pressure shall be checked prior to the pre-conditioning and adjusted to the recommended values if needed. Driving the vehicle with snow chains is not permitted. Vehicles should not be tested with an empty starter battery. In case the vehicle has problems starting, the battery shall be replaced following the recommendations of the vehicle's manufacturer. The vehicle's test mass comprises of the driver, a witness of the test (if applicable), the test equipment, including the mounting and the power supply devices and any artificial payload. It shall be between the actual mass of the vehicle and the maximum permissible test mass of the vehicle at the beginning of the test and shall not increase during the test. The test vehicles shall not be driven with the intention to generate a passed or failed test due to extreme driving that do not represent normal conditions of use. If necessary, verification of normal driving may be based on expert judgement made by or on behalf of the granting type approval authority through cross-correlation on several signals, which may include exhaust flow rate, exhaust temperature, CO 2 , O 2 etc. in combination with vehicle speed, acceleration and GNSS data and potentially further vehicle data parameters like engine speed, gear, accelerator pedal position etc. 5.3.2. Vehicle conditioning for cold start PEMS trip Before RDE testing, the vehicle shall be preconditioned in the following way: The vehicle shall be driven on public roads, preferably on the same route as the planned RDE testing or for at least 10 min per type of operation (e.g. urban, rural, motorway) or 30 minutes with a minimum average velocity of 30 km/h. The validation test in the laboratory, as in Appendix 6 of this Annex, also counts as preconditioning. The vehicle shall subsequently be parked with doors and bonnet closed and kept in engine-off status within moderate or extended altitude and temperatures, in accordance with paragraph 5.1., for between 6 and 72 hours. Exposure to extreme atmospheric conditions (such as heavy snowfall, storm, hail) and excessive amounts of dust or smoke should be avoided. Before the test start, the vehicle and equipment shall be checked for damages and the presence of warning signals that may suggest malfunctioning. In the case of a malfunction the source of the malfunctioning shall be identified and corrected or the vehicle shall be rejected. 5.3.3. Auxiliary devices The air conditioning system or other auxiliary devices shall be operated in a way which corresponds to their typically intended use during real driving on the road. Any use shall be documented. The vehicle windows shall be closed when the air conditioning or heating are used. 5.3.4. Vehicles equipped with periodically regenerating systems 5.4. PEMS operational requirements The trip shall be selected in such a way that the testing is uninterrupted and the data continuously recorded to reach the minimum test duration defined in paragraph 6.3. Electrical power shall be supplied to the PEMS by an external power supply unit and not from a source that draws its energy either directly or indirectly from the engine of the test vehicle. The installation of the PEMS equipment shall be done in a way to minimise the influence on the vehicle’s emissions or performance or both to the greatest extent possible. Care should be exercised to minimise the mass of the installed equipment and potential aerodynamic modifications of the test vehicle. During type approval, a validation test in the laboratory shall be performed before running an RDE test according to Appendix 6. For OVC-HEV the test shall be conducted in Charge Sustaining vehicle operation. 5.5. Lubricating oil, fuel and reagent For the test performed during type approval, the fuel used for RDE testing shall be either the reference fuel defined in Annex B3 of the UN Regulation No 154 or within the specifications issued by the manufacturer for vehicle operation by the customer. The reagent (where applicable) and lubricant used shall be within the specifications recommended or issued by the manufacturer. For tests performed during ISC, or Market Surveillance the fuel used for RDE testing may be any fuel legally available in the market ( 7 ) and within the specifications issued by the manufacturer for vehicle operation by the customer. In the case of an RDE test with a failed result, samples of fuel, lubricant and reagent (if applicable) shall be taken and kept for at least 1 year under conditions guaranteeing the integrity of the sample. Once analysed, the samples can be discarded. 6. TEST PROCEDURE 6.1. Types of speed bins Urban speed bin is characterised by vehicle speeds lower than or equal to 60 km/h. Rural speed bin is characterised by vehicle speeds higher than 60 km/h and lower than or equal to 90 km/h. For those vehicles that are equipped with a device permanently limiting vehicle speed to 90 km/h, rural speed bin is characterised by vehicle speed higher than 60 km/h and lower than or equal to 80 km/h. Motorway speed bin is characterised by speeds above 90 km/h. For those vehicles that are equipped with a device permanently limiting vehicle speed to 100 km/h, motorway speed bin is characterised by speed higher than 90 km/h. For those vehicles that are equipped with a device permanently limiting vehicle speed to 90 km/h, motorway speed bin is characterised by speed higher than 80 km/h. 6.1.1. Other requirements The average speed (including stops) of the urban speed bin shall be between 15 and 40 km/h. The speed range of the motorway driving shall properly cover a range between 90 and at least 110 km/h. The vehicle’s velocity shall be above 100 km/h for at least 5 minutes. For those vehicles that are equipped with a device permanently limiting vehicle speed to 100 km/h, the speed range of the motorway speed bin shall properly cover a range between 90 and 100 km/h. The vehicle’s velocity shall be above 90 km/h for at least 5 minutes. For those vehicles that are equipped with a device limiting vehicle speed to 90 km/h, the speed range of the motorway speed bin of shall properly cover a range between 80 and 90 km/h. The vehicle’s velocity shall be above 80 km/h for at least 5 minutes. In the case that the local speed limits for the specific vehicle being tested prevent compliance with the requirements of this paragraph, the requirements of the following paragraph shall apply: The speed range of the motorway driving shall properly cover a range between X – 10 and X km/h. The vehicle’s velocity shall be above x – 10 km/h for at least 5 minutes. Where X = the local speed limit for the tested vehicle. 6.2. Required distance shares of trip speed bins The following is the distribution of the speed bins in an RDE trip that are required for respecting the needs of evaluation: The trip shall consist of approximately 34 % per cent urban, 33 % per cent rural and 33 % per cent motorway speed bins. ‘Approximately’ shall mean the interval of ± 10 per cent points around the stated percentages. The urban speed bin shall however never be less than 29 % of the total trip distance. The shares of urban, rural and motorway speed bins shall be expressed as a percentage of the total trip distance. The minimum distance of each, urban, rural and motorway speed bins shall be 16 km. 6.3. RDE test to be performed The RDE performance shall be demonstrated by testing vehicles on the road, operated over their normal driving patterns, conditions and payloads. RDE tests shall be conducted on paved roads (e.g. off-road operation is not permitted). An RDE trip shall be driven in order to prove compliance with the emission requirements. 6.4. Other trip requirements If the engine stalls during the test, it may be restarted, but the sampling and data recording shall not be interrupted. If the engine stops during the test, the sampling and data recording shall not be interrupted. In general, the exhaust mass flow shall be determined by measurement equipment functioning independently from the vehicle. With agreement of the authority vehicle ECU data may be used in this respect during initial type approval. If the approval authority is not satisfied with the data quality check and validation results of a PEMS test conducted in accordance with Appendix 4, the approval authority may consider the test to be invalid. In such case, the test data and the reasons for invalidating the test shall be recorded by the approval authority. The manufacturer shall demonstrate to the approval authority that the chosen vehicle, driving patterns, conditions and payloads are representative of the PEMS test family. The ambient conditions and payload requirements, as specified in paragraph 5.1. and paragraph 5.3.1. respectively, shall be used ex-ante to determine whether the conditions are acceptable for RDE testing. The approval authority shall propose a test trip in urban, rural and motorway operation meeting the requirements of paragraph 6.2. If applicable, for the purpose of trip design, the urban, rural and motorway parts shall be selected based on a topographic map. If for a vehicle the collection of ECU data influences the vehicle's emissions or performance, the entire PEMS test family to which the vehicle belongs shall be considered as non-compliant. For RDE tests performed during type approval, the type approval authority may verify if the test setup and the equipment used fulfil the requirements of Appendices 4 and 5 through a direct inspection or an analysis of the supporting evidence (e.g. photographs, records). 6.5. Compliance of software tools Any software tool used to verify the trip validity and calculate emissions compliance with the provisions laid down in paragraphs 5 and 6 and Appendices 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 shall be validated by an entity defined by the Member State. Where such software tool is incorporated in the PEMS instrument, proof of the validation shall be provided along with the instrument. 7. TEST DATA ANALYSIS 7.1. Emissions and trip evaluation The test shall be conducted in accordance with Appendix 4. 7.2. The trip validity shall be assessed in a three-step procedure as follows: The steps of the procedure are detailed in Figure 6. If at least one of the requirements is not fulfilled, the trip shall be declared invalid. Figure 6 Assessment of trip validity – schematic (i.e. not all details are included in the steps included in the figure, see the relevant Appendices for such details) 7.3. In order to preserve data integrity, it shall not be permitted to combine data of different RDE trips in a single data set or to modify or remove data from an RDE trip, except for cases mentioned explicitly in this Annex. 7.4. Emission results shall be calculated using the methods laid down in Appendix 7 and Appendix 11. The emissions calculations shall be made between test start and test end. 7.5. The extended factor for this Annex is set at 1.6. If during a particular time interval the ambient conditions are extended, in accordance with paragraph 5.1., then the pollutant emissions calculated according to Appendix 7, during that particular time interval, shall be divided by the extended factor. This provision does not apply to carbon dioxide emissions. 7.6. Gaseous pollutant and particle number emissions during the cold start period, as defined in paragraph 2.6.1., shall be included in the normal evaluation in accordance with Appendices 7 and 11. If the vehicle was conditioned for the last three hours prior to the test at an average temperature that falls within the extended range in accordance with paragraph 5.1., then the provisions of paragraph 7.5. apply to the data collected during the cold start period, even if the test ambient conditions are not within the extended temperature range. 7.7. Data Reporting 7.7.1. General All data of a single RDE test shall be recorded according to the data exchange and data reporting files provided by the Commission ( 8 ) . 7.7.2. Reporting and dissemination of RDE type approval test information ‘Appendix 1 Reserved ‘Appendix 2 Reserved ‘Appendix 3 Reserved ‘Appendix 4 Test procedure for vehicle emissions testing with a portable emissions measurement system (PEMS) Test procedure for vehicle emissions testing with a portable emissions measurement system (PEMS) 1. INTRODUCTION This appendix describes the test procedure to determine pollutant emissions from passenger and light commercial vehicles using a Portable Emissions Measurement System. 2. SYMBOLS, PARAMETERS AND UNITS 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 3.1. PEMS The test shall be carried out with a PEMS, composed of components specified in paragraphs 3.1.1. to 3.1.5. If applicable, a connection with the vehicle ECU may be established to determine relevant engine and vehicle parameters as specified in paragraph 3.2. 3.2. Test parameters Test parameters, as specified in Table A4/1, shall be measured at a constant frequency of 1.0 Hz or higher and recorded and reported in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 10. of Appendix 7 at a sampling frequency of 1.0 Hz. If ECU parameters are obtained, these may be obtained at a substantially higher frequency but the recording rate shall be 1.0 Hz. The PEMS analysers, flow-measuring instruments and sensors shall comply with the requirements laid down in Appendices 5 and 6. Table A4/1 Test parameters 3.4. Installation of PEMS 3.4.1. General The installation of the PEMS shall follow the instructions of the PEMS manufacturer and the local health and safety regulations. When the PEMS is installed inside the vehicle, the vehicle should be equipped with gas monitors or warning systems for hazardous gases (e.g. CO). The PEMS should be installed as to minimise electromagnetic interferences during the test as well as exposure to shocks, vibration, dust and variability in temperature. The installation and operation of the PEMS shall be such that it avoids leakage and minimise heat loss. The installation and operation of PEMS shall not change the nature of the exhaust gas nor unduly increase the length of the tailpipe. To avoid the generation of particles, connectors shall be thermally stable at the exhaust gas temperatures expected during the test. It is recommended to avoid the use elastomer connectors to connect the vehicle exhaust outlet and the connecting tube. Elastomer connectors, if used, shall have no contact with the exhaust gas to avoid artefacts. If the test performed with the use of elastomer connectors fails, the test shall be repeated without the use of elastomer connectors. 3.4.2. Permissible backpressure The installation and operation of the PEMS sampling probes shall not unduly increase the pressure at the exhaust outlet in a way that may influence the representativeness of the measurements. It is thus recommended that only one sampling probe is installed in the same plane. If technically feasible, any extension to facilitate the sampling or connection with the exhaust mass flow meter shall have an equivalent, or larger, cross sectional area than the exhaust pipe. 3.4.3. Exhaust mass flow meter Whenever used, the exhaust mass flow meter shall be attached to the vehicle’s tailpipe(s) in accordance with the recommendations of the EFM manufacturer. The measurement range of the EFM shall match the range of the exhaust mass flow rate expected during the test. It is recommended to select the EFM so that the maximum expected flow rate during the test reaches at least 75 per cent of the EFM full range but does not exceed the EFM full range. The installation of the EFM and any exhaust pipe adaptors or junctions shall not adversely affect the operation of the engine or exhaust after-treatment system. A minimum of four pipe diameters or 150 mm of straight tubing, whichever is larger, shall be placed at either side of the flow-sensing element. When testing a multi-cylinder engine with a branched exhaust manifold, it is recommended to position the exhaust mass flow meter downstream of where the manifolds combine and to increase the cross section of the piping such as to have an equivalent, or larger, cross sectional area from which to sample. If this is not feasible, exhaust flow measurements with several exhaust mass flow meters may be used. The wide variety of exhaust pipe configurations, dimensions and exhaust mass flow rates may require compromises, guided by good engineering judgement, when selecting and installing the EFM(s). It is permissible to install an EFM with a diameter smaller than that of the exhaust outlet or the total cross-sectional area of multiple outlets, providing it improves measurement accuracy and does not adversely affect the operation or the exhaust after-treatment as specified in paragraph 3.4.2. It is recommended to document the EFM set-up using photographs. 3.4.4. Global Positioning System (GNSS) The GNSS antenna shall be mounted as near as possible to the highest location on the vehicle, so as to ensure good reception of the satellite signal. The mounted GNSS antenna shall interfere as little as possible with the vehicle operation. 3.4.5. Connection with the Engine Control Unit (ECU) If desired, relevant vehicle and engine parameters listed in Table A4/1 can be recorded by using a data logger connected with the ECU or the vehicle network through national or international standards, such as ISO 15031-5 or SAE J1979, OBD-II, EOBD or WWH-OBD. If applicable, manufacturers shall disclose labels to allow the identification of required parameters. 3.4.6. Sensors and auxiliary devices Vehicle speed sensors, temperature sensors, coolant thermocouples or any other measurement device not part of the vehicle shall be installed to measure the parameter under consideration in a representative, reliable and accurate manner without unduly interfering with the vehicle operation and the functioning of other analysers, flow-measuring instruments, sensors and signals. Sensors and auxiliary equipment shall be powered independently of the vehicle. It is permitted to power any safety-related illumination of fixtures and installations of PEMS components outside of the vehicle’s cabin by the vehicle’s battery. 3.5. Emissions sampling Emissions sampling shall be representative and conducted at locations of well-mixed exhaust, where the influence of ambient air downstream of the sampling point is minimal. If applicable, emissions shall be sampled downstream of the exhaust mass flow meter, respecting a distance of at least 150 mm to the flow sensing element. The sampling probes shall be fitted at least 200 mm or three times the inner diameter of the exhaust pipe, whichever is larger, upstream of the point at which the exhaust gas exits the PEMS sampling installation into the environment. If the PEMS feeds part of the sample back to the exhaust flow, this shall occur downstream of the sampling probe in a manner that does not affect the nature of the exhaust gas at the sampling point(s). If the length of the sampling line is changed, the system transport times shall be verified and, if necessary, corrected. If the vehicle is equipped with more than one tailpipe then all functioning tailpipes shall be connected before sampling and measuring exhaust flow. If the engine is equipped with an exhaust after-treatment system, the exhaust sample shall be taken downstream of the exhaust after-treatment system. When testing a vehicle with a branched exhaust manifold, the inlet of the sampling probe shall be located sufficiently far downstream so as to ensure that the sample is representative of the average pollutant emissions of all cylinders. In multi-cylinder engines, having distinct groups of manifolds, such as in a ‘V’ engine configuration, the sampling probe shall be positioned downstream of where the manifolds combine. If this is technically not feasible, multi-point sampling at locations of well-mixed exhaust may be used. In this case, the number and location of sampling probes shall match as far as possible those of the exhaust mass flow meters. In case of unequal exhaust flows, proportional sampling or sampling with multiple analysers shall be considered. If particles are measured, they shall be sampled from the centre of the exhaust stream. If several probes are used for emissions sampling, the particle sampling probe should be placed upstream of the other sampling probes. The particle sampling probe should not interfere with the sampling of gaseous pollutants. The type and specifications of the probe and its mounting shall be documented in detail (e.g. L type or 45° cut, internal diameter, with or without hat, etc). If hydrocarbons are measured, the sampling line shall be heated to 463 ± 10 K (190 ± 10 °C). For the measurement of other gaseous components, with or without cooler, the sampling line shall be kept at a minimum of 333 K (60 °C) to avoid condensation and to ensure appropriate penetration efficiencies of the various gases. For low pressure sampling systems, the temperature can be lowered correspondingly to the pressure decrease provided that the sampling system ensures a penetration efficiency of 95 per cent for all regulated gaseous pollutants. If particles are sampled and not diluted at the tailpipe, the sampling line from the raw exhaust sample point to the point of dilution or particle detector shall be heated to a minimum of 373 K (100 °C). The residence time of the sample in the particle sampling line shall be less than 3 s until reaching first dilution or the particle detector. All parts of the sampling system from the tailpipe up to the particle detector, which are in contact with raw or diluted exhaust gas, shall be designed to minimize deposition of particles. All parts shall be made from antistatic material to prevent electrostatic effects. 4. PRE-TEST PROCEDURES 4.1. PEMS leak check After the installation of the PEMS is completed, a leak check shall be performed at least once for each PEMS-vehicle installation as prescribed by the PEMS manufacturer or as follows. The probe shall be disconnected from the exhaust system and the end plugged. The analyser pump shall be switched on. After an initial stabilization period, all flow meters shall read approximately zero in the absence of a leak. If this is not the case the sampling lines shall be checked and the fault shall be corrected. The leakage rate on the vacuum side shall not exceed 0.5 per cent of the in-use flow rate for the portion of the system being checked. The analyser flows and bypass flows may be used to estimate the in-use flow rate. Alternatively, the system may be evacuated to a pressure of at least 20 kPa vacuum (80 kPa absolute). After an initial stabilization period the pressure increase Δ p (kPa/min) in the system shall not exceed: where: Alternatively, a concentration step change at the beginning of the sampling line shall be introduced by switching from zero to span gas while maintaining the same pressure conditions as under normal system operation. If for a correctly calibrated analyser after an adequate period of time the reading is ≤ 99 per cent compared to the introduced concentration, the leakage problem shall be corrected. 4.2. Starting and stabilizing the PEMS The PEMS shall be switched on, warmed up and stabilized in accordance with the specifications of the PEMS manufacturer until key functional parameters (e.g., pressures, temperatures and flows) have reached their operating set points before test start. To ensure correct functioning, the PEMS may be kept switched on or can be warmed up and stabilized during vehicle conditioning. The system shall be free of errors and critical warnings. 4.3. Preparing the sampling system The sampling system, consisting of the sampling probe and sampling lines shall be prepared for testing by following the instruction of the PEMS manufacturer. It shall be ensured that the sampling system is clean and free of moisture condensation. 4.4. Preparing the Exhaust mass Flow Meter (EFM) If used for measuring the exhaust mass flow, the EFM shall be purged and prepared for operation in accordance with the specifications of the EFM manufacturer. This procedure shall, if applicable, remove condensation and deposits from the lines and the associated measurement ports. 4.5. Checking and calibrating the analysers for measuring gaseous emissions Zero and span calibration adjustments of the analysers shall be performed using calibration gases that meet the requirements of paragraph 5. of Appendix 5. The calibration gases shall be chosen to match the range of pollutant concentrations expected during the RDE test. To minimise analyser drift, it is recommended to conduct the zero and span calibration of analysers at an ambient temperature that resembles, as closely as possible, the temperature experienced by the test equipment during the trip. 4.6. Checking the analyser for measuring particle emissions The zero level of the analyser shall be recorded by sampling HEPA filtered ambient air at an appropriate sampling point, ideally at the inlet of the sampling line. The signal shall be recorded at a constant frequency which is a multiple of 1.0 Hz averaged over a period of 2 minutes. The final concentration shall be within the manufacturer’s specifications, but shall not exceed 5,000 particles per cubic-centimetre. 4.7. Determining vehicle speed Vehicle speed shall be determined by at least one of the following methods: 4.8. Check of PEMS set up The correctness of connections with all sensors and, if applicable, the ECU shall be verified. If engine parameters are retrieved, it shall be ensured that the ECU reports values correctly (e.g., zero engine speed [rpm] while the combustion engine is in key-on-engine-off status). The PEMS shall function free of errors and critical warnings. 5. EMISSIONS TEST 5.1. Test start Sampling, measurement and recording of parameters shall begin prior to the test start (as defined in point 2.6.5. of this Annex). Before the test start it shall be confirmed that all necessary parameters are recorded by the data logger. To facilitate time alignment, it is recommended to record the parameters that are subject to time alignment either by a single data recording device or with a synchronised time stamp. 5.2. Test Sampling, measurement and recording of parameters shall continue throughout the on-road test of the vehicle. The engine may be stopped and started, but emissions sampling and parameter recording shall continue. Repeated stalling of the engine (i.e. unintentional stopping of the engine) should be avoided during an RDE trip. Any warning signals, suggesting malfunctioning of the PEMS, shall be documented and verified. If any error signal(s) appear during the test, the test shall be invalid. Parameter recording shall reach a data completeness of higher than 99 per cent. Measurement and data recording may be interrupted for less than 1 per cent of the total trip duration but for no more than a consecutive period of 30 s solely in the case of unintended signal loss or for the purpose of PEMS system maintenance. Interruptions may be recorded directly by the PEMS but it is not permissible to introduce interruptions in the recorded parameter via the pre-processing, exchange or post-processing of data. If conducted, auto zeroing shall be performed against a traceable zero standard similar to the one used to zero the analyser. It is strongly recommended to initiate PEMS system maintenance during periods of zero vehicle speed. 5.3. Test end Excessive idling of the engine after the completion of the trip shall be avoided. The data recording shall continue after the test end (as defined in paragraph 2.6.6. of this Annex) and until the response time of the sampling systems has elapsed. For vehicles with a signal detecting regeneration, the OBD-check shall be performed and documented directly after data recording and before any further driven distance is driven. 6. POST-TEST PROCEDURE 6.1. Checking the analysers for measuring gaseous emissions The zero and span of the analysers of gaseous components shall be checked by using calibration gases identical to the ones applied under paragraph 4.5. to evaluate the analyser's zero and response drift compared to the pre-test calibration. It is permissible to zero the analyser prior to verifying the span drift, if the zero drift was determined to be within the permissible range. The post-test drift check shall be completed as soon as possible after the test and before the PEMS, or individual analysers or sensors, are turned off or have switched into a non-operating mode. The difference between the pre-test and post-test results shall comply with the requirements specified in Table A4/2. Table A4/2 Permissible analyser drift over a PEMS test If the difference between the pre-test and post-test results for the zero and span drift is higher than permitted, all test results shall be invalid and the test repeated. 6.2. Checking the analyser for measuring particle emissions The zero level of the analyser shall be recorded in accordance with paragraph 4.6. 6.3. Checking the on-road emission measurements The span gas concentration that was used for the calibration of the analysers in accordance with paragraph 4.5. at the test start shall cover at least 90 per cent of the concentration values obtained from 99 per cent of the measurements of the valid parts of the emissions test. It is permissible that 1 per cent of the total number of measurements used for evaluation exceeds the concentration of the span gas used by up to a factor of two. If these requirements are not met, the test shall be invalid. 6.4. Consistency check of vehicle altitude In case altitude has only been measured with a GNSS, the GNSS altitude data shall be checked for consistency and, if necessary, corrected. The consistency of data shall be checked by comparing the latitude, longitude and altitude data obtained from the GNSS with the altitude indicated by a digital terrain model or a topographic map of suitable scale. Measurements that deviate by more than 40 m from the altitude depicted in the topographic map shall be manually corrected. The original and uncorrected data shall be retained and any corrected data shall be marked. The instantaneous altitude data shall be checked for completeness. Data gaps shall be completed by data interpolation. The correctness of interpolated data shall be verified by a topographic map. It is recommended to correct interpolated data if the following condition applies: The altitude correction shall be applied so that: where: 6.5. Consistency check of GNSS vehicle speed The vehicle speed as determined by the GNSS shall be checked for consistency by calculating and comparing the total trip distance with reference measurements obtained from either a sensor, the validated ECU or, alternatively, from a digital road network or topographic map. It is mandatory to correct GNSS data for obvious errors, e.g., by applying a dead reckoning sensor, prior to the consistency check. The original and uncorrected data shall be retained and any corrected data shall be marked. The corrected data shall not exceed an uninterrupted time period of 120 s or a total of 300 s. The total trip distance as calculated from the corrected GNSS data shall deviate by no more than 4 per cent from the reference. If the GNSS data do not meet these requirements and no other reliable speed source is available, the test shall be invalid. 6.6. Consistency check of the ambient temperature The ambient temperature data shall be checked for consistency and inconsistent values corrected by substituting outliers with the average of the neighbouring values. The original and uncorrected data shall be retained and any corrected data shall be marked. ‘Appendix 5 Specifications and calibration of PEMS components and signals 1. INTRODUCTION This appendix sets out the specifications and calibration of PEMS components and signals 2. SYMBOLS, PARAMETERS AND UNITS 3. LINEARITY VERIFICATION 3.1. General The accuracy and linearity of analysers, flow-measuring instruments, sensors and signals shall be traceable to international or national standards. Any sensors or signals that are not directly traceable (e.g., simplified flow-measuring instruments) shall be calibrated alternatively against chassis dynamometer laboratory equipment that has been calibrated against international or national standards. 3.2. Linearity requirements All analysers, flow-measuring instruments, sensors and signals shall comply with the linearity requirements given in Table A5/1. If air flow, fuel flow, the air-to-fuel ratio or the exhaust mass flow rate is obtained from the ECU, the calculated exhaust mass flow rate shall meet the linearity requirements specified in Table A5/1. Table A5/1 Linearity requirements of measurement parameters and systems 3.3. Frequency of linearity verification The linearity requirements pursuant to paragraph 3.2. shall be verified: The linearity requirements pursuant to paragraph 3.2. for sensors or ECU signals that are not directly traceable shall be performed using a measurement device with a traceable calibration on the chassis dynamometer, once for each PEMS-vehicle setup. 3.4. Procedure of linearity verification 3.4.1. General requirements The relevant analysers, instruments and sensors shall be brought to their normal operating condition according to the recommendations of their manufacturer. The analysers, instruments and sensors shall be operated at their specified temperatures, pressures and flows. 3.4.2. General procedure The linearity shall be verified for each normal operating range by executing the following steps: 3.4.3. Requirements for linearity verification on a chassis dynamometer Non-traceable flow-measuring instruments, sensors or ECU signals, that cannot directly be calibrated according to traceable standards, shall be calibrated on a chassis dynamometer. The procedure shall follow, as far as applicable, the requirements of UN Regulation No 154. If necessary, the instrument or sensor to be calibrated shall be installed on the test vehicle and operated according to the requirements of Appendix 4. The calibration procedure shall follow whenever possible the requirements of paragraph 3.4.2. At least 10 appropriate reference values shall be selected as to ensure that at least 90 per cent of the maximum value expected to occur during the RDE test is covered. If a non-traceable flow-measuring instrument, sensor or ECU signal for determining exhaust flow is to be calibrated, a reference exhaust mass flow meter with traceable calibration or the CVS shall be attached to the vehicle’s tailpipe. It shall be ensured that the vehicle exhaust is accurately measured by the exhaust mass flow meter according to paragraph 3.4.3. of Appendix 4. The vehicle shall be operated by applying constant throttle at a constant gear selection and chassis dynamometer load. 4. ANALYSERS FOR MEASURING GASEOUS COMPONENTS 4.1. Permissible types of analysers 4.1.1. Standard analysers The gaseous components shall be measured with analysers specified in paragraph 4.1.4., Annex B5 to UN Regulation No 154. If an NDUV analyser measures both NO and NO 2 , a NO 2 /NO converter is not required. 4.1.2. Alternative analysers Any analyser not meeting the design specifications of paragraph 4.1.1. is permissible provided that it fulfils the requirements of paragraph 4.2. The manufacturer shall ensure that the alternative analyser achieves an equivalent or higher measurement performance compared to a standard analyser over the range of pollutant concentrations and co-existing gases that can be expected from vehicles operated with permissible fuels under moderate and extended conditions of valid RDE testing as specified in paragraphs 5., 6. and 7. of this Appendix. Upon request, the manufacturer of the analyser shall submit in writing supplemental information, demonstrating that the measurement performance of the alternative analyser is consistently and reliably in line with the measurement performance of standard analysers. Supplemental information shall contain: Approval authorities may request additional information to substantiate equivalency or refuse approval if measurements demonstrate that an alternative analyser is not equivalent to a standard analyser. 4.2. Analyser specifications 4.2.1. General In addition to the linearity requirements defined for each analyser in paragraph 3., the compliance of analyser types with the specifications laid down in paragraphs 4.2.2. to 4.2.8. shall be demonstrated by the analyser manufacturer. Analysers shall have a measuring range and response time appropriate to measure with adequate accuracy the concentrations of the exhaust gas components at the applicable emissions standard under transient and steady state conditions. The sensitivity of the analysers to shocks, vibration, aging, variability in temperature and air pressure as well as electromagnetic interferences and other impacts related to vehicle and analyser operation shall be limited as far as possible. 4.2.2. Accuracy The accuracy, defined as the deviation of the analyser reading from the reference value, shall not exceed 2 per cent of reading or 0.3 per cent of full scale, whichever is larger. 4.2.3. Precision The precision, defined as 2.5 times the standard deviation of 10 repetitive responses to a given calibration or span gas, shall be no greater than 1 per cent of the full scale concentration for a measurement range equal or above 155 ppm (or ppmC 1 ) and 2 per cent of the full scale concentration for a measurement range of below 155 ppm (or ppmC 1 ). 4.2.4. Noise The noise shall not exceed 2 per cent of full scale. Each of the 10 measurement periods shall be interspersed with an interval of 30 seconds in which the analyser is exposed to an appropriate span gas. Before each sampling period and before each span period, sufficient time shall be given to purge the analyser and the sampling lines. 4.2.5. Zero response drift The drift of the zero response, defined as the mean response to a zero gas during a time interval of at least 30 seconds, shall comply with the specifications given in Table A5/2. 4.2.6. Span response drift The drift of the span response, defined as the mean response to a span gas during a time interval of at least 30 seconds, shall comply with the specifications given in Table A5/2. Table A5/2 Permissible zero and span response drift of analysers for measuring gaseous components under laboratory conditions 4.2.7. Rise time The rise time, defined as the time between the 10 per cent and 90 per cent response of the final reading ( t 10 to t 90 ; see paragraph 4.4.), shall not exceed 3 seconds. 4.2.8. Gas drying Exhaust gases may be measured wet or dry. A gas-drying device, if used, shall have a minimal effect on the composition of the measured gases. Chemical dryers are not permitted. 4.3. Additional requirements 4.3.1. General The provisions in paragraphs 4.3.2. to 4.3.5. define additional performance requirements for specific analyser types and apply only to cases in which the analyser under consideration is used for RDE emission measurements. 4.3.2. Efficiency test for NO X converters If a NO X converter is applied, for example to convert NO 2 into NO for analysis with a chemiluminescence analyser, its efficiency shall be tested by following the requirements in paragraph 5.5. of Annex B5 to UN Regulation No 154. The efficiency of the NO X converter shall be verified no longer than one month before the emissions test. 4.3.3. Adjustment of the Flame Ionisation Detector (FID) 4.3.4. Conversion efficiency of the non-methane cutter (NMC) If hydrocarbons are analysed, a NMC can be used to remove non-methane hydrocarbons from the gas sample by oxidizing all hydrocarbons except methane. Ideally, the conversion for methane is 0 per cent and for the other hydrocarbons, represented by ethane, is 100 per cent. For the accurate measurement of NMHC, the two efficiencies shall be determined and used for the calculation of the NMHC emissions (see paragraph 6.2. of Appendix 7). It is not necessary to determine the methane conversion efficiency in the case where the NMC-FID is calibrated according to method (b) in paragraph 6.2. of Appendix 7 by passing the methane/air calibration gas through the NMC. 4.3.5. Interference effects 4.4. Response time check of the analytical system For the response time check, the settings of the analytical system shall be exactly the same as during the emissions test (i.e. pressure, flow rates, filter settings in the analysers and all other parameters influencing the response time). The response time shall be determined with gas switching directly at the inlet of the sample probe. The gas switching shall be done in less than 0.1 second. The gases used for the test shall cause a concentration change of at least 60 per cent full scale of the analyser. The concentration trace of each single gas component shall be recorded. For time alignment of the analyser and exhaust flow signals, the transformation time is defined as the time from the change ( t 0 ) until the response is 50 per cent of the final reading ( t 50 ). The system response time shall be ≤ 12 s with a rise time of ≤ 3 seconds for all components and all ranges used. When using a NMC for the measurement of NMHC, the system response time may exceed 12 seconds. 5. GASES 5.1. Calibration and span gases for RDE tests 5.1.1. General The shelf life of calibration and span gases shall be respected. Pure as well as mixed calibration and span gases shall fulfil the specifications of Annex B5 of UN Regulation No 154. 5.1.2. NO 2 calibration gas In addition, NO 2 calibration gas is permissible. The concentration of the NO 2 calibration gas shall be within two per cent of the declared concentration value. The amount of NO contained in the NO 2 calibration gas shall not exceed 5 per cent of the NO 2 content. 5.1.3. Multicomponent mixtures Only multicomponent mixtures which fulfil the requirements of paragraph 5.1.1. shall be used. These mixtures may contain two or more of the components. Multicomponent mixtures containing both NO and NO 2 are exempted of the NO 2 impurity requirement set out in paragraphs 5.1.1. and 5.1.2. 5.2. Gas dividers Gas dividers (i.e., precision blending devices that dilute with purified N 2 or synthetic air) can be used to obtain calibration and span gases. The accuracy of the gas divider shall be such that the concentration of the blended calibration gases is accurate to within ± 2 per cent. The verification shall be performed at between 15 and 50 per cent of full scale for each calibration incorporating a gas divider. An additional verification may be performed using another calibration gas, if the first verification has failed. Optionally, the gas divider may be checked with an instrument which by nature is linear, e.g. using NO gas in combination with a CLD. The span value of the instrument shall be adjusted with the span gas directly connected to the instrument. The gas divider shall be checked at the settings typically used and the nominal value shall be compared with the concentration measured by the instrument. The difference shall in each point be within ±1 per cent of the nominal concentration value. 5.3. Oxygen interference check gases Oxygen interference check gases consist of a blend of propane, oxygen and nitrogen and shall contain propane at a concentration of 350 ± 75 ppmC 1 . The concentration shall be determined by gravimetric methods, dynamic blending or the chromatographic analysis of total hydrocarbons plus impurities. The oxygen concentrations of the oxygen interference check gases shall meet the requirements listed in Table A5/3; the remainder of the oxygen interference check gas shall consist of purified nitrogen. Table A5/3 Oxygen interference check gases 6. ANALYSERS FOR MEASURING (SOLID) PARTICLE EMISSIONS This section will define future requirement for analysers for measuring particle number emissions, once their measurement becomes mandatory. 6.1. General The PN analyser shall consist of a pre-conditioning unit and a particle detector that counts with 50 per cent efficiency from approximately 23 nm. It is permissible that the particle detector also pre-conditions the aerosol. The sensitivity of the analysers to shocks, vibration, aging, variability in temperature and air pressure as well as electromagnetic interferences and other impacts related to vehicle and analyser operation shall be limited as far as possible and shall be clearly stated by the equipment manufacturer in its support material. The PN analyser shall only be used within its manufacturer’s declared parameters of operation. An example of a PN analyser setup is provided in Figure A5/1. Figure A5/1 Example of a PN analyser setup: Dotted lines depict optional parts. EFM = Exhaust mass Flow Meter, d = inner diameter, PND = Particle Number Diluter The PN analyser shall be connected to the sampling point via a sampling probe which extracts a sample from the centreline of the tailpipe tube. As specified in paragraph 3.5. of Appendix 4, if particles are not diluted at the tailpipe, the sampling line shall be heated to a minimum temperature of 373 K (100 °C) until the point of first dilution of the PN analyser or the particle detector of the analyser. The residence time in the sampling line shall be less than 3 s. All parts in contact with the sampled exhaust gas shall be always kept at a temperature that avoids condensation of any compound in the device. This can be achieved for example by heating at a higher temperature and diluting the sample or oxidizing the (semi)volatile species. The PN analyser shall include a heated section at wall temperature ≥ 573 K. The unit shall control the heated stages to constant nominal operating temperatures, within a tolerance of ± 10 K, and provide an indication of whether or not heated stages are at their correct operating temperatures. Lower temperatures are acceptable as long as the volatile particle removal efficiency fulfils the specifications of paragraph 6.4. Pressure, temperature and other sensors shall monitor the proper operation of the instrument during operation and trigger a warning or message in case of malfunction. The delay time of the PN analyser shall be ≤ 5 s. The PN analyser (and/or particle detector) shall have a rise time of ≤ 3.5 s. Particle concentration measurements shall be reported normalised to 273 K and 101.3 kPa. If necessary, the pressure and/or temperature at the inlet of the detector shall be measured and reported for the purposes of normalizing the particle concentration. PN systems that comply with the calibration requirements of UN Regulation No 154 automatically comply with the calibration requirements of this appendix. 6.2. Efficiency requirements The complete PN analyser system including the sampling line shall fulfil the efficiency requirements of Table A5/3a. Table A5/3a PN analyser (including the sampling line) system efficiency requirements Efficiency E(d p ) is defined as the ratio in the readings of the PN analyser system to a reference Condensation Particle Counter (CPC)’s (d 50 % = 10 nm or lower, checked for linearity and calibrated with an electrometer) or an Electrometer’s number concentration measuring in parallel monodisperse aerosol of mobility diameter d p and normalized at the same temperature and pressure conditions. The material should be thermally stable soot-like (e.g. spark discharged graphite or diffusion flame soot with thermal pre-treatment). If the efficiency curve is measured with a different aerosol (e.g. NaCl), the correlation to the soot-like curve must be provided as a chart which compares the efficiencies obtained using both test aerosols. The differences in the counting efficiencies shall be taken into account by adjusting the measured efficiencies based on the provided chart to give soot-like aerosol efficiencies. The correction for multiply charged particles shall be applied and documented but shall not exceed 10 %. These efficiencies refer to the PN analysers with the sampling line. The PN analyser can also be calibrated in parts (i.e. the pre-conditioning unit separately from the particle detector) as long as it is proven that the PN analyser and the sampling line together fulfil the requirements of Table A5/3a. The measured signal from the detector shall be > 2 times the limit of detection (here defined as the zero level plus 3 standard deviations). 6.3. Linearity requirements The PN analyser including the sampling line shall fulfil the linearity requirements of paragraph 3.2. of Appendix 5 using monodisperse or polydisperse soot-like particles. The particle size (mobility diameter or count median diameter) shall be larger than 45 nm. The reference instrument shall be an Electrometer or a Condensation Particle Counter (CPC) with d 50 = 10 nm or lower, verified for linearity. Alternatively, a particle number system compliant with UN Regulation No 154. In addition, the differences of the PN analyser from the reference instrument at all points checked (except the zero point) shall be within 15 % of their mean value. At least 5 points equally distributed (plus the zero) shall be checked. The maximum checked concentration shall be >90 % of the PN analyser nominal measurement range. If the PN analyser is calibrated in parts, then the linearity can be checked only for the PN detector, but the efficiencies of the rest parts and the sampling line shall be considered in the slope calculation. 6.4. Volatile removal efficiency The system shall achieve > 99 % removal of ≥ 30 nm tetracontane (CH 3 (CH 2 ) 38 CH 3 ) particles with an inlet concentration of ≥ 10000 particles per cubic-centimetre at the minimum dilution. The system shall also achieve a > 99 % removal efficiency of tetracontane with count median diameter > 50 nm and mass > 1 mg/m 3 . The volatile removal efficiency with tetracontane shall be proven only once for the instrument family. The instrument manufacturer though shall provide the maintenance or replacement interval that ensures that the removal efficiency does not drop below the technical requirements. If such information is not provided, the volatile removal efficiency shall be checked yearly for each instrument. 7. INSTRUMENTS FOR MEASURING EXHAUST MASS FLOW 7.1. General Instruments or signals for measuring the exhaust mass flow rate shall have a measuring range and response time appropriate for the accuracy required to measure the exhaust mass flow rate under transient and steady state conditions. The sensitivity of instruments and signals to shocks, vibration, aging, variability in temperature, ambient air pressure, electromagnetic interferences and other impacts related to vehicle and instrument operation shall be on a level as to eliminate additional errors. 7.2. Instrument specifications The exhaust mass flow rate shall be determined by a direct measurement method applied in either of the following instruments: Each individual exhaust mass flow meter shall fulfil the linearity requirements set out in paragraph 3. Furthermore, the instrument manufacturer shall demonstrate the compliance of each type of exhaust mass flow meter with the specifications in paragraphs 7.2.3. to 7.2.9. It is permissible to calculate the exhaust mass flow rate based on air flow and fuel flow measurements obtained from sensors with traceable calibration if these fulfil the linearity requirements of paragraph 3., the accuracy requirements of paragraph 8. and if the resulting exhaust mass flow rate is validated according to paragraph 4. of Appendix 6. In addition, other methods that determine the exhaust mass flow rate based on non-traceable instruments and signals, such as simplified exhaust mass flow meters or ECU signals, are permissible if the resulting exhaust mass flow rate fulfils the linearity requirements of paragraph 3. and is validated according to paragraph 4. of Appendix 6. 7.2.1. Calibration and verification standards The measurement performance of exhaust mass flow meters shall be verified with air or exhaust gas against a traceable standard such as a calibrated exhaust mass flow meter or a full flow dilution tunnel. 7.2.2. Frequency of verification The compliance of exhaust mass flow meters with paragraphs 7.2.3. to 7.2.9. shall be verified no longer than one year before the actual test. 7.2.3. Accuracy The accuracy of the EFM, defined as the deviation of the EFM reading from the reference flow value, shall not exceed ± 3 percent of the reading, or 0.3 % of full scale, whichever is larger. 7.2.4. Precision The precision, defined as 2.5 times the standard deviation of 10 repetitive responses to a given nominal flow, approximately in the middle of the calibration range, shall not exceed 1 per cent of the maximum flow at which the EFM has been calibrated. 7.2.5. Noise The noise shall not exceed 2 per cent of the maximum calibrated flow value. Each of the 10 measurement periods shall be interspersed with an interval of 30 seconds in which the EFM is exposed to the maximum calibrated flow. 7.2.6. Zero response drift The zero response drift is defined as the mean response to zero flow during a time interval of at least 30 seconds. The zero response drift can be verified based on the reported primary signals, e.g., pressure. The drift of the primary signals over a period of 4 hours shall be less than ±2 per cent of the maximum value of the primary signal recorded at the flow at which the EFM was calibrated. 7.2.7. Span response drift The span response drift is defined as the mean response to a span flow during a time interval of at least 30 seconds. The span response drift can be verified based on the reported primary signals, e.g., pressure. The drift of the primary signals over a period of 4 hours shall be less than ± 2 per cent of the maximum value of the primary signal recorded at the flow at which the EFM was calibrated. 7.2.8. Rise time The rise time of the exhaust flow instruments and methods should match as far as possible the rise time of the gas analysers as specified in paragraph 4.2.7. but shall not exceed 1 second. 7.2.9. Response time check The response time of exhaust mass flow meters shall be determined by applying similar parameters as those applied for the emissions test (i.e., pressure, flow rates, filter settings and all other response time influences). The response time determination shall be done with gas switching directly at the inlet of the exhaust mass flow meter. The gas flow switching shall be done as fast as possible, but in less than 0.1 second is highly recommended. The gas flow rate used for the test shall cause a flow rate change of at least 60 per cent full scale of the exhaust mass flow meter. The gas flow shall be recorded. The delay time is defined as the time from the gas flow switching ( t 0 ) until the response is 10 per cent ( t 10 ) of the final reading. The rise time is defined as the time between 10 per cent and 90 per cent response ( t 10 to t 90 ) of the final reading. The response time ( t 90 ) is defined as the sum of the delay time and the rise time. The exhaust mass flow meter response time ( t 90 ) shall be ≤ 3 seconds with a rise time ( t 10 to t 90 ) of ≤ 1 second in accordance with paragraph 7.2.8. 8. SENSORS AND AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT Any sensor or auxiliary equipment used to determine temperature, atmospheric pressure, ambient humidity, vehicle speed, fuel flow or intake air flow, for example, shall not alter or unduly affect the performance of the vehicle’s engine and exhaust after-treatment system. The accuracy of sensors and auxiliary equipment shall fulfil the requirements of Table A5/4. Compliance with the requirements of Table A5/4 shall be demonstrated at intervals specified by the instrument manufacturer, as required by internal audit procedures or in accordance with ISO 9000. Table A5/4 Accuracy requirements for measurement parameters ‘Appendix 6 Validation of PEMS and non-traceable exhaust mass flow rate 1. INTRODUCTION This appendix describes the requirements to validate under transient conditions the functionality of the installed PEMS as well as the correctness of the exhaust mass flow rate obtained from non-traceable exhaust mass flow meters or calculated from ECU signals. 2. SYMBOLS, PARAMETERS AND UNITS 3. VALIDATION PROCEDURE FOR PEMS 3.1. Frequency of PEMS validation It is recommended to validate the correct installation of a PEMS on a vehicle via comparison with laboratory installed equipment on a test performed on a chassis dynamometer either before the RDE test or, alternatively, after the completion of the test. For tests performed during type approval, the validation test is required. 3.2. PEMS validation procedure 3.2.1. PEMS installation The PEMS shall be installed and prepared according to the requirements of Appendix 4. The PEMS installation shall be kept unchanged in the time period between the validation and the RDE test. 3.2.2. Test conditions The validation test shall be conducted on a chassis dynamometer, as far as possible, under type approval conditions by following the requirements of UN Regulation No 154. It is recommended to feed the exhaust flow extracted by the PEMS during the validation test back to the CVS. If this is not feasible, the CVS results shall be corrected for the extracted exhaust mass. If the exhaust mass flow rate is validated with an exhaust mass flow meter, it is recommended to cross-check the mass flow rate measurements with data obtained from a sensor or the ECU. 3.2.3. Data analysis The total distance-specific emissions [g/km] measured with laboratory equipment shall be calculated in accordance with UN Regulation No 154. The emissions as measured with the PEMS shall be calculated according to Appendix 7, summed to give the total mass of pollutants [g] and then divided by the test distance [km] as obtained from the chassis dynamometer. The total distance-specific mass of pollutants [g/km], as determined by the PEMS and the reference laboratory system, shall be evaluated against the requirements specified in paragraph 3.3. For the validation of NO X emission measurements, humidity correction shall be applied in accordance with UN Regulation No 154. 3.3. Permissible tolerances for PEMS validation The PEMS validation results shall fulfil the requirements given in Table A6/1. If any permissible tolerance is not met, corrective action shall be taken and the PEMS validation shall be repeated. Table A6/1 Permissible tolerances 4. VALIDATION PROCEDURE FOR THE EXHAUST MASS FLOW RATE DETERMINED BY NON-TRACEABLE INSTRUMENTS AND SENSORS 4.1. Frequency of validation In addition to fulfilling the linearity requirements of paragraph 3. of Appendix 5 under steady-state conditions, the linearity of non-traceable exhaust mass flow meters or the exhaust mass flow rate calculated from non-traceable sensors or ECU signals shall be validated under transient conditions for each test vehicle against a calibrated exhaust mass flow meter or the CVS. 4.2. Validation procedure The validation shall be conducted on a chassis dynamometer under type approval conditions, as far as applicable on the same vehicle used for the RDE test. As reference, a flow meter with traceable calibration shall be used. The ambient temperature can be any within the range specified in paragraph 5.1. of this Annex. The installation of the exhaust mass flow meter and the execution of the test shall fulfil the requirement of paragraph 3.4.3. of Appendix 4. The following calculation steps shall be taken to validate the linearity: 4.3. Requirements The linearity requirements given in Table A6/2 shall be fulfilled. If any permissible tolerance is not met, corrective action shall be taken and the validation shall be repeated. Table A6/2 Linearity requirements of calculated and measured exhaust mass flow ‘Appendix 7 Determination of instantaneous emissions 1. INTRODUCTION This appendix describes the procedure to determine the instantaneous mass and particle number emissions [g/s; #/s], following application of the data consistency rules of Appendix 4. The instantaneous mass and particle number emissions shall then be used for the subsequent evaluation of a RDE trip and the calculation of the intermediate and final emission result as described in Appendix 11. 2. SYMBOLS, PARAMETERS AND UNITS 3. TIME CORRECTION OF PARAMETERS For the correct calculation of distance-specific emissions, the recorded traces of component concentrations, exhaust mass flow rate, vehicle speed, and other vehicle data shall be time corrected. To facilitate the time correction, data which are subject to time alignment shall be recorded either in a single data recording device or with a synchronised timestamp following paragraph 5.1. of Appendix 4. The time correction and alignment of parameters shall be carried out by following the sequence described in paragraphs 3.1. to 3.3. 3.1. Time correction of component concentrations The recorded traces of all component concentrations shall be time corrected by reverse shifting according to the transformation times of the respective analysers. The transformation time of analysers shall be determined according to paragraph 4.4. of Appendix 5.: where: 3.2. Time correction of exhaust mass flow rate The exhaust mass flow rate measured with an exhaust flow meter shall be time corrected by reverse shifting according to the transformation time of the exhaust mass flow meter. The transformation time of the mass flow meter shall be determined according to paragraph 4.4. of Appendix 5.: where: In case the exhaust mass flow rate is determined by ECU data or a sensor, an additional transformation time shall be considered and obtained by cross-correlation between the calculated exhaust mass flow rate and the exhaust mass flow rate measured following paragraph 4. of Appendix 6. 3.3. Time alignment of vehicle data Other data obtained from a sensor or the ECU shall be time-aligned by cross-correlation with suitable emission data (e.g., component concentrations). 3.3.1. Vehicle speed from different sources To time align vehicle speed with the exhaust mass flow rate, it is first necessary to establish one valid speed trace. In case vehicle speed is obtained from multiple sources (e.g., the GNSS, a sensor or the ECU), the speed values shall be time aligned by cross-correlation. 3.3.2. Vehicle speed with exhaust mass flow rate Vehicle speed shall be time aligned with the exhaust mass flow rate by cross-correlation between the exhaust mass flow rate and the product of vehicle speed and positive acceleration. 3.3.3. Further signals The time alignment of signals whose values change slowly and within a small value range, e.g. ambient temperature, can be omitted. 4. EMISSION MEASUREMENTS DURING STOP OF THE COMBUSTION ENGINE Any instantaneous emissions or exhaust flow measurements obtained while the combustion engine is deactivated shall be recorded in the data exchange file. 5. CORRECTION OF MEASURED VALUES 5.1. Drift correction 5.2. Dry-wet correction If the emissions are measured on a dry basis, the measured concentrations shall be converted to a wet basis as: where: The following equation shall be used to calculate k w : where: where: 5.3. Correction of NO x for ambient humidity and temperature NO x emissions shall not be corrected for ambient temperature and humidity. 5.4. Correction of negative emission results Negative instantaneous results shall not be corrected. 6. DETERMINATION OF THE INSTANTANEOUS GASEOUS EXHAUST COMPONENTS 6.1. Introduction The components in the raw exhaust shall be measured with the measurement and sampling analysers described in Appendix 5. The raw concentrations of relevant components shall be measured in accordance with Appendix 4. The data shall be time corrected and aligned in accordance with paragraph 3. 6.2. Calculating NMHC and CH 4 concentrations For methane measurement using a NMC-FID, the calculation of NMHC depends on the calibration gas/method used for the zero/span calibration adjustment. When a FID is used for THC measurement without a NMC, it shall be calibrated with propane/air or propane/N 2 in the normal manner. For the calibration of the FID in series with a NMC, the following methods are permitted: It is strongly recommended to calibrate the methane FID with methane/air through the NMC. In method (a), the concentrations of CH 4 and NMHC shall be calculated as follows: In method (b), the concentration of CH 4 and NMHC shall be calculated as follows: where: If the methane FID is calibrated through the cutter (method b), then the methane conversion efficiency as determined in paragraph 4.3.4.(a) of Appendix 5 is zero. The density used for calculating the NMHC mass shall be equal to that of total hydrocarbons at 273.15 K and 101.325 kPa and is fuel-dependent. 7. DETERMINATION OF EXHAUST MASS FLOW RATE 7.1. Introduction The calculation of instantaneous mass emissions according to paragraphs 8. and 9. requires determining the exhaust mass flow rate. The exhaust mass flow rate shall be determined by one of the direct measurement methods specified in paragraph 7.2. of Appendix 5. Alternatively, it is permissible to calculate the exhaust mass flow rate as described in paragraphs 7.2. to 7.4 of this Appendix. 7.2. Calculation method using air mass flow rate and fuel mass flow rate The instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate can be calculated from the air mass flow rate and the fuel mass flow rate as follows: where: If the air mass flow rate and the fuel mass flow rate or the exhaust mass flow rate are determined from ECU recording, the calculated instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate shall meet the linearity requirements specified for the exhaust mass flow rate in paragraph 3. of Appendix 5 and the validation requirements specified in paragraph 4.3. of Appendix 6. 7.3. Calculation method using air mass flow and air-to-fuel ratio The instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate can be calculated from the air mass flow rate and the air-to-fuel ratio as follows: where: where: Coefficients refer to a fuel C β H α O ε N δ S γ with β = 1 for carbon based fuels. The concentration of HC emissions is typically low and may be omitted when calculating λ i . If the air mass flow rate and air-to-fuel ratio are determined from ECU recording, the calculated instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate shall meet the linearity requirements specified for the exhaust mass flow rate in paragraph 3. of Appendix 5 and the validation requirements specified in paragraph 4.3. of Appendix 6. 7.4. Calculation method using fuel mass flow and air-to-fuel ratio The instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate can be calculated from the fuel flow and the air-to-fuel ratio (calculated with A/F st and λ i according to paragraph 7.3.) as follows: The calculated instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate shall meet the linearity requirements specified for the exhaust gas mass flow rate in paragraph 3. of Appendix 5 and the validation requirements specified in paragraph 4.3. of Appendix 6. 8. CALCULATING THE INSTANTANEOUS MASS EMISSIONS OF GASEOUS COMPONENTS The instantaneous mass emissions [g/s] shall be determined by multiplying the instantaneous concentration of the pollutant under consideration [ppm] with the instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate [kg/s], both corrected and aligned for the transformation time, and the respective u value in Table A7/1. If measured on a dry basis, the dry-wet correction according to paragraph 5.1. shall be applied to the instantaneous component concentrations before executing any further calculations. If occurring, negative instantaneous emission values shall enter all subsequent data evaluations. Parameter values shall enter the calculation of instantaneous emissions [g/s] as reported by the analyser, flow-measuring instrument, sensor or the ECU. The following equation shall be applied: where: Table A7/1 Raw exhaust gas u values depicting the ratio between the densities of exhaust component or pollutant i [kg/m 3 ] and the density of the exhaust gas [kg/m 3 ] 9. CALCULATING THE INSTANTANEOUS PARTICLE NUMBER EMISSIONS The instantaneous particle number emissions [particles/s] shall be determined by multiplying the instantaneous concentration of the pollutant under consideration [particles/cm 3 ] with the instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate [kg/s], both corrected and aligned for the transformation time and by dividing with the density [kg/m 3 ] according to Table A7/1. If applicable, negative instantaneous emission values shall enter all subsequent data evaluations. All significant digits of preceding results shall enter the calculation of the instantaneous emissions. The following equation shall apply: where: 10. DATA EXCHANGE Data Exchange: The data shall be exchanged between the measurement systems and the data evaluation software by a standardised data exchange file provided by the Commission 6 . Any pre-processing of data (e.g. time correction according to paragraph 3, vehicle speed correction according to paragraph 4.7 of Appendix 4 or the correction of the GNSS vehicle speed signal according to paragraph 6.5. of Appendix 4) shall be done with the control software of the measurement systems and shall be completed before the data exchange file is generated. ‘Appendix 8 Assessment of overall trip validity using the moving averaging window method 1. INTRODUCTION The Moving Averaging Window method shall be used to assess the overall trip dynamics. The test is divided in sub-sections (windows) and the subsequent analysis aims at determining whether the trip is valid for RDE purposes. The ‘normality’ of the windows shall be assessed by comparing their CO 2 distance-specific emissions with a reference curve obtained from the vehicle CO 2 emissions measured in accordance with the WLTP test. 2. SYMBOLS, PARAMETERS AND UNITS Index (i) refers to the time step Index (j) refers to the window Index (k) refers to the category (t=total, ls=low speed, ms=medium speed, hs=high speed) or to the CO 2 characteristic curve (cc) 3. MOVING AVERAGING WINDOWS 3.1. Definition of averaging windows The instantaneous CO 2 emissions calculated according to Appendix 7 shall be integrated using a moving averaging window method, based on a reference CO 2 mass. The usage of the reference CO 2 mass is illustrated in Figure A8/2. The principle of the calculation is as follows: The RDE distance-specific CO 2 mass emissions are not calculated for the complete data set, but for sub-sets of the complete data set, the length of these sub-sets being determined so as to match always the same fraction of the CO 2 mass emitted by the vehicle over the applicable WLTP test (after all appropriate corrections e.g. ATCT are applied, where relevant). The moving window calculations are conducted with a time increment Δ t corresponding to the data sampling frequency. These sub-sets used to calculate the vehicle on-road CO 2 emissions and its average speed are referred to as ‘averaging windows’ in the following sections. The calculation described in this point shall be run from the first data point (forward), as shown in Figure A8/1. The following data shall not be considered for the calculation of the CO 2 mass, the distance and the vehicle average speed in each averaging window: The periodic verification of the instruments and/or after the zero drift verifications; Vehicle ground speed < 1 km/h; The calculation shall start from when vehicle ground speed is higher than or equal to 1 km/h and include driving events during which no CO 2 is emitted and where the vehicle ground speed is higher than or equal to 1 km/h. The mass emissions M CO 2 ,j shall be determined by integrating the instantaneous emissions in g/s as specified in Appendix 7. Figure A8/1 Vehicle speed versus time - Vehicle averaged emissions versus time, starting from the first averaging window Figure A8/2 Definition of CO 2 mass based on averaging windows The duration ( t 2, j – t 1, j ) of the j th averaging window is determined by: M CO 2 ( t 2, j ) – M CO 2 ( t 1, j ) ≥ M CO 2, ref Where: M CO 2 (t i,j ) is the CO 2 mass measured between the test start and time t i,j , [g]; M CO 2, ref is the reference CO 2 mass (half of the CO 2 mass emitted by the vehicle over the applicable WLTP test). During type approval , the CO 2 reference value shall be taken from the WLTP test CO 2 values of the individual vehicle, obtained in accordance with UN Regulation 154, including all appropriate corrections. For ISC or market surveillance testing purposes , the reference CO 2 mass shall be obtained from the Certificate of Conformity ( 36 ) for the individual vehicle. The value for OVC-HEV vehicles shall be obtained from the WLTP test conducted using the Charge Sustaining mode. t 2, j shall be selected such as: M CO 2 ( t 2, j – Δ t ) – M CO 2 ( t 1, j ) < M CO 2, ref ≤ M CO 2 ( t 2, j ) – M CO 2 ( t 1, j ) Where Δ t is the data sampling period. The CO 2 masses 3.2. Calculation of window parameters 4. EVALUATION OF WINDOWS 4.1. Introduction The reference dynamic conditions of the test vehicle are defined from the vehicle CO 2 emissions versus average speed measured at type approval on the WLTP test and referred to as ‘vehicle CO 2 characteristic curve’. 4.2. CO 2 characteristic curve reference points During type approval , the values shall be taken from the WLTP CO 2 values of the individual vehicle, obtained in accordance with UN Regulation 154, including all appropriate corrections. For ISC or market surveillance testing purposes , the distance-specific CO 2 emissions to be considered, in this paragraph for the definition of the reference curve shall be obtained from the Certificate of Conformity for the individual vehicle. The reference points P 1 , P 2 and P 3 required to define the vehicle CO 2 characteristic curve shall be established as follows: 4.3. CO 2 characteristic curve definition Using the reference points defined in paragraph 4.2., the characteristic curve CO 2 emissions are calculated as a function of the average speed using two linear sections (P 1 , P 2 ) and (P 2 , P 3 ). The section (P 2 , P 3 ) is limited to 145 km/h on the vehicle speed axis. The characteristic curve is defined by equations as follows: For the section ( P 1 , P 2 ): with : For the section ( P 2 , P 3 ): with : Figure A8/3 Vehicle CO 2 characteristic curve and tolerances for ICE and NOVC-HEV vehicles Figure A8/4 Vehicle CO 2 characteristic curve and tolerances for OVC-HEV vehicles 4.4. Low, medium and high-speed windows ‘Appendix 9 Assessment of excess or absence of trip dynamics 1. INTRODUCTION This appendix describes the calculation procedures to verify the trip dynamics by determining the excess or absence of dynamics during an RDE trip. 2. SYMBOLS, PARAMETERS AND UNITS 3. TRIP INDICATORS 3.1. Calculations 3.1.1. Data pre-processing Dynamic parameters, such as acceleration, ( v × a apos ) or RPA, shall be determined with a speed signal of an accuracy of 0,1 % for all speed values above 3 km/h and a sampling frequency of 1 Hz. Otherwise, acceleration shall be determined with an accuracy of 0,01 m/s 2 and a sampling frequency of 1 Hz. In this case, a separate speed signal is required for ( v × a apos ) and shall have an accuracy of at least 0,1 km/h. The speed trace shall form the basis for further calculations and binning as described in paragraphs 3.1.2. and 3.1.3. 3.1.2. Calculation of distance, acceleration and (v × a) The following calculations shall be performed over the whole time based speed trace from the beginning to the end of the test data. The distance increment per data sample shall be calculated as follows: where: The acceleration shall be calculated as follows: where: The product of vehicle speed per acceleration shall be calculated as follows: where: 3.1.3. Binning of the results 3.1.3.1. Binning of the results After the calculation of a i and (v × a) i , the values v i , d i , a i and (v × a) i shall be ranked in ascending order of the vehicle speed. All datasets with ( v i ≤ 60 km/h) belong to the ‘urban’ speed bin, all datasets with (60 km/h < v i ≤ 90 km/h) belong to the ‘rural’ speed bin and all datasets with ( v i > 90 km/h) belong to the ‘motorway’ speed bin. For N2 category vehicles that are equipped with a device limiting vehicle speed to 90 km/h, all datasets with v i ≤ 60 km/h belong to the “urban” speed bin, all datasets with 60 km/h < v i ≤ 80 km/h belong to the “rural” speed bin and all datasets with v i > 80 km/h belong to the “motorway” speed bin. The number of datasets with acceleration values a i 0,1 m/s 2 shall be greater than or equal to 100 in each speed bin. For each speed bin the average vehicle speed ( where: 3.1.4. Calculation of (v × a pos ) k- [95] per speed bin The 95 th percentile of the (v × a pos ) values shall be calculated as follows: The (v × a pos ) i,k values in each speed bin shall be ranked in ascending order for all datasets with a i,k > 0,1m/s 2 and the total number of these samples M k shall be determined. Percentile values are then assigned to the (v × a pos ) i,k values with a i,k > 0,1 m/s 2 as follows: The lowest (v × a pos )value gets the percentile 1/ M k , the second lowest 2/ M k , the third lowest 3/ M k and the highest value (M k /M k = 100 %.) (v × a pos ) k- [95] is the (v × a pos ) j,k value, with j/M k = 95 %. If j/M k = 95 % cannot be met, (v × a pos ) k- [95] shall be calculated by linear interpolation between consecutive samples j and j+1 with j/M k < 95 % and ( j+1 )/M k > 95 %. The relative positive acceleration per speed bin shall be calculated as follows: where: 4. ASSESSMENT OF TRIP VALIDITY 4.1.1. Assessment of (v × a pos ) k- [95] per speed bin (with v in [km/h]) (v × a pos ) k- [95] > (0,136 × is fulfilled, the trip is invalid. (v × a pos ) k- [95] > (0,0742 × is fulfilled, the trip is invalid. Upon the request of the manufacturer, and only for those N1 or N2 vehicles where the vehicle power-to-test mass ratio is less than or equal to 44 W/kg then: (v × a pos ) k- [95] > (0,136 × is fulfilled, the trip is invalid. (v × a pos ) k- [95] > (– 0,097 × is fulfilled, the trip is invalid. 4.1.2. Assessment of RPA per speed bin RPA k < (– 0,0016 is fulfilled, the trip is invalid. ‘Appendix 10 Procedure to determine the cumulative positive elevation gain of a PEMS trip 1. INTRODUCTION This appendix describes the procedure to determine the cumulative elevation gain of a PEMS trip. 2. SYMBOLS, PARAMETERS AND UNITS 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS The cumulative positive elevation gain of a RDE trip shall be determined based on three parameters: the instantaneous vehicle altitude h GNSS,i [m above sea level] as measured with the GNSS, the instantaneous vehicle speed v i [km/h] recorded at a frequency of 1 Hz and the corresponding time t [s] that has passed since test start. 4. CALCULATION OF CUMULATIVE POSITIVE ELEVATION GAIN 4.1. General The cumulative positive elevation gain of a RDE trip shall be calculated as a two-step procedure, consisting of (i) the correction of instantaneous vehicle altitude data, and (ii) the calculation of the cumulative positive elevation gain. 4.2. Correction of instantaneous vehicle altitude data The altitude h(0) at the start of a trip at d(0) shall be obtained by GNSS and verified for correctness with information from a topographic map. The deviation shall not be larger than 40 m. Any instantaneous altitude data h(t) shall be corrected if the following condition applies: The altitude correction shall be applied so that: where: Upon the completion of the correction procedure, a valid set of altitude data is established. This data set shall be used for the calculation of the cumulative positive elevation gain as described in the following. 4.3. Final calculation of the cumulative positive elevation gain 4.3.1. Establishment of a uniform spatial resolution The cumulative elevation gain shall be calculated from data of a constant spatial resolution of 1 m starting with the first measurement at the start of a trip d(0) . The discrete data points at a resolution of 1 m are referred to as way points, characterized by a specific distance value d (e.g., 0, 1, 2, 3 m…) and their corresponding altitude h(d) [m above sea level]. The altitude of each discrete way point d shall be calculated through interpolation of the instantaneous altitude h corr (t) as: Where: 4.3.2. Additional data smoothing The altitude data obtained for each discrete way point shall be smoothed by applying a two-step procedure; d a and d e denote the first and last data point respectively (Figure A10/1). The first smoothing run shall be applied as follows: Where: The second smoothing run shall be applied as follows: Where: Figure A10/1 Illustration of the procedure to smooth the interpolated altitude signals 4.3.3. Calculation of the final result The positive cumulative elevation gain of a total trip shall be calculated by integrating all positive interpolated and smoothed road grades, i.e., road grade,2 (d) . The result should be normalized by the total test distance d tot and expressed in meters of cumulative elevation gain per one hundred kilometres of distance. The waypoint vehicle speed v w shall then be calculated over each discrete way point of 1m: The positive cumulative elevation gain of the urban part of a trip shall then be calculated based on the vehicle speed over each discrete way point. All datasets with v w ≤ 60 km/h belong to the urban part of the trip. All of the positive interpolated and smoothed road grades that correspond to urban datasets shall be integrated. The number of 1m waypoints which correspond to urban datasets shall be integrated and converted to km to define the urban test distance d urban [km]. The positive cumulative elevation gain of the urban part of the trip shall then be calculated by dividing the urban elevation gain by the urban test distance, and expressed in metres of cumulative elevation gain per one hundred kilometres of distance. ‘Appendix 11 Calculation of the final RDE emission results 1. This appendix describes the procedure to calculate the final pollutant emissions for the complete and urban part of an RDE trip 2. Symbols, Parameters and Units Index (k) refers to the category (t=total, u=urban, 1-2=first two phases of the WLTP test) 3. Calculation of the Intermediate RDE emissions results For the valid trips, the intermediate RDE results are calculated as follows for vehicles with ICE, NOVC-HEV and OVC-HEV. Any instantaneous emissions or exhaust flow measurements obtained while the combustion engine is deactivated, as defined in paragraph 2.5.2. of this Annex, shall be set to zero. Any correction of the instantaneous pollutant emissions for Extended conditions according to paragraph 5.1., 7.5. and 7.6. of this Annex shall be applied. For the complete RDE trip and for the urban part of the RDE trip (k=t=total, k=u=urban): The values of the parameter RF L1 and RF L2 of the function used to calculate the result evaluation factor are as follows: RF L1 =1.30 and RF L2 =1.50; The RDE result evaluation factors RF k (k=t=total, k=u=urban) shall be obtained using the functions laid down in paragraph 3.1. for vehicles with ICE and NOVC-HEV, and in paragraph 3.2. for OVC-HEV. A graphical illustration of the method is provided in Figure A11/1 below, while the mathematical formulas are found in Table A11/1: Figure A11/1 Function to calculate the result evaluation factor Table A11/1 Result evaluation factors calculation 3.1. RDE result evaluation factor for vehicles with ICE and NOVC-HEV The value of the RDE result evaluation factor depends on the ratio r k between the distance specific CO 2 emissions measured during the RDE test and the distance-specific CO 2 emitted by the vehicle over the validation WLTP test conducted on this vehicle including all appropriate corrections. For the urban emissions, the relevant phases of the WLTP test shall be: 3.2. RDE result evaluation factor for OVC-HEV The value of the RDE result evaluation factor depends on the ratio r k between the distance-specific CO 2 emissions measured during the RDE test and the distance-specific CO 2 emitted by the vehicle over the applicable WLTP test conducted in Charge Sustaining vehicle operation including all appropriate corrections. The ratio r k is corrected by a ratio reflecting the respective usage of the internal combustion engine during the RDE trip and on the WLTP test, to be conducted in charge sustaining vehicle operation. For either the urban or the total driving: where IC k is the ratio of the distance driven either in urban or total trip with the combustion engine activated, divided by the total urban or total trip distance: With determination of combustion engine operation in accordance with paragraph 2.5.2. of this Annex. 4. Final RDE emission results taking into account the PEMS margin In order to take into account the uncertainty of the PEMS measurements compared to the ones performed in the laboratory with the applicable WLTP test, the intermediate calculated emission values M RDE,k shall be divided by 1+margin pollutant. , where margin pollutant is defined in the Table A11/2: The PEMS margin for each pollutant is specified as follows: Table A11/2 Any negative final results shall be set to zero. Any Ki factors which are applicable, according to point 5.3.4. of this Annex, shall be applied. These values shall be considered the Final RDE Emission Results for NO x and PN. ‘Appendix 12 Manufacturer's RDE certificate of compliance MANUFACTURER’S CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE REAL DRIVING EMISSIONS REQUIREMENTS (Manufacturer): ………………………………………………………………….. (Address of the Manufacturer): ………………………………………………………….. Certifies that: The vehicle types listed in the attachment to this Certificate comply with the requirements laid down in point 3.1 of Annex IIIA to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 for all valid RDE tests which are performed in accordance with the requirements of the above Annex. Done at [......................... (Place)] On [ (Date)] […] […] ..……………………………………… (Stamp and signature of the manufacturer's representative) Annex: ( 1 ) Regulation No 85 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UN/ECE) — Uniform provisions concerning the approval of internal combustion engines or electric drive trains intended for the propulsion of motor vehicles of categories M and N with regard to the measurement of net power and the maximum 30 minutes power of electric drive trains ( OJ L 323, 7.11.2014, p. 52 ). ( 2 ) The term “ particle ” is conventionally used for the matter being characterised (measured) in the airborne phase (suspended matter), and the term “particulate” for the deposited matter. ( 3 ) NT shall be rounded to the next higher integer number ( 4 ) When there is only one vehicle emission type in a PEMS test family, the type approval authority shall decide whether the vehicle shall be tested in hot or cold start. ( 5 ) 1 for Germany; 2 for France; 3 for Italy; 4 for the Netherlands; 5 for Sweden; 6 for Belgium; 7 for Hungary; 8 for the Czech Republic; 9 for Spain; 12 for Austria; 13 for Luxembourg; 17 for Finland; 18 for Denmark; 19 for Romania; 20 for Poland; 21 for Portugal; 23 for Greece; 24 for Ireland. 25 for Croatia; 26 for Slovenia; 27 for Slovakia; 29 for Estonia; 32 for Latvia; 34 for Bulgaria; 36 for Lithuania; 49 for Cyprus; 50 for Malta. ( 6 ) UN Regulation No 154 – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of light duty passenger and commercial vehicles with regards to criteria emissions, emissions of carbon dioxide and fuel consumption and/or the measurement of electric energy consumption and electric range (WLTP) [2022/2124] ( OJ L 290, 10.11.2022, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) See Directive 2009/30/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 amending Directive 98/70/EC as regards the specification of petrol, diesel and gas-oil and introducing a mechanism to monitor and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and amending Council Directive 1999/32/EC as regards the specification of fuel used by inland waterway vessels and repealing Directive 93/12/EEC ( OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 88 ). ( 8 ) To be found in CIRCABC link: ( 9 ) Multiple parameter sources may be used. ( 10 ) To be measured on a wet basis or to be corrected as described in paragraph 5.1. of Appendix 7. ( 11 ) Parameter only mandatory if measurement required for compliance with the limits. ( 12 ) May be calculated from THC and CH 4 concentrations according to paragraph 6.2. to Appendix 7. ( 13 ) May be calculated from measured NO and NO 2 concentrations. ( 14 ) Method to be chosen according to paragraph 4.7. of this Appendix. ( 15 ) To be determined only if necessary to verify the vehicle status and operating conditions. ( 16 ) The preferable source is the ambient pressure sensor. ( 17 ) To be determined only if indirect methods are used to calculate exhaust mass flow rate as described in paragraphs 7.2. and 7.4. of Appendix 7. ( 18 ) If the zero drift is within the permissible range, it is permissible to zero the analyser prior to verifying the span drift. ( 19 ) Optional to determine exhaust mass flow. ( 20 ) Optional parameter. ( 21 ) The linearity check shall be verified with soot-like particles, as these are defined in paragraph 6.2. of this appendix. ( 22 ) To be updated based on error propagation and traceability charts. ( 23 ) Optional to determine exhaust mass flow. ( 24 ) The accuracy shall be 0.02 per cent of reading if used to calculate the air and exhaust mass flow rate from the fuel flow according to paragraph 7 of Appendix 7. ( 25 ) Optional to determine exhaust mass flow. ( 26 ) This requirement applies to the speed sensor only; if vehicle speed is used to determine parameters like acceleration, the product of speed and positive acceleration, or RPA, the speed signal shall have an accuracy of 0.1 % above 3 km/h and a sampling frequency of 1 Hz. This accuracy requirement can be met by using a wheel rotational speed signal. ( 27 ) Only applicable if vehicle speed is determined by the ECU; to meet the permissible tolerance it is permitted to adjust the ECU vehicle speed measurements based on the outcome of the validation test. ( 28 ) Parameter only mandatory if measurement required for compliance with the limits. ( 29 ) PMP system. ( 30 ) depending on fuel ( 31 ) at λ = 2, dry air, 273 K, 101,3 kPa ( 32 ) u values accurate within 0,2 % for mass composition of: C=66-76 %; H=22-25 %; N=0-12 % ( 33 ) NMHC on the basis of CH 2,93 (for THC the u gas coefficient of CH 4 shall be used) ( 34 ) u accurate within 0,2 % for mass composition of: C 3 =70-90 %; C 4 =10-30 % ( 35 ) u gas is a unitless parameter; the u gas values include unit conversions to ensure that the instantaneous emissions are obtained in the specified physical unit, i.e., g/s ( 36 ) As found in Annex VIII of Regulation (EU) 2020/638. ANNEX IV In Annex V to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151, point 2.3 is replaced by the following: ANNEX V Annex VI to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 is amended as follows: ANNEX VI Annex VII to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 is amended as follows: ANNEX VII Annex VIII to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 is amended a follows: ANNEX VIII In Annex IX to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151, Part A is replaced by the following: ‘A. REFERENCE FUELS The specification for the reference fuels to be used shall be those set out in Annex B3 to UN Regulation No 154.’. ANNEX IX ‘ANNEX XI On-board diagnostics (OBD) for motor vehicles 1. INTRODUCTION 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS The requirements for OBD systems set out in paragraph 6.8. of UN Regulation No 154 shall apply for the purposes of this Annex. 3. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR DEFICIENCIES OF OBD SYSTEMS 4. TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS The definitions, requirements and tests for OBD systems set out in paragraph 3.10, 4, 5.10, 6.8 and Annex C5 to UN Regulation No 154 shall apply for the purposes of this Annex. The in-use performance requirements are specified in Appendix 1. ‘Appendix 1 IN-USE PERFORMANCE 1.1. General Requirements The technical requirements and specifications shall be those set out in Appendix 1 to Annex 11 to UN/ECE Regulation No 83 with the exceptions and additional requirements as described in points 1.1.1 to 1.1.6. ANNEX X In Annex XII to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151, point 2 is replaced by the following: ‘2. DETERMINATION OF CO 2 EMISSIONS AND FUEL CONSUMPTION FROM VEHICLES SUBMITTED TO MULTI-STAGE TYPE-APPROVAL OR INDIVIDUAL VEHICLE APPROVAL ANNEX XI Annex XIII to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 is amended as follows: ANNEX XII ‘ANNEX XVI Requirements for vehicles that use a reagent for the exhaust after-treatment system 1. INTRODUCTION This Annex sets out the requirements for vehicles that rely on the use of a reagent for the after-treatment system in order to reduce emissions. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS The general requirements for vehicles that use a reagent for the exhaust after-treatment system shall be those set out in paragraph 6.9. of UN Regulation No 154. 3. TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS The technical requirements for vehicles that use a reagent for the exhaust after-treatment system shall be those set out in Appendix 6 to UN Regulation No 154. ANNEX XIII Annex XX to Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 is amended as follows: ANNEX XIV ‘ANNEX XXI Type 1 emissions test procedures 1. INTRODUCTION This Annex describes the procedure for determining the levels of emissions of gaseous compounds, particulate matter, particle number, CO 2 emissions, fuel consumption, electric energy consumption and electric range from light-duty vehicles. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 3. TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS The technical requirements for conducting the type 1 test shall be those set out in paragraph 6.3. and Annexes Part B of UN Regulation No 154, with the exceptions described in the points below. ( *1 ) In case the actual RRC value is lower than this value, the actual rolling resistance value of the tyre or any higher value up to the RRC value indicated here shall be used for interpolation. ( *2 ) The value to be applied shall be that corresponding to the emission characters EA, EB and EC as specified in Table 1, Appendix 6 to Annex I.. ANNEX XV ‘ANNEX XXII Devices for monitoring on board the vehicle the consumption of fuel and/or electric energy 1. INTRODUCTION This Annex sets out the definitions and requirements applicable to the devices for monitoring on board the vehicle the consumption of fuel and/or electric energy. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS The general requirements for OBFCM devices shall be those set out in paragraph 6.3.9. of UN Regulation No 154. 3. TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS The technical requirements for the OBFCM device shall be those set out in Appendix 5 to UN Regulation No 154.’