Corrigendum to Directive 2004/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 amending Directive 97/68/EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery ( Official Journal of the European Union L 146 of 30 April 2004 ) Directive 2004/26/EC should read as follows: DIRECTIVE 2004/26/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 21 April 2004 amending Directive 97/68/EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 95 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Directive 97/68/EC is amended as follows: Article 2 The Commission shall, not later than 31 December 2007: and submit, where appropriate, proposals to the European Parliament and the Council. Article 3 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 20 May 2005. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof. When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 4 Member States shall determine the sanctions applicable to breaches of the national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take all necessary measures for their implementation. The sanctions determined must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall notify these provisions to the Commission by 20 may 2005, and shall notify any subsequent modifications thereof as soon as possible. Article 5 This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 6 This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 21 April 2004. For the European Parliament The President P. COX For the Council The President D. ROCHE ANNEX I 3. Annex V IS amended as follows: 4. ANNEX VII IS AMENDED AS FOLLOWS: Apppendix 1 is replaced by the following: ‘Appendix 1 TEST RESULTS FOR COMPRESSION IGNITION ENGINES TEST RESULTS 1. INFORMATION CONCERNING THE CONDUCT OF THE NRSC TEST ( 21 ) : 1.1. Reference fuel used for test 1.2. Lubricant 1.3. Engine driven equipment (if applicable) 1.4. Engine performance 1.5. Emission levels 2. INFORMATION CONCERNING THE CONDUCT OF THE NRTC TEST ( 26 ) : 2.1. Emission results on the NRTC test: 2.2. Sampling system used for the NRTC test: Gaseous emissions: Particulates: Method: single/multiple filter ’ 5. Annex XII is amended as follows: The following section is added: ANNEX II ‘Annex VI ANALYTICAL AND SAMPLING SYSTEM 1. GASEOUS AND PARTICULATE SAMPLING SYSTEMS 1.1. Determination of the gaseous emissions Section 1.1.1 and Figures 2 and 3 contain detailed descriptions of the recommended sampling and analysing systems. Since various configurations can produce equivalent results, exact conformance with these figures is not required. Additional components such as instruments, valves, solenoids, pumps and switches may be used to provide additional information and coordinate the functions of the component systems. Other components which are not needed to maintain the accuracy on some systems, may be excluded if their exclusion is based upon good engineering judgement. 1.1.1. Gaseous exhaust components CO, CO 2 , HC, NOx An analytical system for the determination of the gaseous emissions in the raw or diluted exhaust gas is described based on the use of: For the raw exhaust gas (Figure 2), the sample for all components may be taken with one sampling probe or with two sampling probes located in close proximity and internally split to the different analysers. Care must be taken that no condensation of exhaust components (including water and sulphuric acid) occurs at any point of the analytical system. For the diluted exhaust gas (Figure 3), the sample for the hydrocarbons shall be taken with another sampling probe than the sample for the other components. Care must be taken that no condensation of exhaust components (including water and sulphuric acid) occurs at any point of the analytical system. Figure 2 Flow diagram of exhaust gas analysis system for CO, NO x and HC Figure 3 Flow diagram of dilute exhaust gas analysis system for CO, CO 2 , NO x and HC Descriptions — Figures 2 and 3 General statement: All components in the sampling gas path must be maintained at the temperature specified for the respective systems. 1.2. Determination of the particulates Sections 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 and Figures 4 to 15 contain detailed descriptions of the recommended dilution and sampling systems. Since various configurations can produce equivalent results, exact conformance with these figures is not required. Additional components such as instruments, valve, solenoids, pumps and switches may be used to provide additional information and coordinate the functions of the component systems. Other components which are not needed to maintain the accuracy on some systems, may be excluded if their exclusion is based on good engineering judgement. 1.2.1. Dilution system 1.2.1.1. Partial flow dilution system (Figures 4 to 12) ( 27 ) A dilution system is described based on the dilution of a part of the exhaust stream. Splitting of the exhaust stream and the following dilution process may be done by different dilution system types. For subsequent collection of the particulates, the entire dilute exhaust gas or only a portion of the dilute exhaust gas may be passed to the particulate sampling system (section 1.2.2, Figure 14). The first method is referred to as total sampling type, the second method as fractional sampling type. The calculation of the dilution ratio depends on the type of system used. The following types are recommended: Figure 4 Partial flow dilution system with isokinetic probe and fractional sampling (SB control) Figure 5 Partial flow dilution system with isokinetic probe and fractional sampling (PB control) Figure 6 Partial flow dilution system with CO 2 or NOx concentration measurement and fractional sampling Figure 7 Partial flow dilution system with CO 2 concentration measurement, carbon balance and total sampling Figure 8 Partial flow dilution system with single venturi, concentration measurement and fractional sampling Figure 9 Partial flow dilution system twin venturi or twin orifice, concentration measurement and fractional sampling Figure 10 Partial flow dilution system with multiple tube splitting, concentration measurement and fractional sampling Figure 11 Partial flow dilution system with flow control and total sampling Figure 12 Partial flow dilution system with flow control and fractional sampling Description - Figures 4 to 12 1.2.1.2. Full flow dilution system (Figure 13) A dilution system is described based upon the dilution of the total exhaust using the constant volume sampling (CVS) concept. The total volume of the mixture of exhaust and dilution air must be measured. Either a PDP or a CFV or a SSV system may be used. For subsequent collection of the particulates, a sample of the dilute exhaust gas is passed to the particulate sampling system (section 1.2.2, Figures 14 and 15). If this is done directly, it is referred to as single dilution. If the sample is diluted once more in the secondary dilution tunnel, it is referred to as double dilution. This is useful, if the filter face temperature requirement cannot be met with single dilution. Although partly a dilution system, the double dilution system is described as a modification of a particulate sampling system in section 1.2.2, (Figure 15), since it shares most of the parts with a typical particulate sampling system. The gaseous emissions may also be determined in the dilution tunnel of a full flow dilution system. Therefore, the sampling probes for the gaseous components are shown in Figure 13 but do not appear in the description list. The respective requirements are described in section 1.1.1. Descriptions (Figure 13) Figure 13 Full flow dilution system The total amount of raw exhaust gas is mixed in the dilution tunnel DT with the dilution air. The diluted exhaust gas flow rate is measured either with a positive displacement pump PDP or with a critical flow venturi CFV or with a sub-sonic venturi SSV. A heat exchanger HE or electronic flow compensation EFC may be used for proportional particulate sampling and for flow determination. Since particulate mass determination is based on the total diluted exhaust gas flow, the dilution ratio is not required to be calculated. 1.2.2. Particulate sampling system (Figures 14 and 15) The particulate sampling system is required for collecting the particulates on the particulate filter. In the case of total sampling partial flow dilution, which consists of passing the entire dilute exhaust sample through the filters, dilution (section 1.2.1.1, Figures 7 and 11) and sampling system usually form an integral unit. In the case of fractional sampling partial flow dilution or full flow dilution, which consists of passing through the filters only a portion of the diluted exhaust, the dilution (section 1.2.1.1, Figures 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 12 and section 1.2.1.2, Figure 13) and sampling systems usually form different units. In this Directive, the double dilution system DDS (Figure 15) of a full flow dilution system is considered as a specific modification of a typical particulate sampling system as shown in Figure 14. The double dilution system includes all important parts of the particulate sampling system, like filter holders and sampling pump, and additionally some dilution features, like a dilution air supply and a secondary dilution tunnel. In order to avoid any impact on the control loops, it is recommended that the sample pump be running throughout the complete test procedure. For the single filter method, a bypass system shall be used for passing the sample through the sampling filters at the desired times. Interference of the switching procedure on the control loops must be minimised. Descriptions - Figures 14 and 15 Figure 14 Particulate sampling system Figure 15 Dilution system (full flow system only) A sample of the diluted exhaust gas is transferred from the dilution tunnel DT of a full flow dilution system through the particulate sampling probe PSP and the particulate transfer tube PTT to the secondary dilution tunnel SDT, where it is diluted once more. The sample is then passed through the filter holder(s) FH that contain the particulate sampling filters. The dilution air flow rate is usually constant whereas the sample flow rate is controlled by the flow controller FC3. If electronic flow compensation EFC (Figure 13) is used, the total diluted exhaust gas flow is used as command signal for FC3. ANNEX III ‘Annex XIII PROVISIONS FOR ENGINES PLACED ON THE MARKET UNDER A “FLEXIBLE SCHEME” On the request of an equipment manufacturer (OEM), and permission being granted by an approval authority, an engine manufacturer may during the period between two successive stages of limit values place a limited number of engines on the market that only comply with the previous stage of emission limit values in accordance with the following provisions: 1. ACTIONS BY THE ENGINE MANUFACTURER AND THE OEM 2. ACTIONS BY THE ENGINE MANUFACTURER 3. ACTIONS BY THE APPROVAL AUTHORITY ANNEX IV The following Annexes are added: ‘ANNEX XIV CCNR stage I ( 28 ) ANNEX XV CCNR stage II ( 29 ) ( *1 ) OJ L 164, 30.6.1994, p. 15 . Directive as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1882/2003 ( OJ L 284, 31.10.2003, p. 1 ). ( *2 ) OJ L 301, 28.10.1982, p. 1 . Directive as amended by the 2003 Act of Accession. ( 4 ) Identical with C1 cycle as described in paragraph 8.3.1.1. of the ISO8178-4: 2002(E) standard. ( 5 ) Identical with D2 cycle as described in paragraph 8.4.1. of the ISO8178-4: 2002(E) standard. ( 6 ) Constant-speed auxiliary engines must be certified to the ISO D2 duty cycle, i.e. the 5-mode steady-state cycle specified in Section 3.7.1.2., while variable-speed auxiliary engines must be certified to the ISO C1 duty cycle, i.e. the 8-mode steady-state cycle specified in Section 3.7.1.1. ( 7 ) Identical with E3 cycle as described in Sections 8.5.1, 8.5.2. and 8.5.3. of the ISO8178-4: 2002(E) standard. The four modes lie on an average propeller curve based on in-use measurements. ( 8 ) Identical with E2 cycle as described in Sections 8.5.1, 8.5.2. and 8.5.3. of the ISO8178-4: 2002(E) standard. ( 9 ) Identical with F cycle of ISO 8178-4: 2002 (E) standard. ( 10 ) The calibration procedure is common for both NRSC and NRTC tests, with the exception of the requirements specified in Sections 1.11. and 2.6.’ ( 11 ) In the case of NO x , the NO x concentration (NO x conc or NO x conc c ) has to be multiplied by K HNOx (humidity correction factor for NO x quoted in section 1.3.3) as follows: K HNOx x conc or K HNOx x conc c ( 12 ) The particulate mass flow rate PT mass has to be multiplied by Kp (humidity correction factor for particulates quoted in section 1.4.1).’; ( 1 ) OJ C 220, 16.9.2003, p. 16 . ( 2 ) Opinion of the European Parliament of 21 October 2003 (not yet published in the Official Journal). Council Decision of 30 March 2004 (not yet published in the Official Journal). ( 3 ) OJ L 59, 27.2.1998, p. 1 . Directive as last amended by Directive 2002/88/EC ( OJ L 35, 11.2.2003, p. 28 ). ( 13 ) The values quoted in the specifications are “true values”. In establishment of their limit values the terms of ISO 4259 “Petroleum products – Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test” have been applied and in fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; in fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for technical reasons, the manufacturer of fuels should nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value in the case of quotations of maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify the questions as to whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ISO 4259 should be applied. ( 14 ) The range for cetane number is not in accordance with the requirements of a minimum range of 4R. However, in the case of a dispute between fuel supplier and fuel user, the terms of ISO 4259 may be used to resolve such disputes provided replicate measurements, of sufficient number to archive the necessary precision, are made in preference to single determinations. ( 15 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the test shall be reported. ( 16 ) Even though oxidation stability is controlled, it is likely that shelf life will be limited. Advice should be sought from the supplier as to storage conditions and life. ( 17 ) The values quoted in the specifications are ’true values’. In establishment of their limit values the terms of ISO 4259 “Petroleum products – Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test” have been applied and in fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; in fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for technical reasons, the manufacturer of fuels should nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value in the case of quotations of maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify the questions as to whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ISO 4259 should be applied. ( 18 ) The range for cetane number is not in accordance with the requirements of a minimum range of 4R. However, in the case of a dispute between fuel supplier and fuel user, the terms of ISO 4259 may be used to resolve such disputes provided replicate measurements, of sufficient number to archive the necessary precision, are made in preference to single determinations. ( 19 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the Type I test shall be reported. ( 20 ) Even though oxidation stability is controlled, it is likely that shelf life will be limited. Advice should be sought from the supplier as to storage conditions and life.‘. ( 21 ) For the case of several parent engines to be indicated for each of them. ( 22 ) For the case of several parent engines to be indicated for each of them. ( 23 ) Uncorrected power measured in accordance with section 2.4 of Annex I. ( 24 ) Indicate figure numbers defined in Annex VI section 1. ( 25 ) Delete as appropriate. ( 26 ) For the case of several parent engines, to be indicated for each of them. ( 27 ) Figures 4 to 12 show many types of partial flow dilution systems, which normally can be used for the steady-state test (NRSC). But, because of very severe constraints of the transient tests, only those partial flow dilution systems (Figures 4 to 12) able to fulfill all the requirements quoted in the section ‘Partial flow dilution system specifications’ of Annex III, Appendix 1, Section 2.4, are accepted for the transient test (NRTC). ( 28 ) CCNR Protocol 19, Resolution of the Central Commission for the Navigation of the Rhine of 11 May 2000. ( 29 ) CCNR Protocol 21, Resolution of the Central Commission for the Navigation of the Rhine of 31 May 2001.’