Corrigendum to Commission Recommendation 2004/394/EC of 29 April 2004 on the results of the risk evaluation and the risk reduction strategies for the substances: acetonitrile; acrylamide; acrylonitrile; acrylic acid; butadiene; hydrogen fluoride; hydrogen peroxide; methacrylic acid; methyl methacrylate; toluene; trichlorobenzene ( Official Journal of the European Union L 144 of 30 April 2004 ) Recommendation 2004/394/EC should read as follows: COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION of 29 April 2004 on the results of the risk evaluation and the risk reduction strategies for the substances: acetonitrile; acrylamide; acrylonitrile; acrylic acid; butadiene; hydrogen fluoride; hydrogen peroxide; methacrylic acid; methyl methacrylate; toluene; trichlorobenzene (notified under document number C(2004) 1446) (Text with EEA relevance) (2004/394/EC) THE COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, Having regard to Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 of 23 March 1993 on the evaluation and control of the risks of existing substances ( 1 ) and in particular Article 11(2) thereof, Whereas: HEREBY RECOMMENDS: Done at Brussels, 29 April 2004. For the Commission Margot WALLSTRÖM Member of the Commission PART 1 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the life cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State Rapporteur ( 6 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate for synthesis of industrial chemicals, pharmaceuticals and pesticides, and in the manufacturing of photographic film. Other uses include as a solvent in various extraction processes and in research and analytical laboratories. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore, some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure of the substance to man and the environment, in particular, the substance is produced during biomass burning and is present in automobile exhaust, which do not result from the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures are not part of this risk assessment. The comprehensive Risk Assessment Reports as forwarded to the Commission by the Member State Rapporteur does however provide information about these risks. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for ATMOSPHERE is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measure to limit the risks. The conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS The risk assessment has identified other sources of acetonitrile emissions (eg burning of fossil fuels). This is outside the scope of Council Regulation (EEC) 793/93 and has not been considered in the Risk Reduction Strategy. for WORKERS The legislation for workers protection currently in force at Community level is considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for ENVIRONMENT PART 2 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State Rapporteur ( 11 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate in the chemical industry for the production of polyacrylamide. Other uses are as on-site preparation of polyacrylamide gels and as grouting agents. The main uses of polyacrylamide are in waste water treatment, paper and pulp processing and mineral processing; minor uses include as cosmetic additives and as soil conditioners. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: In addition to the conclusion given above, risks cannot be excluded considering the remaining uses, as the substance is identified as a non-threshold carcinogen. The adequacy of existing controls and the feasibility and practicability of further specific measures should be considered. However, the risk assessment indicates that risks are already low. This should be taken into account when considering the adequacy of existing controls and the feasibility and practicability of further specific risk reduction measures. The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. The conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the ATMOSPHERE is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for further information and/or testing. This conclusion is reached because of: The need to obtain this information was re-evaluated in light of the risk reduction strategy and is no longer required (see section II Strategy for limiting risks). The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for HUMAN HEALTH and the ENVIRONMENT It is recommended: for WORKERS The legislation for worker protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for CONSUMERS PART 3 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the lifecycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 16 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as a monomer in the production of polymeric materials, primarily acrylic and modacrylic fibres, acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene plastics and styrene-acrylonitrile plastics. Other uses are as a monomer in the synthesis of novel polymeric materials, production of acrylamide, adiponitrile, fatty amines and fatty alcohols. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure to the substance, relevant for man and the environment, which do not result from the life cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community, in particular, the substance is produced during combustion of fossil fuels. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures are not part of this risk assessment. The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as forwarded to the Commission by the Member State Rapporteur, does however provide information which could be used to assess these risks. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT are that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measure to limit the risks. The conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the ATMOSPHERE and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks for MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS The risk assessment has identified other sources of acrylonitrile emissions (e.g. burning of fossil fuels). This is outside the scope of Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and has not been considered in the risk reduction strategy. for WORKERS The legislation for workers protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for CONSUMERS and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT for the ENVIRONMENT PART 4 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the life cycle of the substance produced in or imported into European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 18 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate in the production of poly-acrylates. Other uses are as an ingredient in adhesives and its occurrence as a residual monomer in adhesives, paints, binding agents, printing inks, sanitary towels, panty-liners and nappy pants. Polyacrylates are mainly used as co-builders in phosphate free washing agents, in flocculating agents and for treatment of drinking and waste water. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore, some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure to the substance, relevant for man and the environment, in particular, during the use of acrylate based grouting agents, as a decomposition product during the production of printed circuit boards and during the removal of paints using gas flames, which do not result from the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures are part of this risk assessment. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to CONSUMERS and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. The conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the ATMOSPHERE and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is a need for further information and/or testing. This conclusion is reached because The information and/or test requirements are STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for ENVIRONMENT it is recommended that: for Acrylic Acid released from chemical grouts: for Acrylic Acid used in wet polymerisation processes at downstream user sites (processing capacity > 500 t/a) and in SAP production: PART 5 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the life cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 21 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate in the polymer industry. The major uses of 1,3-butadiene are in the manufacture of synthetic rubber such as styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) and polybutadiene rubber, thermoplastic resins such as acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS), and styrene-butadiene latex. It is also used as a chemical intermediate in the production of neoprene for automotive and industrial rubber goods, in the production of methylmethacrylate-butadiene-styrene (MBS) polymer, which is used as a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) reinforcing agent, and for producing adiponitrile, a nylon precursor. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore, some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is a need to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for ATMOSPHERE, AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for CONSUMERS and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT the existing legislative measures for the protection of consumers and humans exposed via the environment, in particular the provisions under the Directive 76/769/EEC (marketing and use Directive) as regards CMR substances, Directive 2001/95/EC (general product safety) as regards products, and Directive 96/61/EC (integrated pollution prevention and control) are considered sufficient to address the risks identified. PART 6 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the life cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 23 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate in the chemical industry for the synthesis of organofluoride compounds and inorganic fluorides. Other uses are as a pickling Other uses are agent for metal surfaces, an etching agent for glass surfaces and surface cleaning. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore, some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure of the substance to man and the environment, in particular, releases of hydrogen fluoride from iron/steel and aluminium industry, glass, ceramic and brick industry, power plants and phosphate chemical producers, which does not result from the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures are not part of this risk assessment. The risk assessment forwarded to the Commission by the Member State Rapporteur does however provide information which could be used to assess these risks. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM and ATMOSPHERE is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks for MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed. Within this framework it is recommended: for CONSUMERS It is recommended: for the ENVIRONMENT PART 7 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the life cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report as forwarded to the Commission by the Member State Rapporteur ( 27 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as in pulp bleaching and chemicals manufacture. Other uses are in textile bleaching, disinfection in the foods processing industry, etching in the electronics industry, metal plating, degrading of proteins, tooth bleaching, professional hair dyeing and bleaching, treatment of drinking water and waste water, in numerous consumer products for hair dyeing and bleaching, household textile bleaching products, cleaning agents, contact lens disinfection, and tooth bleaching products. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks (applies to the workers and to the consumers) This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for ATMOSPHERE and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks for MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended that: for CONSUMERS It is recommended that: for ENVIRONMENT It is recommended that: PART 8 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the lifecycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 30 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an internal and external intermediate in the chemical industry for the production of methacrylic acid esters and as co-monomer in different kinds of polymers. Other uses are as an ingredient in adhesives and its occurrence as a residual monomer in paints and products for textile processing. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore, some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure to the substance, relevant for man and the environment, in particular during the use of methacrylate based grouts, which do not result from the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures are part of this risk assessment. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to CONSUMERS and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. The conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the ATMOSPHERE and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for ENVIRONMENT For methacrylic acid released from chemical grouts it is recommended: PART 9 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the lifecycle of the substance as described in the risk evaluation forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 32 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate in production of polymers, copolymers, adhesives, reactive resins, in transesterification and in cast sheet production. Other uses are in the production of emulsion, dispersion and solvent polymers, acrylic sheet type polymers, as an ingredient in reactive adhesives and embedding resins, floor coatings, casting resins used for dental and medical applications and the substance occurs as residual monomer in paints, as well as in other polymers used for consumer products. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore, some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure to the substance, relevant for man and the environment, in particular, as a decomposition product during the thermal processing of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), which do not result from the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures are part of this risk assessment. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to CONSUMERS is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. The conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the ATMOSPHERE and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for ENVIRONMENT for Methyl methacrylate used in wet polymerisation processes at downstream user sites (processing capacity > 5000 t/a) it is recommended: PART 10 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the lifecycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 34 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate for synthesis of other chemicals, in solvents, and adhesives, paints, lacquers, varnishes and in the mineral oil, fuel and polymer industries. Other uses reported are in the pulp, paper and board industry, textile industry, agricultural industry and electrical and electronic industry. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure of the substance to man and the environment, in particular the use and combustion of petroleum products, which do not result from the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures is not part of this risk assessment. The comprehensive Risk Assessment Reports as forwarded to the Commission by the Member State Rapporteur does however provide information that could be used to assess these risks. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS The information and/or test requirement is: The need to obtain this information was re-evaluated in light of the risk reduction strategy and is no longer required (see section II Strategy for limiting risks). The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks for ATMOSPHERE is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks for MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS The risk assessment has identified other sources of toluene emissions (e.g. gasoline and crude oil). This is outside the scope of Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and has not been considered in the risk reduction strategy. for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level is generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. Within this framework it is recommended: for CONSUMERS It is recommended: for ENVIRONMENT and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT It is recommended: The proposal from the Commission to limit the content of solvents in certain products would further limit the risk from toluene to man via the environment ( 36 ) PART 11 The risk assessment is based on current practices related to the lifecycle of the substance produced in or imported into European Community as described in the comprehensive Risk Assessment Report forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur ( 38 ) . The risk assessment has, based on the available information, determined that in the European Community the substance is mainly used as an intermediate for synthesis of herbicides and as a process solvent in closed systems. Other uses reported include as a solvent, dye carrier in textile industry, additive in dielectric fluids and corrosion inhibitor. It was not possible to obtain information on the use of the total volume of substance produced in or imported into the European Community, therefore, some uses may exist which are not covered by this risk assessment. The risk assessment has identified other sources of exposure of the substance to man and the environment, in particular, from certain 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene containing dielectric fluids still in use in existing electrical equipment and environmental formation of 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene as a decomposition product of other, more complex organo-chlorine compounds, which do not result from the life-cycle of the substance produced in or imported into the European Community. The assessment of the risks arising from these exposures are not part of this risk assessment. The comprehensive Risk Assessment Reports as forwarded to the Commission by the Member State rapporteur does however provide information that could be used to assess these risks. The risk assessment indicates that it should be further investigated if the substance should be considered in relation to national or international programmes addressing persistent organic pollutants. RISK ASSESSMENT A. Human health The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to WORKERS is that there is a need for further information and/or testing. This conclusion is reached because: The information and/or test requirements are The need to obtain this information was re-evaluated in light of the risk reduction strategy and is no longer required (see section II Strategy for limiting risks). That there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to CONSUMERS is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to HUMAN HEALTH (physicochemical properties) is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: B. Environment The conclusions of the evaluation of the risks to the environment for AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM and TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEM is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to the ATMOSPHERE is that there is at present no need for further information and/or testing or for risk reduction measures beyond those which are being applied. This conclusion is reached because: The conclusion of the assessment of the risks to MICRO-ORGANISMS IN THE SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT is that there is a need for specific measures to limit the risks. This conclusion is reached because of: STRATEGY FOR LIMITING RISKS for WORKERS The legislation for workers' protection currently in force at Community level and in particular the provisions under Commission Directive 2000/39/EC ( 39 ) establishing a first list of indicative exposure limit values are generally considered to give an adequate framework to limit the risks of the substance to the extent needed and shall apply. The marketing and use restrictions proposed for the environment will also reduce the risk for human health (workers) and eliminate the need for more information on the occupational exposure scenarios. for CONSUMERS, the ENVIRONMENT and HUMANS EXPOSED VIA THE ENVIRONMENT It is recommended: ( 1 ) OJ L 84, 5.4.1993, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 131, 26.5.1994, p. 3 . ( 3 ) OJ L 231, 28.9.1995, p. 18 . ( 4 ) OJ L 161, 29.6.1994, p. 3 . ( 5 ) The classification of the substances is established by Commission Directive 2000/32/EC of 19 May 2000 adapting to technical progress for the 26th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 136, 8.6.2000, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 7 ) OJ L 177, 5.7.1991, p. 22. ( 8 ) OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1. ( 9 ) OJ L 257, 10.10.1996, p. 26. ( 10 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2001/59/EC of 6 August, adapting to technical progress for the 28th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 225, 21.8.2001, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 12 ) OJ L 262, 27.9.1976, p. 201. ( 13 ) N-methylolacrylamide-based grouts are also a potential source of free acrylamide in the grouting process and consideration should be given to examining the risks from this chemical. ( 14 ) OJ L 11, 15.1.2002, p. 4. ( 15 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2000/32/EC of 19 May 2000 adapting to technical progress for the 26th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 136, 8.6.2000, p. 1 ). ( 16 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 17 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2000/32/EC of 19 May 2000 adapting to technical progress for the 26th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 136, 8.6.2000, p. 1 ). ( 18 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 19 ) OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, p. 11. ( 20 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2001/59/EC of 6 August, adapting to technical progress for the 28th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 225, 21.8.2001, p. 1 ). ( 21 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 22 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2000/32/EC of 19 May 2000, adapting to technical progress for the 26th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 136, 8.6.2000, p. 1 ). ( 23 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 24 ) Minutes of the meeting of 2 April 2003 of the Emergencies Committee of Directive 92/59/EEC (General Product Safety). ( 25 ) OJ L 228, 11.8.1992, p. 24. ( 26 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 91/325/EEC of 1 March 1991, adapting to technical progress for the 12th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L180, 8. 7. 1991, p. 1 ). ( 27 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 28 ) OJ L 238 25.9.2003, p. 27. ( 29 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2001/59/EC of 19 August 2001 adapting to technical progress for the 28th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 225, 21.8.2001, p. 1 ). ( 30 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 31 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2000/32/EC of 19 May 2000 adapting to technical progress for the 26th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 136, 8.6.2000, p. 1 ). ( 32 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 33 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 91/325/EEC of 1 March 1991, adapting to technical progress for the 12th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 180, 8. 7. 1991, p. 1 ). ( 34 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 35 ) OJ L 129, 18.5.1976, p. 23. ( 36 ) Proposal for a Directive on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of organic solvents in decorative paints and varnishes and vehicle refinishing products and amending Directive 1999/13/EC (COM(2002) 750 final). ( 37 ) The classification of the substance is established by Commission Directive 2001/59/ECof 6 August, adapting to technical progress for the 28th time Council Directive 67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ L 225, 21.8.2001, p. 30 ). ( 38 ) The comprehensive Risk Assessment Report, as well as a summary thereof, can be found on the internet site of the European Chemicals Bureau: ( 39 ) OJ L 142, 16.6.2000, p. 47.