COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2022/2427 of 6 December 2022 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for common waste gas management and treatment systems in the chemical sector (notified under document C(2022) 8788) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for the common waste gas management and treatment systems in the chemical sector, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 6 December 2022. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 establishing a forum for the exchange of information pursuant to Article 13 of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions ( OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 ). ( 3 ) 1. Best Available Techniques (BAT) conclusions for Common Waste Gas Management and Treatment Systems in the Chemical Sector These BAT conclusions concern the following activity specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU: 4. Chemical industry (i.e. all production processes included in the categories of activities listed in points 4.1 to 4.6 of Annex I, unless specified otherwise). More specifically, these BAT conclusions focus on emissions to air from the aforementioned activity. These BAT conclusions do not address the following: Other BAT conclusions which are complementary for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions include Common Waste Water and Waste Gas Treatment/Management Systems in the Chemical Sector (CWW). Other BAT conclusions and reference documents which could be relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: These BAT conclusions apply without prejudice to other relevant legislation, e.g. on the registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals (REACH) or on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures (CLP). DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: ACRONYMS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following acronyms apply: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) and indicative emission levels for channelled emissions to air The BAT-AELs and the indicative emission levels for channelled emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to values of concentration, expressed as mass of emitted substance per volume of waste gas under standard conditions (dry gas at a temperature of 273,15 K, and a pressure of 101,3 kPa) and expressed in the unit mg/Nm 3 , μg/Nm 3 or ng I-TEQ/Nm 3 . The reference oxygen levels used to express BAT-AELs and indicative emission levels in these BAT conclusions are shown in the table below. For the cases where a reference oxygen level is given, the equation for calculating the emission concentration at the reference oxygen level is: where: The equation above does not apply if the process furnace(s)/heater(s) use(s) oxygen-enriched air or pure oxygen or when additional air intake for safety reasons brings the oxygen level in the waste gas very close to 21 vol-%. In this case, the emission concentration at the reference oxygen level of 3 dry vol-% is calculated differently. For averaging periods of BAT-AELs and indicative emission levels for channelled emissions to air, the following definitions apply. For the purpose of calculating the mass flows in relation to BAT 11 (Table 1.1), BAT 14 (Table 1.3), BAT 18 (Table 1.6), BAT 29 (Table 1.9) and BAT 36 (Table 1.15), where waste gases with similar characteristics, e.g. containing the same (type of) substances/parameters, and discharged through two or more separate stacks could, in the judgement of the competent authority, be discharged through a common stack, these stacks shall be considered as a single stack. BAT-AELs for diffuse VOC emissions to air For diffuse VOC emissions from the use of solvents or the reuse of recovered solvents, the BAT-AELs in these BAT conclusions are given as a percentage of the solvent input, calculated on an annual basis according to Part 7 of Annex VII to Directive 2010/75/EU. BAT-AELs for total emissions to air for the production of polymers or synthetic rubbers Production of polyolefins or synthetic rubbers For total emissions to air of VOCs from the production of polyolefins or synthetic rubbers, the BAT-AELs in these BAT conclusions are given as specific emission loads calculated on an annual basis by dividing the total VOC emissions by a sector-dependent production rate, expressed in the unit g C/kg of product. Production of PVC For total emissions to air of VCM from the production of PVC, the BAT-AELs in these BAT conclusions are given as specific emission loads calculated on an annual basis by dividing the total VCM emissions by a sector-dependent production rate, expressed in the unit g/kg of product. For the purpose of calculating specific emission loads, total emissions include the VCM concentration in the PVC. Production of viscose For the production of viscose, the BAT-AEL in these BAT conclusions is given as a specific emission load calculated on an annual basis by dividing the total S emissions by the production rate of staple fibres or casing, expressed in the unit g S/kg of product. 1.1. General BAT conclusions 1.1.1. Environmental management systems BAT 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to elaborate and implement an environmental management system (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Specifically for the chemical sector, BAT is also to incorporate the following features in the EMS: Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 6 ) establishes the European Union eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), which is an example of an EMS consistent with this BAT. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the EMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. BAT 2. In order to facilitate the reduction of emissions to air, BAT is to establish, maintain and regularly review (including when a substantial change occurs) an inventory of channelled and diffuse emissions to air, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that incorporates all of the following features: Note for diffuse emissions The information about diffuse emissions to air is particularly relevant for activities using large amounts of organic substances or mixtures (e.g. production of pharmaceuticals, production of large volumes of organic chemicals or of polymers). The information about fugitive emissions covers all emission sources in contact with organic substances with a vapour pressure greater than 0,3 kPa at 293,15 K. Sources of fugitive emissions connected to pipes whose diameter is small (e.g. smaller than 12,7 mm, i.e. 0,5 inch) may be excluded from the inventory. Equipment operated under subatmospheric pressure may be excluded from the inventory. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the inventory will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2. Other than normal operating conditions (OTNOC) BAT 3. In order to reduce the frequency of the occurrence of OTNOC and to reduce emissions to air during OTNOC, BAT is to set up and implement a risk-based OTNOC management plan as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1) that includes all of the following features: 1.1.3. Channelled emissions to air 1.1.3.1. General techniques BAT 4. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air, BAT is to use an integrated waste gas management and treatment strategy that includes, in order of priority, process-integrated recovery and abatement techniques. Description The integrated waste gas management and treatment strategy is based on the inventory in BAT 2. It takes into account factors such as greenhouse gas emissions and the consumption or reuse of energy, water and materials associated with the use of the different techniques. BAT 5. In order to facilitate the recovery of materials and the reduction of channelled emissions to air, as well as to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to combine waste gas streams with similar characteristics, thus minimising the number of emission points. Description The combined treatment of waste gases with similar characteristics ensures more effective and efficient treatment compared to the separate treatment of individual waste gas streams. The combination of waste gases is carried out considering plant safety (e.g. avoiding concentrations close to the lower/upper explosive limit), technical (e.g. compatibility of the individual waste gas streams, concentration of the substances concerned), environmental (e.g. maximising recovery of materials or pollutant abatement) and economic factors (e.g. distance between different production units). Care is taken that the combination of waste gases does not lead to the dilution of emissions. BAT 6. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air, BAT is to ensure that the waste gas treatment systems are appropriately designed (e.g. considering the maximum flow rate and pollutant concentrations), operated within their design ranges, and maintained (through preventive, corrective, regular and unplanned maintenance) so as to ensure optimal availability, effectiveness and efficiency of the equipment. 1.1.3.2. Monitoring BAT 7. BAT is to continuously monitor key process parameters (e.g. waste gas flow and temperature) of waste gas streams being sent to pretreatment and/or final treatment. BAT 8. BAT is to monitor channelled emissions to air with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 1.1.3.3. Organic compounds BAT 9. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce the mass flow of organic compounds sent to the final waste gas treatment, BAT is to recover organic compounds from process off-gases by using one or a combination of the techniques given below and to reuse them. Applicability Recovery may be restricted where the energy demand is excessive due to the low concentration of the compound(s) concerned in the process off-gas(es). Reuse may be restricted due to product quality specifications. BAT 10. In order to increase energy efficiency and to reduce the mass flow of organic compounds sent to the final waste gas treatment, BAT is to send process off-gases with a sufficient calorific value to a combustion unit that is, if technically possible, combined with heat recovery. BAT 9 has priority over sending process off-gases to a combustion unit. Description Process off-gases with a high calorific value are burnt as a fuel in a combustion unit (gas engine, boiler, process heater or furnace) and the heat is recovered as steam or for electricity generation, or to provide heat to the process. For process off-gases with low VOC concentrations (e.g. < 1 g/Nm 3 ), pre-concentration steps may be applied using adsorption (rotor or fixed bed, with activated carbon or zeolites), in order to increase the calorific value of the process off-gases. Molecular sieves (‘smoothers’), typically composed of zeolites, may be used to level down high variations (e.g. concentration peaks) of VOC concentrations in the process off-gases. Applicability Sending process off-gases to a combustion unit may be restricted due to the presence of contaminants or due to safety considerations. BAT 11. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of organic compounds, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.1 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of organic compounds The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. BAT 12. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of PCDD/F from thermal treatment of waste gases containing chlorine and/or chlorinated compounds, BAT is to use techniques a. and b., and one or a combination of techniques c. to e., given below. Table 1.2 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled emissions to air of PCDD/F from thermal treatment of waste gases containing chlorine and/or chlorinated compounds The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 1.1.3.4. Dust (including PM 10 and PM 2,5 ) and particulate-bound metals BAT 13. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce the mass flow of dust and particulate-bound metals sent to the final waste gas treatment, BAT is to recover materials from process off-gases by using one or a combination of the techniques given below and to reuse them. Applicability Recovery may be restricted where the energy demand for dust purification or decontamination is excessive. Reuse may be restricted due to product quality specifications. BAT 14. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of dust and particulate-bound metals, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.3 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of dust, lead and nickel The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 1.1.3.5. Inorganic compounds BAT 15. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce the mass flow of inorganic compounds sent to the final waste gas treatment, BAT is to recover inorganic compounds from process off-gases by using absorption and to reuse them. Description See Section 1.4.1. Applicability Recovery may be restricted where the energy demand is excessive due to the low concentration of the compound(s) concerned in the process off-gas(es). Reuse may be restricted due to product quality specifications. BAT 16. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of CO, NO X and SO X from thermal treatment, BAT is to use technique c. and one or a combination of the other techniques given below. Table 1.4 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of NO X and indicative emission level for channelled emissions to air of CO from thermal treatment The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. The BAT-AEL for channelled emissions to air of SO 2 is given in Table 1.6. BAT 17. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of ammonia from the use of selective catalytic reduction (SCR) or selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR) for the abatement of NO X emissions (ammonia slip), BAT is to optimise the design and/or operation of SCR or SNCR (e.g. optimised reagent to NO X ratio, homogeneous reagent distribution and optimum size of the reagent drops). Table 1.5 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled emissions to air of ammonia from the use of SCR or SNCR (ammonia slip) The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. BAT 18. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of inorganic compounds other than channelled emissions to air of ammonia from the use of selective catalytic reduction (SCR) or selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR) for the abatement of NO X emissions), channelled emissions to air of CO, NO X and SO X from the use of thermal treatment, and channelled emissions to air of NO X from process furnaces/heaters, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.6 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of inorganic compounds The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 1.1.4. Diffuse VOC emissions to air 1.1.4.1. Management system for diffuse VOC emissions BAT 19. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce diffuse VOC emissions to air, BAT is to elaborate and implement a management system for diffuse VOC emissions, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following features: Applicability The features points iii., iv., vi., and vii. are only applicable to sources of diffuse VOC emissions for which monitoring according to BAT 22 is applicable. The level of detail of the management system for diffuse VOC emissions will be proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of the plant, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.4.2. Monitoring BAT 20. BAT is to estimate fugitive and non-fugitive VOC emissions to air separately at least once every year by using one or a combination of the techniques given below, as well as to determine the uncertainty of this estimation. The estimation distinguishes between VOCs classified as CMR 1A or 1B and VOCs that are not classified as CMR 1A or 1B. The estimation of the diffuse VOC emissions to air takes into account the results of the monitoring carried out according to BAT 21 and/or to BAT 22. For the purpose of the estimation, channelled emissions may be counted as non-fugitive emissions when the inherent characteristics of the waste gas stream (e.g. low velocities, variability of the flow rate and concentration) do not allow an accurate measurement according to BAT 8. The main sources of uncertainty of the estimation are identified, and corrective actions are implemented to reduce the uncertainty. BAT 21. BAT is to monitor diffuse VOC emissions from the use of solvents by compiling, at least once every year, a solvent mass balance of the solvent inputs and outputs of the plant, as defined in Part 7 of Annex VII to Directive 2010/75/EU and to minimise the uncertainty of the solvent mass balance data by using all of the techniques given below. Applicability This BAT may not apply to the production of polyolefins, PVC or synthetic rubbers. This BAT may not be applicable to plants whose total annual consumption of solvents is lower than 50 tonnes. The level of detail of the solvent mass balance will be proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of the plant, and the range of environmental impacts it may have, as well as to the type and quantity of solvents used. BAT 22. BAT is to monitor diffuse VOC emissions to air with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. Optical gas imaging (OGI) is a useful complementary technique to the method EN 15446 (‘sniffing’) in order to identify sources of fugitive VOC emissions and is particularly relevant in the case of inaccessible sources (see Section 1.4.2.). This technique is described in EN 17628. In the case of non-fugitive emissions, measurements may be complemented by the use of thermodynamic models. Where large amounts (e.g. above 80 t/yr) of VOCs are used/consumed, the quantification of VOC emissions from the plant with tracer correlation (TC) or with optical absorption-based techniques, such as differential absorption light detection and ranging (DIAL) or solar occultation flux (SOF), is a useful complementary technique (see Section 1.4.2.). These techniques are described in EN 17628. Applicability BAT 22 only applies when the annual quantity of diffuse VOC emissions from the plant estimated according to BAT 20 is greater than the following: For fugitive emissions: For non-fugitive emissions: 1.1.4.3. Prevention or reduction of diffuse VOC emissions BAT 23. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce diffuse VOC emissions to air, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given below with the following order of priority. The use of techniques to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce diffuse VOC emissions to air is prioritised according to the hazardous properties of the emitted substance(s) and/or the significance of the emissions. 1.1.4.4. BAT conclusions for the use of solvents or the reuse of recovered solvents The emission levels for the use of solvents or the reuse of recovered solvents given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1 and Section 1.1.4.3. Table 1.7 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for diffuse VOC emissions to air from the use of solvents or the reuse of recovered solvents The associated monitoring is given in BAT 20, BAT 21 and BAT 22. 1.2. Polymers and synthetic rubbers The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the production of certain polymers. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. 1.2.1. BAT conclusions for the production of polyolefins BAT 24. BAT is to monitor the TVOC concentration in polyolefin products, at least once every year for each representative polyolefin grade produced during the same year, in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. The measurement samples are taken at the point of transition from the closed to the open system where the polyolefin comes into contact with the atmosphere. The closed system refers to the part of the production process where the materials (e.g. reactants, solvents, suspension agents) are not in contact with the atmosphere. It includes the polymerisation steps, the reuse and recovery of materials. The open system refers to the part of the production process where the polyolefins come into contact with the atmosphere. It includes the finishing steps (e.g. drying, blending) as well as the transfer, handling and storage of polyolefins. When the transition point between the open and the closed system cannot be clearly identified, the measurement samples are taken at an appropriate point. Applicability Measurements do not apply to production processes only made up of a closed system. BAT 25. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce emissions to air of organic compounds, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below, as far as applicable. Table 1.8 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for total emissions to air of VOCs from the production of polyolefins expressed as specific emission loads The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8, BAT 20, BAT 22 and BAT 24. The monitoring of TVOC emissions to air includes all emissions from the following process steps, where the emissions are identified as relevant in the inventory given in BAT 2: storage and handling of raw materials, polymerisation, recovery of materials and pollutant abatement, finishing of the polymer (e.g. extrusion, drying, blending) as well as the transfer, handling and storage of polymers. 1.2.2. BAT conclusions for the production of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) BAT 26. BAT is to monitor channelled emissions to air with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 27. BAT is to monitor the residual vinyl chloride monomer concentration in PVC slurry/latex, at least once every year for each representative PVC grade produced during the same year, in accordance with EN standards. The samples of the PVC slurry/latex are taken at the point of transition from the closed to the open system where the PVC slurry/latex comes into contact with the atmosphere. The closed system refers to the part of the production process where the PVC slurry/latex is not in contact with the atmosphere. It generally includes the polymerisation steps, the reuse and recovery of VCM. The open system is the part of the system where the PVC slurry/latex comes into contact with the atmosphere. It includes the finishing steps (e.g. drying and blending) as well as the transfer, handling and storage of PVC. BAT 28. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce the mass flow of organic compounds sent to the final waste gas treatment, BAT is to recover the vinyl chloride monomer from process off-gases by using one or a combination of the techniques given below, and to reuse the recovered monomer. Applicability Recovery may be restricted where the energy demand is excessive due to the low concentration of the compound(s) concerned in the process off-gas(es). BAT 29. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of vinyl chloride monomer from the recovery of vinyl chloride monomer, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.9 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled emissions to air of VCM from the recovery of VCM The associated monitoring is given in BAT 26. BAT 30. In order to reduce emissions to air of vinyl chloride monomer, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. Table 1.10 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for total emissions to air of VCM from the production of PVC expressed as specific emission loads The associated monitoring is given in BAT 20, BAT 22, BAT 26 and BAT 27. The monitoring of VCM emissions to air includes all emissions from the following process steps or equipment, where the emissions are identified as relevant in the inventory given in BAT 2: finishing, e.g. drying and blending; transfer, handling and storage; reactor openings; gasholders; waste water treatment plants; recovery and/or abatement of VCM. Table 1.11 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for the VCM concentration in the PVC slurry/latex The associated monitoring is given in BAT 27. 1.2.3. BAT conclusions for the production of synthetic rubbers BAT 31. BAT is to monitor the TVOC concentration in synthetic rubbers, at least once every year for each representative synthetic rubber grade produced during the same year, in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. The samples are taken after lowering the VOC content in the polymer (see BAT 32 a.) where the synthetic rubber comes into contact with the atmosphere. Applicability Measurements do not apply to production processes only made up of a closed system. BAT 32. In order to reduce emissions to air of organic compounds, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.12 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for total emissions to air of VOC from the production of synthetic rubbers expressed as specific emission load The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8, BAT 20, BAT 22 and BAT 31. The monitoring of TVOC emissions to air includes all emissions from the following process steps, where the emissions are identified as relevant in the inventory given in BAT 2: storage of raw materials, polymerisation, recovery of materials and abatement techniques, finishing of the polymer (e.g. extrusion, drying, blending) as well as the transfer, handling and storage of synthetic rubbers. 1.2.4. BAT conclusions for the production of viscose using CS 2 BAT 33. BAT is to monitor channelled emissions to air with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 34. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce the mass flow of CS 2 and H 2 S sent to the final waste gas treatment, BAT is to recover CS 2 by using technique a. and/or technique b. or a combination of technique c. with technique(s) a. and/or b., given below and to reuse the CS 2 , or, alternatively, to use technique d. BAT 35. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of CS 2 and H 2 S, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.13 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of CS 2 and H 2 S from the production of viscose using CS 2 The associated monitoring is given in BAT 33. Table 1.14 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air of H 2 S and CS 2 from the production of staple fibres and casing expressed as specific emission loads The associated monitoring is given in BAT 33. 1.3. Process furnaces/heaters The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply when process furnaces/heaters with a total rated thermal input equal to or greater than 1 MW are used in the production processes included in the scope of these BAT conclusions. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. Where the waste gases of two or more separate process furnaces/heaters are, or could, in the judgement of the competent authority, be discharged through a common stack, the capacities of all individual furnaces/heaters shall be added together for the purpose of calculating the total rated thermal input. BAT 36. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce channelled emissions to air of CO, dust, NO X and SO X , BAT is to use technique c. and one or a combination of the other techniques given below. Table 1.15 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled NO X emissions to air and indicative emission level for channelled CO emissions to air from process furnaces/heaters The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 1.4. Description of techniques 1.4.1. Techniques to reduce channelled emissions to air 1.4.2. Techniques to monitor diffuse emissions to air 1.4.3. Techniques to reduce diffuse emissions ( 1 ) Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from medium combustion plants ( OJ L 313, 28.11.2015, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Directive 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe ( OJ L 152, 11.6.2008, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations and/or due to operational conditions (e.g. batch processes), a 30-minute sampling/measurement and/or an average of three consecutive samplings/measurements is inappropriate, a more representative sampling/measurement procedure may be employed. For PCDD/F, one sampling period of 6 to 8 hours is used. ( 6 ) Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) The monitoring only applies when the substance/parameter concerned is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory given in BAT 2. ( 8 ) Measurements are carried out according to EN 15259. ( 9 ) To the extent possible, the measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. ( 10 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every year or once every 3 years if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 11 ) Generic EN standards for continuous measurements are EN 14181, EN 15267-1, EN 15267-2 and EN 15267-3. ( 12 ) In the case of process furnaces/heaters with a total rated thermal input of less than 100 MW operated less than 500 hours per year, the minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every year. ( 13 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 3 years if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 14 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 6 months if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 15 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every year if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 16 ) In the case of the production of polyolefins, the monitoring of TVOC emissions from finishing steps (e.g. drying, blending) and from polymer storage may be complemented by the monitoring in BAT 24 if it provides a better representation of the TVOC emissions. ( 17 ) In the case of the production of synthetic rubbers, the monitoring of TVOC emissions from finishing steps (e.g. extrusion, drying, blending) and from synthetic rubber storage may be complemented by the monitoring in BAT 31 if it provides a better representation of the TVOC emissions. ( 18 ) i.e. other than benzene, 1,3-butadiene, chloromethane, dichloromethane, ethylene dichloride, ethylene oxide, formaldehyde, propylene oxide, tetrachloromethane, toluene, trichloromethane. ( 19 ) For activities listed under points 8 and 10, Part 1 of Annex VII of the IED, the BAT-AEL ranges apply to the extent that they lead to lower emission levels than the emission limit values in part 2 and 4 of Annex VII to the IED. ( 20 ) TVOC is expressed in mg C/Nm 3 . ( 21 ) In the case of polymer production, the BAT-AEL may not apply to emissions from the finishing steps (e.g. extrusion, drying, blending) and from polymer storage. ( 22 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the TVOC mass flow is below e.g. 100 g C/h) if no CMR substances are identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory given in BAT 2. ( 23 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 30 mg C/Nm 3 when using techniques to recover materials (e.g. solvents, see BAT 9), if both of the following conditions are fulfilled: ( 24 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the mass flow of the sum of the VOCs classified as CMR 1A or 1B is below e.g. 1 g/h). ( 25 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the mass flow of the sum of the VOCs classified as CMR 2 is below e.g. 50 g/h). ( 26 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the mass flow of the substance concerned is below e.g. 1 g/h). ( 27 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the mass flow of the substance concerned is below e.g. 50 g/h). ( 28 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 15 mg/Nm 3 when using techniques to recover materials (e.g. solvents, see BAT 9), if the abatement efficiency of the waste gas treatment system is ≥ 95 %. ( 29 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 20 mg/Nm 3 when using techniques to recover toluene (see BAT 9), if the abatement efficiency of the waste gas treatment system is ≥ 95 %. ( 30 ) The upper end of the range is 20 mg/Nm 3 when neither an absolute nor a fabric filter is applicable. ( 31 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the dust mass flow is below e.g. 50 g/h) if no CMR substances are identified as relevant in the dust based on the inventory given in BAT 2. ( 32 ) In the case of the production of complex inorganic pigments using direct heating, and in the case of the drying step in the production of E-PVC, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 10 mg/Nm 3 . ( 33 ) Dust emissions are expected to be towards the lower end of the BAT-AEL range (e.g. below 2,5 mg/Nm 3 ) when the presence of substances classified as CMR 1A or 1B, or CMR 2 in the dust is identified as relevant (see BAT 2). ( 34 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the lead mass flow is below e.g. 0,1 g/h). ( 35 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the Ni mass flow is below e.g. 0,15 g/h). ( 36 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 80 mg/Nm 3 if the process off-gas(es) contain(s) high levels of NO X precursors. ( 37 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 200 mg/Nm 3 if the process off-gas(es) contain(s) high levels of NO X precursors. ( 38 ) As an indication, the emission levels for carbon monoxide are 4-50 mg/Nm 3 , as a daily average or average over the sampling period. ( 39 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 40 mg/Nm 3 in the case of process off-gases containing very high levels of NO X (e.g. above 5 000 mg/Nm 3 ) prior to treatment with SCR or SNCR. ( 40 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to channelled emissions to air of ammonia from the use of SCR or SNCR (ammonia slip). This is covered by BAT 17. ( 41 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the NH 3 mass flow is below e.g. 50 g/h). ( 42 ) In the case of the drying step in the production of E-PVC, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 20 mg/Nm 3 , when the substitution of ammonium salts is not possible due to product quality specifications. ( 43 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the mass flow of the substance concerned is below e.g. 5 g/h). ( 44 ) In the case of NO X concentrations above 100 mg/Nm 3 , the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 3 mg/Nm 3 due to analytical interference ( 45 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the HCl mass flow is below e.g. 30 g/h). ( 46 ) In the case of the production of explosives, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 220 mg/Nm 3 when regenerating or recovering nitric acid from the production process. ( 47 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to channelled emissions to air of NO X from the use of catalytic or thermal oxidation (see BAT 16) or from process furnaces/heaters (see BAT 36). ( 48 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the mass flow of the substance concerned is below e.g. 500 g/h. ( 49 ) In the case of the production of caprolactam, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 200 mg/Nm 3 in the case of process off-gases containing very high levels of NO X (e.g. above 10 000 mg/Nm 3 ) prior to treatment with SCR or SNCR, when the abatement efficiency of the SCR or SNCR is ≥ 99 %. ( 50 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply in the case of physical purification or reconcentration of spent sulphuric acid. ( 51 ) The monitoring only applies to emission sources that are identified as relevant in the inventory given in BAT 2. ( 52 ) The monitoring does not apply to equipment operated under subatmospheric pressure. ( 53 ) In the case of inaccessible sources of fugitive VOC emissions (e.g. if the monitoring requires the removal of insulation or the use of scaffolding), the monitoring frequency may be reduced to once during the period covered by each LDAR programme (see BAT 19 point iii.). ( 54 ) For the production of PVC, the minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 5 years if the plant uses VCM gas detectors to continuously monitor VCM emissions in a way that allows an equivalent level of detection of VCM leaks. ( 55 ) In the case of high-integrity equipment (see BAT 23 b.) in contact with VOCs classified as CMR 1A or 1B, a lower minimum monitoring frequency may be adopted, but in any case at least once every 5 years. ( 56 ) In the case of high-integrity equipment (see BAT 23 b.) in contact with VOCs other than VOCs classified as CMR 1A or 1B, a lower minimum monitoring frequency may be adopted, but in any case at least once every 8 years. ( 57 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 5 years if non-fugitive emissions are quantified by using measurements. ( 58 ) This standard may be complemented by EN 17628. ( 59 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to plants whose total annual consumption of solvents is lower than 50 tonnes. ( 60 ) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range is typically associated with the gas-phase polymerisation process. ( 61 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 2,7 g C/kg in the case of the production of EVA or other copolymers (e.g. ethyl acrylate copolymers). ( 62 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 4,7 g C/kg if both of the following conditions are met: ( 63 ) The monitoring of VCM emissions from finishing steps (e.g. drying, blending) as well as from the transfer, handling and storage of PVC may be replaced by the monitoring in BAT 27. ( 64 ) Generic EN standards for continuous measurements are EN 14181, EN 15267-1, EN 15267-2 and EN 15267-3. ( 65 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 6 months if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 66 ) To the extent possible, the measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. ( 67 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every year if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 68 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the VCM mass flow is below e.g. 1 g/h). ( 69 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 5 mg/Nm 3 if both of the following conditions are met: ( 70 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 0,5 g VCM per kg of PVC produced if both of the following conditions are met: ( 71 ) The monitoring only applies when the substance concerned is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory given in BAT 2. ( 72 ) Generic EN standards for continuous measurements are EN 14181, EN 15267-1, EN 15267-2 and EN 15267-3. ( 73 ) In the case of the production of casing, the minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every month when continuous monitoring is not possible due to analytical interference. ( 74 ) To the extent possible, the measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. ( 75 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to the production of filament yarn. ( 76 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 500 mg CS 2 /Nm 3 if: ( 77 ) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range can be achieved by using thermal oxidation or technique d. in BAT 34. ( 78 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 30 mg/Nm 3 , when the sum of H 2 S and CS 2 (expressed as Total S) is close to the lower end of the BAT-AEL range in Table 1.14. ( 79 ) Emissions to air refer to channelled emissions only. ( 80 ) In the case of the production of complex inorganic pigments, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 400 mg/Nm 3 when condition b) below is met, and up to 1 000 mg/Nm 3 when conditions a) and b) below are met: ( 81 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply to minor emissions (i.e. when the NO X mass flow is below e.g. 500 g/h). ( 82 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 200 mg/Nm 3 when direct heating is used. ( 83 ) As an indication, the emission levels for carbon monoxide are 4-50 mg/Nm 3 , as a daily average or average over the sampling period.