REGULATION (EC) No 1221/2009 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 175(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 2 ) , Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty ( 3 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Objective A Community eco-management and audit scheme, hereinafter referred to as ‘EMAS’, is hereby established, allowing voluntary participation by organisations located inside or outside the Community. The objective of EMAS, as an important instrument of the Sustainable Consumption and Production and Sustainable Industrial Policy Action Plan, is to promote continuous improvements in the environmental performance of organisations by the establishment and implementation of environmental management systems by organisations, the systematic, objective and periodic evaluation of the performance of such systems, the provision of information on environmental performance, an open dialogue with the public and other interested parties and the active involvement of employees in organisations and appropriate training. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation the following definitions shall apply: CHAPTER II REGISTRATION OF ORGANISATIONS Article 3 Determination of the Competent Body 1. Applications for registration from organisations in a Member State shall be made to a Competent Body in that Member State. 2. An organisation with sites located in one or more Member States or third countries may apply for one single corporate registration of all or some of those sites. Applications for a single corporate registration shall be made to a Competent Body of the Member State where the organisation's headquarters or management centre designated for the purpose of this paragraph is located. 3. Applications for registration from organisations outside the Community, including corporate registration consisting only of sites located outside the Community, shall be made to any Competent Body in those Member States that provide for the registration of organisations from outside the Community in accordance with the second subparagraph of Article 11(1). Those organisations shall ensure that the environmental verifier which will carry out the verification and validate the environmental management system of the organisation is accredited or licensed in the Member State where the organisation applies for registration. Article 4 Preparation for registration 1. Organisations wishing to be registered for the first time shall: 2. Organisations may use the assistance referred to in Article 32 that is available in the Member State where the organisation applies for registration. 3. Organisations which have a certified environmental management system, recognised in accordance with Article 45(4), shall not be obliged to carry out those parts which have been recognised as equivalent to this Regulation. 4. Organisations shall provide material or documentary evidence showing that the organisation complies with all applicable legal requirements relating to the environment. Organisations may request information from the competent enforcement authority or authorities in accordance with Article 32 or the environmental verifier. Organisations outside the Community shall also make reference to the legal requirements relating to the environment applicable to similar organisations in the Member States where they intend to submit an application. Where sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46 are available for the specific sector, the assessment of the organisation's environmental performance shall be made with reference to the relevant document. 5. The initial environmental review, the environment management system, the audit procedure and its implementation shall be verified by an accredited or licensed environmental verifier and the environmental statement shall be validated by that verifier. Article 5 Application for registration 1. Any organisation meeting requirements set out in Article 4 may apply for registration. 2. The application for registration shall be made to the Competent Body determined in accordance with Article 3 and shall include the following: 3. The application shall be written in (one of) the official language(s) of the Member State in which the organisation applies for registration. CHAPTER III OBLIGATIONS OF REGISTERED ORGANISATIONS Article 6 Renewal of EMAS registration 1. A registered organisation shall at least on a three-yearly basis: 2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, in the intervening years, a registered organisation shall: 3. Registered organisations shall make their environmental statement and updated environmental statement accessible to the public within one month of registration and one month after the renewal of the registration is completed. Registered organisations may satisfy that requirement by providing access to the environmental statement and the updated environmental statement upon request or by creating links to Internet sites where those statements can be accessed. Registered organisations shall specify the way in which they provide public access in the form set out in Annex VI. Article 7 Derogation for small organisations 1. Competent Bodies shall, upon request of a small organisation, extend for that organisation the three-yearly frequency referred to in Article 6(1) up to four years or the annual frequency referred to in Article 6(2) up to two years, provided that the environmental verifier that has verified the organisation confirms that all the following conditions are met: To submit the request referred to in the first subparagraph, the organisation may use the form set out in Annex VI. 2. The Competent Body shall refuse the request if the conditions set out in paragraph 1 are not met. It shall communicate a reasoned justification to the organisation. 3. Organisations benefiting from an extension of up to two years, as referred to in paragraph 1, shall forward the non-validated updated environmental statement to the Competent Body each year that they are exempt from the obligation to have a validated updated environmental statement. Article 8 Substantial changes 1. Where a registered organisation plans to introduce substantial changes, the organisation shall carry out an environmental review of these changes, including their environmental aspects and impacts. 2. Following the environmental review of changes, the organisation shall update the initial environmental review, modify the environmental policy, the environmental programme and the environmental management system and revise and update the entire environmental statement accordingly. 3. All documents modified and updated pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be verified and validated within six months. 4. After validation, the organisation shall submit changes to the Competent Body using the form set out in Annex VI and make the changes publicly available. Article 9 Internal environmental audit 1. A registered organisation shall establish an audit programme that ensures that over a period of time, not exceeding three years or four years if the derogation provided for in Article 7 applies, all activities in the organisation are subject to an internal environmental audit in accordance with the requirements set out in Annex III. 2. The audit shall be carried out by auditors who possess, individually or collectively, the competence necessary for carrying out these tasks and are sufficiently independent of the activities they audit to make an objective judgment. 3. The organisation's environmental auditing programme shall define the objectives of each audit or audit cycle including the audit frequency for each activity. 4. A written audit report shall be prepared by the auditors at the end of each audit and audit cycle. 5. The auditor shall communicate the findings and conclusions of the audit to the organisation. 6. Following the audit process, the organisation shall prepare and implement an appropriate action plan. 7. The organisation shall put in place appropriate mechanisms that ensure that the audit results are followed up. Article 10 Use of the EMAS logo 1. Without prejudice to Article 35(2), the EMAS logo set out in Annex V may be used only by registered organisations and only as long as their registration is valid. The logo shall always bear the registration number of the organisation. 2. The EMAS logo shall only be used in accordance with the technical specifications set out in Annex V. 3. In case an organisation chooses, in accordance with Article 3(2), not to include all its sites in the corporate registration, it shall ensure that in its communications with the public and in its use of the EMAS logo it is clear which sites are covered by the registration. 4. The EMAS logo shall not be used: 5. Any environmental information published by a registered organisation may bear the EMAS logo provided such information makes reference to the organisation's latest environmental statement or updated environmental statement from which it was drawn and it has been validated by an environmental verifier as being: CHAPTER IV RULES APPLICABLE TO COMPETENT BODIES Article 11 Designation and role of Competent Bodies 1. Member States shall designate Competent Bodies, which shall be responsible for the registration of organisations located in the Community in accordance with this Regulation. Member States may provide that the Competent Bodies they designate provide for and shall be responsible for the registration of organisations located outside the Community in accordance with this Regulation. The Competent Bodies shall control the entry and maintenance of organisations on the register, including suspension and deletion. 2. The Competent Bodies may be national, regional or local. 3. The composition of the Competent Bodies shall guarantee their independence and neutrality. 4. The Competent Bodies shall have the appropriate resources, both financial and in terms of personnel, for the proper performance of their tasks. 5. The Competent Bodies shall apply this Regulation in a consistent manner and shall participate in regular peer evaluation as set out in Article 17. Article 12 Obligations concerning the registration process 1. Competent Bodies shall establish procedures for the registration of organisations. They shall in particular establish rules for: 2. Competent Bodies shall establish and maintain a register of organisations registered in their Member States, including information as to how their environmental statement or updated environmental statement can be obtained, and, in the case of changes, update that register on a monthly basis. The register shall be publicly available on a website. 3. Competent Bodies shall each month, directly or via the national authorities as decided by the Member States concerned, communicate changes in the register referred to in paragraph 2 to the Commission. Article 13 Registration of organisations 1. Competent Bodies shall consider applications for registration of organisations in accordance with the procedures established to this end. 2. Where an organisation applies for registration, the Competent Body shall register that organisation and give it a registration number if all the following conditions are fulfilled: 3. The Competent Body shall inform the organisation that it has been registered and provide the organisation with its registration number and the EMAS logo. 4. If a Competent Body concludes that an applicant organisation does not comply with the requirements set out in paragraph 2, it shall refuse to register that organisation and communicate a reasoned justification to the organisation. 5. If a Competent Body receives a written supervision report from the Accreditation or Licensing Body which provides evidence that the activities of the environmental verifier were not performed adequately enough to ensure that the requirements of this Regulation are met by the applicant organisation, it shall refuse to register that organisation. The Competent Body shall invite the organisation to submit a new application for registration. 6. In order to obtain the necessary evidence for taking a decision on refusal of registration of organisations, the Competent Body shall consult the concerned parties including the organisation. Article 14 Renewal of the organisation's registration 1. A Competent Body shall renew the registration of the organisation if all the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. The Competent Body shall inform the organisation that its registration has been renewed. Article 15 Suspension or deletion of organisations from the register 1. Where a Competent Body believes that a registered organisation does not comply with this Regulation, it shall give the organisation the opportunity to submit its views on the matter. Should the organisation fail to provide a satisfactory response it shall be deleted or suspended from the register. 2. Where a Competent Body receives a written supervision report from the Accreditation or Licensing Body which provides evidence that the activities of the environmental verifier were not performed adequately enough to ensure that the requirements of this Regulation are met by the registered organisation, registration shall be suspended. 3. A registered organisation shall be suspended or deleted from the register, as appropriate, if it fails to submit to a Competent Body, within two months of being required to do so, any of the following: 4. If a Competent Body is informed through a written report by the competent enforcement authority of a breach by the organisation of any applicable legal requirements relating to the environment, it shall suspend or delete the reference to that organisation from the register as appropriate. 5. In case a Competent Body decides to suspend or delete a registration it shall take into account at least the following: 6. In order to obtain the necessary evidence for taking its decision on suspension or deletion of organisations from the register, the Competent Body shall consult the concerned parties including the organisation. 7. Where the Competent Body has received evidence, other than by means of a written supervision report of the Accreditation or Licensing Body, that activities of the environmental verifier were not performed adequately enough to ensure that the requirements of this Regulation are met by the organisation, it shall consult the Accreditation or Licensing Body supervising the environmental verifier. 8. The Competent Body shall give reasons for any measures taken. 9. The Competent Body shall provide appropriate information to the organisation concerning the consultations with the concerned parties. 10. Suspension of an organisation from the register shall be lifted if the Competent Body has received satisfactory information that the organisation is in compliance with the requirements of this Regulation. Article 16 Forum of Competent Bodies 1. A Forum of Competent Bodies from all Member States, hereinafter referred to as ‘the Forum of Competent Bodies’, shall be set up by the Competent Bodies and meet at least once per year in the presence of a representative of the Commission. The Forum of Competent Bodies shall adopt its rules of procedure. 2. Competent Bodies of each Member State shall participate in the Forum of Competent Bodies. Where several Competent Bodies are established within one Member State, appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that all of them are informed about the activities of the Forum of Competent Bodies. 3. The Forum of Competent Bodies shall develop guidance to ensure the consistency of procedures relating to the registration of organisations in accordance with this Regulation, including renewal of registration and suspension and deletion of organisations from the register both inside and outside the Community. The Forum of Competent Bodies shall transmit to the Commission the guidance documents and documents referring to the peer evaluation. 4. Guidance documents referring to harmonisation procedures approved by the Forum of Competent Bodies shall be proposed as appropriate by the Commission for adoption in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 49(3). Those documents shall be made publicly available. Article 17 Peer evaluation of Competent Bodies 1. A peer evaluation shall be organised by the Forum of Competent Bodies to assess conformity of the registration system of every Competent Body with this Regulation and to develop a harmonised approach to the application of the rules relating to registration. 2. The peer evaluation shall be carried out on a regular basis and at least every four years, and shall include an assessment of the rules and procedures set out in Articles 12, 13 and 15. All Competent Bodies shall participate in the peer evaluation. 3. The Commission shall establish procedures for carrying out the peer evaluation, including appropriate appeals procedures against decisions taken as a result of the peer evaluation. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 49(3). 4. Procedures referred to in paragraph 3 shall be established before the first peer evaluation takes place. 5. The Forum of Competent Bodies shall transmit a regular report of the peer evaluation to the Commission and the Committee established under Article 49(1). That report shall be made publicly available after approval by the Forum of Competent Bodies and the Committee referred to in the first subparagraph. CHAPTER V ENVIRONMENTAL VERIFIERS Article 18 Tasks of Environmental verifiers 1. Environmental verifiers shall assess whether an organisation's environmental review, environmental policy, management system, audit procedures and their implementation comply with the requirements of this Regulation. 2. Environmental verifiers shall verify the following: 3. Environmental verifiers shall, in particular, verify the appropriateness of the initial environmental review, or audit or other procedures carried out by the organisation, without unnecessarily duplicating those procedures. 4. Environmental verifiers shall verify whether the results of the internal audit are reliable. Where appropriate, they shall use spot-checks for that purpose. 5. At the time of the verification for the preparation for registration of an organisation, the environmental verifier shall check that at least the following requirements are met by that organisation: 6. For the purposes of the verification for the renewal of registration referred to in Article 6(1), the environmental verifier shall check that the following requirements are met by the organisation: 7. For the purposes of the verification for renewal of registration referred to in Article 6(2), the environmental verifier shall check that at least the following requirements are met by the organisation: Article 19 Frequency of verification 1. The environmental verifier shall design, in consultation with the organisation, a programme that ensures that all elements required for registration and renewal of registration referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6 are verified. 2. The environmental verifier shall at intervals not exceeding 12 months validate any updated information in the environmental statement or updated environmental statement. Where relevant, the derogation provided for in Article 7 shall apply. Article 20 Requirements for environmental verifiers 1. In order to obtain accreditation or a licence in accordance with this Regulation, a candidate environmental verifier shall introduce a request with the Accreditation or Licensing Body from which it seeks accreditation or a licence. That request shall specify the scope of the requested accreditation or licence by reference to the classification of economic activities as set out in Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 ( 11 ) . 2. The environmental verifier shall provide to the Accreditation or Licensing Body appropriate evidence of its competence, including knowledge, relevant experience and technical capacities relevant to the scope of the requested accreditation or licence in the following fields: 3. The environmental verifier shall be required to demonstrate a continuing professional development in the fields of competence set out in paragraph 2 and to maintain such development for assessment by the Accreditation or Licensing Body. 4. The environmental verifier shall be an external third party, independent, in particular of the organisation's auditor or consultant, impartial and objective in performing its activities. 5. The environmental verifier shall ensure that it is free from any commercial, financial or other pressures which might influence its judgment or endanger trust in its independence of judgment and integrity in relation to the verification activities. The environmental verifier shall ensure compliance with any rules applicable in this respect. 6. The environmental verifier shall have documented methods and procedures, including quality control mechanisms and confidentiality provisions, to comply with the verification and validation requirements of this Regulation. 7. Where an organisation acts as environmental verifier, it shall keep an organisation chart detailing structures and responsibilities within the organisation and a statement of legal status, ownership and funding sources. That organisation chart shall be made available on request. 8. Compliance with these requirements shall be ensured through the assessment carried out prior to the accreditation or licensing and through the supervision by the Accreditation or Licensing Body. Article 21 Additional requirements for environmental verifiers which are natural persons and performing verification and validation activities individually Natural persons acting as environmental verifiers and performing verification and validation individually shall have, in addition to complying with the requirements set out in Article 20: Article 22 Additional requirements for environmental verifiers active in third countries 1. Where an environmental verifier intends to carry out verification and validation activities in third countries, it shall seek accreditation or licence for specific third countries. 2. In order to obtain accreditation or a licence for a third country, the environmental verifier shall meet, in addition to the requirements set out in Articles 20 and 21, the following requirements: 3. The requirements set out in paragraph 2 shall be deemed to be met where the environmental verifier demonstrates the existence of a contractual relationship between itself and a qualified person or organisation fulfilling those requirements. That person or organisation shall be independent of the organisation to be verified. Article 23 Supervision of environmental verifiers 1. Supervision of verification and validation activities carried out by environmental verifiers in: 2. At least four weeks in advance of each verification in a Member State, the environmental verifier shall notify its accreditation or licence details and the time and place of the verification to the Accreditation or Licensing Body responsible for the supervision of the environmental verifier concerned. 3. The environmental verifier shall immediately inform the Accreditation or Licensing Body of any changes which have a bearing on the accreditation or licence or their scope. 4. Provision shall be made by the Accreditation or Licensing Body, at regular intervals not exceeding 24 months, to ensure that the environmental verifier continues to comply with the accreditation or licence requirements and to monitor the quality of the verification and validation activities undertaken. 5. Supervision may consist of an office audit, on-the-spot supervision in organisations, questionnaires, a review of environmental statements or updated environmental statements validated by the environmental verifiers and review of the verification report. Supervision shall be proportionate to the activity undertaken by the environmental verifier. 6. Organisations must allow the Accreditation or Licensing Bodies to supervise the environmental verifier during the verification and validation process. 7. Any decision taken by the Accreditation or Licensing Body to terminate or suspend the accreditation or licence or restrict the scope of the accreditation or licence shall be taken only after the environmental verifier has had the possibility of a hearing. 8. If the supervising Accreditation or Licensing Body is of the opinion that the quality of the work of an environmental verifier does not meet the requirements of this Regulation, a written supervision report shall be transmitted to the environmental verifier concerned and to the Competent Body to which the organisation concerned intends to apply for registration or which registered the organisation concerned. In the case of any further dispute, the supervision report shall be transmitted to the Forum of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies referred to in Article 30. Article 24 Additional requirements for supervision of environmental verifiers active in a Member State other than that where the accreditation or license was granted 1. An environmental verifier accredited or licensed in one Member State shall, at least four weeks before performing verification and validation activities in another Member State, notify to the Accreditation or Licensing Body of the latter Member State the following information: That notification shall be provided before each verification and validation activity. 2. The Accreditation or Licensing Body may request clarification of the verifier's knowledge of the necessary applicable legal requirements relating to the environment. 3. The Accreditation or Licensing Body may require conditions other than those referred to in paragraph 1 only where those other conditions do not prejudice the right of the environmental verifier to provide services in a Member State other than the one where the accreditation or licence was granted. 4. The Accreditation or Licensing Body shall not use the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 to delay the arrival of the environmental verifier. Where the Accreditation or Licensing Body is not able to fulfil its tasks in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 before the time for verification and validation as notified by the verifier in accordance with paragraph 1(b), it shall communicate a reasoned justification to the verifier. 5. No discriminatory fees for notification and supervision shall be charged by the Accreditation or Licensing Bodies. 6. Where the supervising Accreditation or Licensing Body is of the opinion that the quality of the work of the environmental verifier does not meet the requirements of this Regulation, a written supervision report shall be transmitted to the environmental verifier concerned, the Accreditation or Licensing Body which granted the accreditation or licence, and the Competent Body to which the organisation concerned intends to apply for registration or which registered the organisation concerned. In the case of any further dispute the supervision report shall be transmitted to the Forum of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies referred to in Article 30. Article 25 Conditions for performing verification and validation 1. The environmental verifier shall operate within the scope of its accreditation or licence, and on the basis of a written agreement with the organisation. That agreement shall: 2. The environmental verifier shall ensure that the components of the organisation are unambiguously defined and correspond to a real division of the activities. The environmental statement shall clearly specify the different parts of the organisation that are subject to verification or validation. 3. The environmental verifier shall carry out an assessment of the elements set out in Article 18. 4. As part of the verification and validation activities the environmental verifier shall examine documentation, visit the organisation, carry out spot-checks and conduct interviews with personnel. 5. Prior to a visit by the environmental verifier, the organisation shall provide it with basic information about the organisation and its activities, the environmental policy and programme, the description of the environmental management system in operation in the organisation, details of the environmental review or audit carried out, the report on that review or audit and on any corrective action taken afterwards, and the draft environmental statement or updated environmental statement. 6. The environmental verifier shall prepare a written report for the organisation, on the outcome of the verification, which shall specify: 7. In cases of non-conformity with the provisions of this Regulation, the report shall specify in addition: 8. After verification, the environmental verifier shall validate the organisation's environmental statement or updated environmental statement and confirm that it meets the requirements of this Regulation provided that the outcome of the verification and validation confirms that: 9. Upon validation, the environmental verifier shall issue a signed declaration as referred to in Annex VII declaring that the verification and validation were carried out in accordance with this Regulation. 10. Environmental verifiers accredited or licensed in one Member State may perform verification and validation activities in any other Member State in accordance with the requirements set out in this Regulation. The verification or validation activity shall be subject to supervision by the Accreditation or Licensing Body of the Member State where the activity is to be performed. The start of the activity shall be notified to that Accreditation or Licensing Body in accordance with the timing set out in Article 24(1). Article 26 Verification and validation of small organisations 1. When carrying out verification and validation activities, the environmental verifier shall take into account specific characteristics of small organisations, including the following: 2. The environmental verifier shall conduct verification or validation in a way that does not impose unnecessary burdens on small organisations. 3. The environmental verifier shall take into account objective evidence that a system is effective, including the existence of procedures within the organisation that are proportionate to the size and complexity of the operation, the nature of the associated environmental impacts and the competence of the operators. Article 27 Conditions for verification and validation in third countries 1. Environmental verifiers accredited or licensed in a Member State may perform verification and validation activities for an organisation located in a third country in accordance with the requirements set out in this Regulation. 2. At least six weeks before verification or validation in a third country, the environmental verifier shall notify its accreditation or licence details and the time and place of the verification or validation to the Accreditation or Licensing Body of the Member State in which the organisation concerned intends to apply for registration or is registered. 3. The verification and validation activities shall be subject to supervision by the Accreditation or Licensing Body of the Member State in which the environmental verifier is accredited or licensed. The start of the activity shall be notified to that Accreditation or Licensing Body in accordance with the timing set out in paragraph 2. CHAPTER VI ACCREDITATION AND LICENSING BODIES Article 28 Operation of Accreditation and Licensing 1. Accreditation Bodies appointed by the Member States pursuant to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall be responsible for the accreditation of environmental verifiers and the supervision of the activities carried out by environmental verifiers in accordance with this Regulation. 2. Member States may appoint a Licensing Body, in accordance with Article 5(2) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, which shall be responsible for issuing licences to and supervising environmental verifiers. 3. Member States may decide not to allow the accreditation or licensing of natural persons as environmental verifiers. 4. Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall assess an environmental verifier's competence in the light of the elements set out in Articles 20, 21 and 22 relevant to the scope of the requested accreditation or licence. 5. The scope of accreditation or the licence of environmental verifiers shall be determined according to the classification of economic activities as set out in Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006. That scope shall be limited by the competence of the environmental verifier and, where appropriate, it shall take into account the size and complexity of the activity. 6. Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall establish appropriate procedures on accreditation or licensing, refusal of accreditation or a licence, suspension and withdrawal of accreditation or a licence of environmental verifiers and on supervision of environmental verifiers. Those procedures shall include mechanisms for considering observations from concerned parties, including Competent Bodies and the representative bodies of organisations, concerning applicants and accredited or licensed environmental verifiers. 7. In the case of a refusal of accreditation or licence, the Accreditation or Licensing Body shall inform the environmental verifier of the reasons for the decision. 8. Accreditation or Licensing Bodies shall establish, revise and update a list of environmental verifiers and their scope of accreditation or licence in their Member States and shall communicate each month, directly or via the national authorities as decided by the Member State concerned, changes in that list to the Commission and to the Competent Body of the Member State where the Accreditation or Licensing Body is located. 9. Within the framework of the rules and procedures regarding monitoring of activities as laid down in Article 5(3) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall draw up a supervision report where they decide, after consultation with the environmental verifier concerned, either of the following: This report shall be transmitted to the Competent Body in the Member State where the organisation is registered or applies for registration and, if applicable, to the Accreditation or Licensing Body that granted the accreditation or licence. Article 29 Suspension and withdrawal of accreditation or license 1. Suspension or withdrawal of the accreditation or licence shall require the consultation of concerned parties including the environmental verifier, in order to provide the Accreditation or Licensing Body with the necessary evidence for taking its decision. 2. The Accreditation or Licensing Body shall inform the environmental verifier of the reasons for the measures taken and, if applicable, of the process of discussion with the competent enforcement authority. 3. The accreditation or licence shall be suspended or withdrawn until assurance of the environmental verifier's compliance with this Regulation is obtained, as appropriate, depending on the nature and scope of the failure or violation of legal requirements. 4. Suspension of the accreditation or licence shall be lifted where the Accreditation or Licensing Body has received satisfactory information that the environmental verifier complies with this Regulation. Article 30 Forum of the Accreditation and Licensing Bodies 1. A forum constituted of all the Accreditation and Licensing Bodies from all Member States, hereinafter referred to as ‘the Forum of the Accreditation and Licensing Bodies’, shall be set up and meet at least once per year in the presence of a representative of the Commission. 2. The task of the Forum of the Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall be to ensure the consistency of procedures relating to the following: 3. The Forum of the Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall develop guidance on issues in the field of the competence of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies. 4. The Forum of the Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall adopt its rules of procedure. 5. The guidance documents referred to in paragraph 3 and the rules of procedure referred to in paragraph 4 shall be transmitted to the Commission. 6. Guidance documents referring to harmonisation procedures approved by the Forum of the Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall be proposed as appropriate by the Commission for adoption in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 49(3). These documents shall be made publicly available. Article 31 Peer evaluation of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies 1. The peer evaluation with regard to accreditation and licensing of environmental verifiers under this Regulation to be organised by the Forum of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies, shall be carried out on a regular basis, at least every four years, and shall include an assessment of the rules and procedures set out in Articles 28 and 29. All Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall participate in the peer evaluation. 2. The Forum of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies shall transmit a regular report of the peer evaluation to the Commission and the Committee established under Article 49(1). That report shall be made publicly available after approval by the Forum of Accreditation and Licensing Bodies and the Committee referred to in the first subparagraph. CHAPTER VII RULES APPLICABLE TO MEMBER STATES Article 32 Assistance to organisations relating to compliance with legal requirements relating to the environment 1. Member States shall ensure that organisations get access to information and assistance possibilities regarding legal requirements relating to the environment in that Member State. 2. The assistance shall include the following: 3. Member States may confer the tasks referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 to the Competent Bodies or to any other body having the necessary expertise and the appropriate resources to fulfil the task. 4. Member States shall ensure that enforcement authorities reply to requests, at least from small organisations, on the applicable legal requirements relating to the environment that fall within their competence, and provide information to the organisations on the means of showing how the organisations meet relevant legal requirements. 5. Member States shall ensure that competent enforcement authorities communicate a failure by registered organisations to comply with applicable legal requirements relating to the environment to the Competent Body which has registered the organisation. The competent enforcement authority shall inform that Competent Body as soon as possible and in any case within one month after it has become aware of the failure. Article 33 Promotion of EMAS 1. Member States shall, in conjunction with Competent Bodies, enforcement authorities and other relevant stakeholders, promote the EMAS scheme taking into account activities referred to in Articles 34 to 38. 2. To that end, Member States may establish a promotion strategy which shall be revised on a regular basis. Article 34 Information 1. Member States shall take appropriate measures to provide information to: 2. Member States shall, where appropriate, use professional publications, local journals, promotion campaigns or any other functional means to increase general awareness of EMAS. Member States may cooperate, in particular, with industrial associations, consumer organisations, environmental organisations, trade unions, local institutions and other relevant stakeholders. Article 35 Promotion activities 1. Member States shall carry out promotion activities for EMAS. These activities may include: 2. The EMAS logo without a registration number may be used by Competent Bodies, Accreditation and Licensing Bodies, national authorities and other stakeholders for EMAS-related marketing and promotional purposes. In such cases, use of the EMAS logo set out in Annex V shall not suggest that the user is registered where this is not the case. Article 36 Promotion of participation of small organisations Member States shall take adequate measures to encourage the participation of small organisations, inter alia, by: Article 37 Cluster and step-by-step approach 1. Member States shall encourage local authorities to provide, in participation with industrial associations, chambers of commerce and other concerned parties, specific assistance to clusters of organisations to meet the requirements for registration as referred to in Articles 4, 5 and 6. Each organisation from the cluster shall be registered separately. 2. Member States shall encourage organisations to implement an environment management system. They shall in particular encourage a step-by-step approach leading to EMAS registration. 3. Systems established pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 shall operate with the objective of avoiding unnecessary costs for participants, in particular for small organisations. Article 38 EMAS and other policies and instruments in the Community 1. Without prejudice to Community legislation, Member States shall consider how registration under EMAS in accordance with this Regulation can be: 2. Without prejudice to Community legislation, notably competition, taxation and State aid legislation, Member States shall, where appropriate, take measures facilitating organisations to become or remain EMAS registered. Those measures may include, inter alia , the following: Article 39 1. Member States may charge fees taking into account the following: Those fees shall not exceed a reasonable amount and shall be proportionate to the size of the organisation and to the work to be done. 2. Member States shall ensure that organisations are informed about all applicable fees. Article 40 Non-compliance 1. Member States shall take appropriate legal or administrative measures in case of non-compliance with this Regulation. 2. Member States shall put in place effective provisions against the use of the EMAS logo in violation of this Regulation. Provisions put in place in accordance with Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2005 concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market ( 12 ) may be used. Article 41 Information and reporting to the Commission 1. Member States shall inform the Commission of the structure and procedures relating to the functioning of the Competent Bodies and Accreditation and Licensing Bodies and shall update that information, where appropriate. 2. Every two years, Member States shall report to the Commission updated information on the measures taken pursuant to this Regulation. In those reports, Member States shall take account of the latest report presented by the Commission to the European Parliament and to the Council pursuant to Article 47. CHAPTER VIII RULES APPLICABLE TO THE COMMISSION Article 42 Information 1. The Commission shall provide information to: 2. The Commission shall maintain and make publicly available: Article 43 Collaboration and coordination 1. The Commission shall promote, as appropriate, collaboration between Member States in order, in particular, to achieve a uniform and consistent application of the rules throughout the Community relating to the following: 2. Without prejudice to Community legislation on public procurement, the Commission and other Community institutions and bodies shall, where appropriate, refer to EMAS or other environmental management systems recognised in accordance with Article 45, or equivalent, as contract performance conditions for works and service contracts. Article 44 Integration of EMAS into other policies and instruments in the Community The Commission shall consider how registration under EMAS in accordance with this Regulation can be: Article 45 Relationship with other environmental management systems 1. Member States may submit to the Commission a written request for recognition of existing environmental management systems, or parts thereof, that are certified in accordance with appropriate certification procedures recognised at national or regional level as complying with corresponding requirements of this Regulation. 2. Member States shall specify in their request the relevant parts of the environmental management systems and the corresponding requirements of this Regulation. 3. Member States shall provide evidence of the equivalence with this Regulation of all relevant parts of the environmental management system concerned. 4. The Commission shall, after examination of the request referred to in paragraph 1, and acting in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 49(2), recognise the relevant parts of the environmental management systems and recognise the accreditation or licensing requirements for the certification bodies if it is of the opinion that a Member State has: 5. The Commission shall publish the Article 46 Development of reference documents and guides 1. The Commission shall, in consultation with Member States and other stakeholders, develop sectoral reference documents that shall include: The Commission may also develop reference documents for cross-sectoral use. 2. The Commission shall take into account existing reference documents and environmental performance indicators developed in accordance with other environmental policies and instruments in the Community or international standards. 3. The Commission shall establish, by the end of 2010, a working plan setting out an indicative list of sectors, which will be considered priorities for the adoption of sectoral and cross-sectoral reference documents. The working plan shall be made publicly available and regularly updated. 4. The Commission shall, in cooperation with the Forum of Competent Bodies, develop a guide on registration of organisations outside the Community. 5. The Commission shall publish a user's guide setting out the steps needed to participate in EMAS. That guide shall be available in all official languages of the institutions of the European Union and online. 6. Documents developed in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 4 shall be submitted for adoption. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, by supplementing it, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 49(3). Article 47 Reporting Every five years, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report containing information on the actions and measures taken under this Chapter and information received from the Member States pursuant to Article 41. The report shall include an assessment of the impact of the scheme on the environment and the trend in terms of number of participants. CHAPTER IX FINAL PROVISIONS Article 48 Amendment of Annexes 1. The Commission may amend the Annexes if necessary or appropriate, in the light of experience gained in the operation of EMAS, in response to identified needs for guidance on EMAS requirements and in the light of any changes in international standards or new standards which are of relevance to the effectiveness of this Regulation. 2. Those measures, designed to amend non-essential elements of this Regulation, shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 49(3). Article 49 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a Committee. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 3 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. 3. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1) to (4) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. Article 50 Review The Commission shall review EMAS in the light of the experience gained during its operation and international developments by 11 January 2015. It shall take into account the reports transmitted to the European Parliament and to the Council in accordance with Article 47. Article 51 Repeal and transitional provisions 1. The following legal acts shall be repealed: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1: 3. Article 52 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 25 November 2009. For the European Parliament The President J. BUZEK For the Council The President Å. TORSTENSSON ( 1 ) Opinion of 25 February 2009 (not yet published in the Official Journal). ( 2 ) OJ C 120, 28.5.2009, p. 56 . ( 3 ) Opinion of the European Parliament of 2 April 2009 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and Council Decision of 26 October 2009. ( 4 ) OJ L 242, 10.9.2002, p. 1 . ( 5 ) OJ L 114, 24.4.2001, p. 1 . ( 6 ) OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30 . ( 7 ) OJ L 247, 17.9.2001, p. 1 . ( 8 ) OJ L 184, 23.7.2003, p. 19 . ( 9 ) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 . ( 10 ) OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36 . ( 11 ) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 ( OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) OJ L 149, 11.6.2005, p. 22 . ( 13 ) OJ L 247, 17.9.2001, p. 24 . ( 14 ) OJ L 70, 9.3.2006, p. 63 . ANNEX I ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW The environmental review shall cover the following areas: ANNEX II Environmental management system requirements and additional issues to be addressed by organisations implementing EMAS The environmental management system requirements under EMAS are those laid down in Section 4 of the EN ISO 14001:2004 standard. These requirements are reproduced in the left column of the table below, which constitutes Part A of this Annex. In addition, registered organisations are required to address a number of additional issues that have a direct link to a number of elements of Section 4 of the EN ISO 14001:2004 standard. These additional requirements are listed in the right column below, which constitutes Part B of this Annex. ( 1 ) The use of the text reproduced in this Annex is made with the permission of the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN). The full text can be purchased from the national standard bodies, the list of which is given in this Annex. Any reproduction of this Annex for commercial reasons is not permitted. ANNEX III INTERNAL ENVIRONMENTAL AUDIT A. Audit programme and audit frequency 1. Audit programme The audit programme shall guarantee that the management of the organisation is provided with the information it needs to review the organisation's environmental performance and the effectiveness of the environmental management system, and be able to demonstrate that they are under control. 2. Objectives of the audit programme The objectives shall include, in particular, assessing the management systems in place, and determining conformity with the organisation's policy and programme, which shall include compliance with relevant environmental regulatory requirements. 3. Scope of the audit programme The overall scope of the individual audits, or of each stage of an audit cycle where appropriate, shall be clearly defined and shall explicitly specify the: Environmental audit includes assessment of the factual data necessary to evaluate environmental performance. 4. Audit frequency The audit or audit cycle which covers all activities of the organisation shall be completed, as appropriate, at intervals of no longer than three years or four years if the derogation provided for in Article 7 applies. The frequency with which any activity is audited will vary depending on the: More complex activities with a more significant environmental impact shall be audited more frequently. The organisation shall carry out audits at least on an annual basis, as this will help to demonstrate to the organisation's management and the environmental verifier that it is in control of its significant environmental aspects. The organisation shall carry out audits regarding: B. Audit activities Audit activities shall include discussions with personnel, inspection of operating conditions and equipment and reviewing of records, written procedures and other relevant documentation, with the objective of evaluating the environmental performance of the activity being audited to determine whether it meets the applicable standards, regulations or environmental objectives and targets set and whether the system in place to manage environmental responsibilities is effective and appropriate, inter alia, spot-checking of compliance with these criteria should be used to determine the effectiveness of the entire management system. The following steps, in particular, shall be included in the audit process: C. Reporting audit findings and conclusions The fundamental objectives of a written audit report are: ANNEX IV ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING A. Introduction Environmental information shall be presented in a clear and coherent manner in electronic form or in printed form. B. Environmental statement The environmental statement shall contain at least the elements and shall meet the minimum requirements as set out below: The updated environmental statement shall contain at least the elements and shall meet the minimum requirements as set out in points (e) to (h). C. Core indicators and other relevant existing environmental performance indicators 1. Introduction Organisations shall report, both in the environmental statement and the updated environmental statement, on the core indicators insofar as these relate to the direct environmental aspects of the organisation and other relevant existing environmental performance indicators as set out below. The reporting shall provide data on actual input/impact. If disclosure would adversely affect the confidentiality of commercial or industrial information of the organisation where such confidentiality is provided for by national or Community law to protect a legitimate economic interest, the organisation may be permitted to index this information in its reporting, e.g. by establishing a base line year (with the index number 100) from which the development of the actual input/impact would appear. The indicators shall: 2. Core indicators 3. Other relevant environmental performance indicators Each organisation shall also report annually on its performance relating to the more specific environmental aspects as identified in its environmental statement and, where available, take account of sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46. D. Public availability The organisation shall be able to demonstrate to the environmental verifier that anybody interested in the organisation's environmental performance can easily and freely be given access to the information required above under points B and C. The organisation shall ensure that this information is available in (one of) the official language(s) of the Member State, in which the organisation is registered, and if applicable in (one of) the official language(s) of those Member States, in which sites covered by the corporate registration are located. E. Local accountability Organisations registering under EMAS may wish to produce one corporate environmental statement, covering a number of different geographic locations. As the intention of EMAS is to ensure local accountability, organisations shall ensure that the significant environmental impacts of each site are clearly identified and reported within the corporate environmental statement. ANNEX V EMAS LOGO 1. The logo may be used in any of the 23 languages provided the following wording is used: 2. The logo shall be used either: ANNEX VI INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION (information to be provided when applicable) ANNEX VII ENVIRONMENTAL VERIFIER'S DECLARATION ON VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION ACTIVITIES … (name). with EMAS environmental verifier registration number … accredited or licensed for the scope … (NACE Code) declares to have verified whether the site(s) or the whole organisation as indicated in the environmental statement/updated environmental statement ( *1 ) of the organisation … (name) with registration number (if available) … meet all requirements of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS). By signing this declaration, I declare that: This document is not equivalent to EMAS registration. EMAS registration can only be granted by a Competent Body under Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009. This document shall not be used as a stand-alone piece of public communication. Done at … on …/…/20…. Signature ( *1 ) cross when non-applicable. ANNEX VIII CORRELATION TABLE