COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/2866 of 15 December 2023 implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/631 of the European Parliament and of the Council by determining the procedures for performing the verification of the CO 2 emission and fuel consumption values of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles in-service (in-service verification) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2019/631 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 setting CO 2 emission performance standards for new passenger cars and for new light commercial vehicles, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 443/2009 and (EU) No 510/2011 ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 7(9), third subparagraph and Article 13(4), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation determines the procedures for verifying that the CO 2 emission and fuel consumption values recorded in the certificates of conformity correspond to the CO 2 emissions from and the fuel consumption of vehicles in-service and the procedures for verifying the presence of any strategies on board or relating to the vehicles that artificially improve the vehicle’s performance in the tests performed for the purpose of type-approval (‘in-service verification’). 2. This Regulation also establishes detailed rules on the procedures for reporting deviations found in the CO 2 emissions of vehicles in-service as compared to the specific emissions of CO 2 recorded in the certificates of conformity as a result of in-service verification and for taking those deviations into account in the calculation of the manufacturer’s average specific emissions of CO 2 . 3. This Regulation does not apply to the following: Article 2 Definitions For the purpose of this Regulation, the definitions in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 ( 4 ) , Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2019/631, paragraph 3 of UN Regulation No 154 and Article 2 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2867 ( 5 ) shall apply. In addition, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 Selection of in-service verification families 1. The number of in-service verification families selected each year by a granting type-approval authority shall be at least 2 % of the total number of in-service verification families for which that authority has issued emissions type-approvals in the three calendar years preceding the in-service verification. 2. When selecting in-service verification families in accordance with Article 3 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2867, the granting type-approval authority shall: 3. When performing the assessment referred to in paragraph 2, point (b), the Commission shall take into account at least the following elements, when available: 4. Each year, by 31 December, the Commission shall publish a report describing the methodology used for the assessment referred to in paragraph 2, point (b), and the main findings of its assessment undertaken in that year. The report shall also contain a list of in-service verification families with the highest risk of including vehicles with a deviation in the CO 2 emission values. Article 4 Type and number of in-service verification tests 1. For each in-service verification family selected in a given calendar year in accordance with Article 3, the granting type-approval authority shall undertake in that year at least one of the following tests on the vehicles selected, ensuring the following distribution: 2. For each in-service verification family selected, the following number of vehicles shall be tested: 3. The granting type-approval authority may decide to include in-service verification test results performed by the Commission, another type-approval authority, a market surveillance authority or a third party complying with the requirements of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/163, in the statistical method described in Annex I if all of the following conditions are met: Article 5 Selection of individual test vehicles 1. The granting type-approval authority shall select test vehicles that, at the time of selection, meet all of the following criteria: 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, where a granting type-approval authority is not able to select a sufficient number of vehicles meeting those criteria, the granting type-approval authority may select test vehicles that, at the time of selection, meet all of the following criteria: 3. The granting type-approval authority shall verify and ensure that the test vehicles are in a state representative of a vehicle properly maintained and used, and have characteristics covered by those recorded in the certificate of conformity, by means of the vehicle checklist set out in Annex II. Article 6 Test conditions for chassis dynamometer tests 1. For each test vehicle selected to undergo a chassis dynamometer test, the chassis dynamometer load settings referred to in paragraph 8 of Annex B4 to UN Regulation 154 shall be set according to the road load coefficients f 0 , f 1 , f 2 and the test mass specified in the certificate of conformity of the test vehicle. 2. The test fuel used for the chassis dynamometer tests shall be the reference fuel as specified in Annex B3 to UN Regulation No 154. In the case of bi-fuelled vehicles running on petrol and liquefied petroleum gas or on petrol and compressed natural gas, and in the case of flex-fuel vehicles using petrol and ethanol (E85) fuel, the chassis dynamometer test shall be performed on the fuel for which Member States have to report the CO 2 emissions value as set out in point 2a of Part A of Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2019/631 or in point 2a of Part A of Annex III to Regulation (EU) 2019/631. Article 7 Chassis dynamometer test result of an individual test vehicle 1. The granting type-approval authority shall calculate the RCB, target speed and distance corrections referred to in Annex B7 or, where applicable, B6 or B8, to UN Regulation No 154, using the results of the chassis dynamometer test performed. For the calculation of the Ki, K CO2 and ATCT family correction factors referred to in Annex B6, B7 and B8 to UN Regulation No 154, the granting type-approval authority shall do any of the following: 2. For each individual test vehicle, other than an OVC-HEV, undergoing a chassis dynamometer test, the granting type-approval authority shall determine the chassis dynamometer test result (CO 2 ratio ) as the ratio of the CO 2 emission value calculated from the chassis dynamometer test, taking into account the correction factors referred to in paragraph 1 (CO 2 , in-service verification ) to the combined CO 2 emission value recorded in entry 49 of the certificate of conformity of that vehicle (CO 2 , CoC ). 3. For each OVC-HEV undergoing a chassis dynamometer test, the granting type-approval authority shall determine the chassis dynamometer test result (CO 2 ratio ) as the ratio of the CO 2 emission value calculated from the chassis dynamometer test in charge sustaining mode according to Annex B8 to UN Regulation No 154, taking into account the correction factors referred to in paragraph 1 (CO 2 , in-service verification ) to the combined charge sustaining CO 2 emission value recorded in entry 49 of the certificate of conformity of that vehicle (CO 2 , CoC ). In addition, the granting type-approval authority shall determine the equivalent all electric range and CO 2 emission value calculated from the chassis dynamometer test in charge depleting mode according to Annex B8 to UN Regulation No 154, taking into account the correction factors referred to in paragraph 1. The test report shall include the ratio of the weighted combined CO 2 emission value calculated from the chassis dynamometer tests, taking into account the correction factors referred to in paragraph 1, to the weighted combined CO 2 emission value recorded in entry 49 of the certificate of conformity of that vehicle, as well as information on the deterioration of the traction battery over time and the equivalent all electric range. 4. For each individual test vehicle, the granting type-approval authority shall, before and after the chassis dynamometer test, read out from the on-board diagnostics serial port of the vehicle the values of the real-world data as defined in Article 2(c) of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/392, using a generic scan-tool. The granting type-approval authority shall include these values in the test report, together with the value for ‘fuel_consumed WLTP ’ in accordance with Annex C5 to UN Regulation No 154. Article 8 Statistical evaluation of chassis dynamometer test results and calculation of the size of the deviation 1. The granting type-approval authority shall evaluate the chassis dynamometer test results of the individual test vehicles obtained in accordance with Article 7 to establish whether or not there is a deviation in the CO 2 emission values of the in-service verification family undergoing chassis dynamometer tests, by using the method set out in Annex I. 2. In case the in-service verification family fails the statistical evaluation as set out in Annex I, the granting type-approval authority shall determine the size of the deviation in the CO 2 emission values as follows: where: Article 9 Test conditions for road load tests 1. For a road load test, the granting type-approval authority may use any of the measurement methods referred to in Annex B4 to UN Regulation No 154. 2. A vehicle selected for a road load test shall be emptied of all additional equipment and any features that were not present at the time of first registration shall be removed. The vehicle’s fuel tanks shall be filled to at least 90 per cent of their capacity. The vehicle shall be fitted with the standard equipment in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications, with an additional mass of 100 kg and with the mass representative of the vehicle load, as defined in paragraph 3.2.26 of UN Regulation No 154. The granting type-approval authority shall determine the mass of the vehicle thus prepared or as if thus prepared, which will be considered as the test mass determined during the road load test. 3. The granting type-approval authority shall ensure that the tyres of a vehicle selected for a road load test meet all of the following conditions: As an alternative to condition (a), the granting type-approval authority may apply a correction to the road load coefficient f 0 as set out in Annex III. The f 0, measured, corrected shall then be considered as the f 0 determined during the road load test. 4. The granting type-approval authority shall ensure that during the road load test the vehicle height control and active grill shutters of each test vehicle, as well as other movable aerodynamic body parts that dynamically modify its aerodynamic drag, operate according to the requirements set out in paragraph 4.2.1.5 of Annex B4 to UN Regulation No 154. Article 10 Road load test result of an individual test vehicle 1. For each individual test vehicle, other than an OVC-HEV, undergoing a road load test, the granting type-approval authority shall calculate the CO 2 emission value (CO 2, in-service verification ) from the road load coefficients f 0 , f 1 , f 2 and the test mass determined during the road load test by applying the methods set out in Annex B7 or, where applicable, Annex B8, to UN Regulation No 154, using the measured CO 2 emission values for vehicle low and vehicle high. 2. In case of an OVC-HEV undergoing a road load test, the granting type-approval authority shall calculate CO 2 , in-service verification from the road load coefficients f 0 , f 1 , f 2 and the test mass determined during the road load test by applying the methods set out in Annex B8 to UN Regulation No 154, using the interpolation line corresponding to the charge-sustaining mode. 3. In case the interpolation method was not used, CO 2 , in-service verification shall be calculated from the road load coefficients f 0 , f 1 , f 2 and the test mass determined during the road load test as set out in Annex IV. 4. For each individual test vehicle undergoing a road load test, the granting type-approval authority shall determine the road load test result (CO 2 ratio ) as the ratio of CO 2, in-service verification determined in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article, to the combined CO 2 emission value, or, in case of an OVC-HEV, the combined charge sustaining CO 2 emission value, recorded in entry 49 of the certificate of conformity of that vehicle (CO 2 , CoC ). Article 11 Statistical evaluation of road load test results and calculation of the size of the deviation 1. The granting type-approval authority shall evaluate the road load test results obtained in accordance with Article 10 to establish whether or not there is a deviation in the CO 2 emission values of the road load family undergoing road load tests, by using the method set out in Annex I. 2. In case the road load family fails the statistical evaluation as set out in Annex I, the granting type-approval authority shall determine the size of the deviation in the CO 2 emission values, as follows: where: Article 12 Test conditions for artificial strategies tests The granting type-approval authority shall verify the presence of artificial strategies in the test vehicle selected in accordance with Article 4 by means of the following tests: Article 13 Evaluation of artificial strategies test results and calculation of the size of the deviation 1. The granting type-approval authority shall evaluate the results of the tests performed in accordance with Article 12 to assess the risk of artificial strategies being present in the test vehicle, by comparing the following: 2. The granting type-approval authority shall describe the criteria used for this evaluation in the test report, with artificial strategies to be understood as any software, control logic, hardware or component on board or relating to the vehicle, which reduces the vehicle’s CO 2 emission or fuel consumption values in the tests performed for the purpose of emissions type-approval, but which does not operate consistently when the vehicle is in-service, taking into account the difference in conditions, unless this is required by legislation or can be justified by the necessity to protect the vehicle against immediate damage or to ensure safe operation of the vehicle. 3. If, based on the evaluation according to paragraph 1, the granting type-approval authority assesses the risk that artificial strategies are present in the test vehicle to be high, it shall specify and perform a specific test programme in addition to the tests performed according to Article 12, to identify the presence or absence of an artificial strategy. 4. If the granting type-approval authority identifies that artificial strategies are present, it shall determine the size of the deviation in the CO 2 emission values by comparing the CO 2 emission value with and without artificial strategies. If the size of that deviation cannot be determined based on the tests performed according to Article 12 and, if applicable, paragraph 3, the size of the deviation in the CO 2 emission values shall be 10 % of the CO 2 emission value of the vehicle high of the in-service verification family or, for OVC-HEV, 10 % of the CO 2 emission value in charge sustaining mode of the vehicle high of the in-service verification family, in both cases with a minimum of 14 g/km. Article 14 Test report 1. The granting type-approval authority shall include in the test reports referred to in Article 5(1) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2867, at least the following information for each in-service verification family tested and for each type of test: 2. Within 20 working days of finishing the tests, the test report shall be made available to the manufacturer of the vehicles concerned and the test report together with the following data for each of the individual test vehicles shall be uploaded in an encrypted format to a dedicated Commission server: The data and parameters specified in points (a) and (b) shall not be published. Where all data have been correctly uploaded for all tested vehicles of the in-service verification family, a receipt shall be sent from the Commission server to the uploading entity. Article 15 Conclusions of the granting type-approval authority 1. If the results of the in-service verification show that there is no deviation in the CO 2 emission values, the granting type-approval authority shall come to a conclusion to that effect and attach it to the test report. 2. If the results of the in-service verification show that there is a deviation in the CO 2 emission values, the manufacturer may contest the results within 20 working days after receiving the test report, by providing evidence demonstrating the correspondence between the CO 2 emission values recorded in the certificates of conformity and the values resulting from the in-service verification. In the absence of a reaction, the manufacturer shall be considered to have accepted the results of the in-service verification. 3. Taking into account the information provided by the manufacturer pursuant to paragraph 2, the granting type-approval authority shall come to a conclusion on whether or not the in-service verification has identified a lack of correspondence between the CO 2 emission values of the in-service verification and the values recorded in the certificates of conformity, or on the presence of artificial strategies. The granting type-approval authority shall transmit its conclusion to the manufacturer concerned and to the Commission at the latest 40 working days after informing the manufacturer according to paragraph 2. 4. The granting type-approval authority’s conclusions referred to in paragraph 3 shall, as a minimum, include the following: 5. Before 1 March of each calendar year, the granting type-approval authority shall publish an overview of the in-service verifications performed in the previous calendar year and its conclusions issued in that year, as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3, using the format set out in Annex VI. For in-service verification tests for which no conclusion is established before the publication of the overview, the conclusion shall be included in the next annual overview. Article 16 Correction of the average specific emissions of CO 2 of a manufacturer 1. Where the granting type-approval authority has issued a conclusion as referred to in Article 15(4), point (b), the Commission shall, based on the information included in that conclusion, for the calendar year in which the conclusion was issued and for the following calendar years, apply the size of the deviation of the CO 2 emission values for its provisional calculation of the average specific emissions of CO 2 according to Article 7(4) of Regulation (EU) 2019/631, and notify the manufacturer according to Article 7(5) of Regulation (EU) 2019/631. 2. The Commission shall also apply the size of the deviation of the CO 2 emission values as specified in the conclusion referred to in Article 15(4), point (b), for correcting the average specific emissions of CO 2 of the manufacturer for the ten calendar years prior to the year in which the conclusion was issued, but not earlier than the calendar year 2021. The Commission shall amend the implementing acts adopted in accordance with Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/631 accordingly. Article 17 Review The Commission shall by end of 2026 assess the need to increase the minimum number of in-service verification families to be selected each year according to Article 3(1) considering, in particular, the following: Article 18 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 15 December 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 111, 25.4.2019, p. 13 . ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the approval and market surveillance of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No 595/2009 and repealing Directive 2007/46/EC ( OJ L 151, 14.6.2018, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) UN Regulation No 154 – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of light duty passenger and commercial vehicles with regards to criteria emissions, emissions of carbon dioxide and fuel consumption and/or the measurement of electric energy consumption and electric range (WLTP) ( OJ L 290, 10.11.2022, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/1151 of 1 June 2017 supplementing Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council on type-approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions from light passenger and commercial vehicles (Euro 5 and Euro 6) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information, amending Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, Commission Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 and Commission Regulation (EU) No 1230/2012 and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 ( OJ L 175, 7.7.2017, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2867 of 5 October 2023 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2019/631 of the European Parliament and of the Council by setting out the guiding principles and criteria for defining the procedures for the verification of the CO 2 emissions and fuel consumption values of passenger cars and light commercial vehicles in-service (in-service verification) ( OJ L, 2023/2867, 18.12.2023, ELI: ). ( 6 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/163 of 7 February 2022 laying down the rules on the application of Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards functional requirements for market surveillance of vehicles, systems, components and separate technical units ( OJ L 27, 8.2.2022, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/392 of 4 March 2021 on the monitoring and reporting of data relating to CO 2 emissions from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/631 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Commission Implementing Regulations (EU) No 1014/2010, (EU) No 293/2012, (EU) 2017/1152 and (EU) 2017/1153 ( OJ L 77, 5.3.2021, p. 8 ). ANNEX I Statistical evaluation of chassis dynamometer and road load test results (1) Starting point The starting point for the statistical evaluation are the values for CO 2 ratio calculated for 3 individual test vehicles (N = 3) according to paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 7 for chassis dynamometer test results and according to paragraph 4 of Article 10 for road load test results. The criteria set out under point (2) determine if additional vehicles need to be tested. (2) Statistical parameters For the total number of vehicles tested (N), the average (X tests ) and the standard deviation (s) of the test results shall be determined: (3) Evaluation For the 3 vehicles initially tested and after each additional vehicle tested, the value X tests shall be assessed as set out below in order to reach one of the following conclusions for the in-service verification family or road load family concerned: where: t P and t F are as set out in the below table s is the standard deviation determined in accordance with point (2) A is 1,02 for chassis dynamometer test results; A is 1,03 for road load test results; A is 1,08 for road load test results for families tested in the years 2024 or 2025. Values for the pass/fail decision t-parameters (4) Calculation of the size of the deviation For the calculation of the size of the deviation, the average (CO 2 ratio ) is defined as X tests for the total number of vehicles tested, after the family has failed according to point (3): average (CO 2 ratio ) = X tests ( 1 ) Where s is the standard deviation determined in accordance with point (2). ANNEX II Checklist for vehicles selected for in-service verification tests ‘Exclusion criteria’ means that if the condition described is met (reply to the question is ‘yes’), the vehicle cannot be selected for in-service verification tests. ‘Confidential’ means that this information shall be kept as appropriate by the granting type-approval authority, but not be included in the test report submitted to the Commission. (1) Vehicle Characteristics 1.1. The following information shall be recorded and included in the test report: 1.2. The following exclusion criteria shall be checked: (2) Vehicle Owner/User Interview (The owner shall have no knowledge of the implications of the replies) 2.1. The following information shall be recorded: 2.2. The following exclusion criteria shall be checked: (3) Vehicle Examination 3.1. The following information shall be included in the test report: Remark: All checks requiring OBD connections are to be performed before and after the emission test 3.2. The following exclusion criteria shall be checked: 3.3. If the following conditions are not met, the vehicle may still be selected on the condition that appropriate action is taken before performing in-service verification tests: ( 1 ) All systems shall be part of OBD Diagnosis and ‘Error logs/Information detected and diagnosed’ shall be part of the test report. This guarantees that errors with indirect effect on emissions can be properly detected. ANNEX III Correction of the road load coefficient f 0 Step 1: Recalculation of f 0 , CoC : Step 2: Correction of f 0, measured : f 0, measured, corrected = f 0, measured + (f 0, CoC – f 0, CoC, new tyre ) Where: ANNEX IV Calculation of CO 2, in-service verification in case the interpolation method was not used where: ANNEX V In-service verification test data to be reported (1) In-service verification test data to be reported for a chassis dynamometer test or an artificial strategies test The data to be reported is the data specified in Table 2 of the Annex to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/392, where for the purpose of this Regulation, all In addition, the following data is to be reported: (2) In-service verification test data to be reported for a road load test ANNEX VI Reporting format for the in-service verification annual overview A. General information B. List of the in-service verification families selected for testing C. Summary of in-service verification test results D. Detailed in-service verification test results for the year concerned E. Detailed in-service verification test results, for which conclusions were reported as ‘Pending’ in the previous annual overview ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)