DIRECTIVE (EU) 2024/3019 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 November 2024 concerning urban wastewater treatment (recast) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 2 ) , Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 3 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Subject matter This Directive lays down rules on the collection, treatment and discharge of urban wastewater, to protect the environment and human health, in line with the One Health approach, while progressively reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to sustainable levels, improving the energy balance of urban wastewater collection and treatment activities and contributing to the transition towards a circular economy. It also lays down rules on access to sanitation for all, on transparency of the urban wastewater sector, on the regular surveillance of relevant public health parameters in urban wastewater and on the implementation of the polluter-pays principle. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Collecting systems and calculation of the load of an agglomeration 1. Member States shall ensure that all agglomerations of 2 000 p.e. and above comply with the following requirements: 2. Member States shall ensure that agglomerations of 1 000 p.e. and above but below 2 000 p.e. comply with the requirements of paragraph 1 by 31 December 2035. Member States may derogate from the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph for a maximum period of: Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania may derogate from the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph for a maximum period of: Where Member States derogate from the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph, they shall ensure that their first national implementation programme referred to in Article 23 includes: The extensions of the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph shall apply only if the conditions of the second or third subparagraph and of the fourth subparagraph are fulfilled. The Commission shall notify the Member States if those conditions are not fulfilled by 31 July 2028. 3. The load of an agglomeration expressed in p.e. shall be calculated on the basis of the maximum average weekly load generated in that agglomeration during the year, excluding unusual weather situations such as those due to heavy rain. 4. Collecting systems shall fulfil the requirements of Part A of Annex I. Article 4 Individual systems 1. Member States may derogate from Article 3 only if the establishment of a collecting system or the connection to a collecting system is not justified because it would produce no environmental or human health benefit, is not technically feasible or would involve excessive cost. If derogating from Article 3, Member States shall ensure that individual systems for the collection, storage and when applicable, treatment of urban wastewater are used in agglomerations of 1 000 p.e. and above, or part of those agglomerations. 2. Member States shall ensure that the individual systems referred to in paragraph 1 are designed, operated and maintained in a manner that achieves the same level of environmental and human health protection as the secondary and tertiary treatments referred to in Articles 6 and 7. 3. Member States shall ensure that individual systems that are used in agglomerations of 1 000 p.e. and above are registered in a registry. Member States shall ensure that regular inspections of those systems, or regular checks or controls of those systems by other means, are carried out by the competent authority or any other body authorised at national, regional or local level, on the basis of a risk-based approach. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts to specify minimum requirements for: Those implementing acts shall be adopted by 2 January 2028 in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). The requirements related to design referred to in paragraph 2 and this paragraph shall not apply to individual systems referred to in paragraph 1 which were established before 1 January 2025. 5. Member States that use individual systems to collect and/or treat more than 2 % of the urban wastewater load at national level from agglomerations of 2 000 p.e. and above shall provide the Commission with a justification for the use of individual systems. That justification shall: 6. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts establishing the format for submitting the information referred to in paragraph 5. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). Article 5 Integrated urban wastewater management plans 1. By 31 December 2033, Member States shall ensure that an integrated urban wastewater management plan is established for drainage areas of agglomerations of 100 000 p.e. and above. 2. At the latest six months after the first update of the river basin management plan produced pursuant to Article 13(7) of Directive 2000/60/EC following 1 January 2025 but no later than 22 June 2028, Member States shall establish a list of agglomerations of between 10 000 p.e. and 100 000 p.e. where, considering historic data, modelling and state-of-the-art climate projections, including seasonal variations, as well as the anthropogenic pressures and the assessment of impacts undertaken under the river basin management plan, one or more of the following conditions apply: Member States shall review the list referred to in the first subparagraph every six years after its establishment and update it where necessary. 3. By 31 December 2039, Member States shall ensure that an integrated urban wastewater management plan is established for drainage areas of agglomerations referred to in paragraph 2. 4. Integrated urban wastewater management plans shall be made available to the Commission on request. 5. Integrated urban wastewater management plans shall include at least the elements set out in Annex V, and prioritise green and blue infrastructure solutions wherever possible. 6. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts to specify: Those implementing acts shall be adopted by 2 January 2028 in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). 7. Member States shall ensure that integrated urban wastewater management plans are reviewed at least every six years after their establishment and updated where necessary. Following an update of the list referred to in paragraph 2, Member States shall ensure that integrated management plans are established for agglomerations within six years of their inclusion in that list. Article 6 Secondary treatment 1. Member States shall ensure that discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants treating urban wastewater from agglomerations of 2 000 p.e. and above satisfy, before being discharged into receiving waters, the relevant requirements of secondary treatment set out in Part B and Table 1 of Annex I in accordance with the methods for monitoring and evaluation of results laid down in Part C of Annex I. Without prejudice to the possibility of using alternative methods as referred to in Part C, point 1, of Annex I, the maximum permitted number of samples which fail to conform to the parametric values of Part B and Table 1 of Annex I is set out in Part C and Table 4 of Annex I. For agglomerations of 2 000 p.e. and above but below 10 000 p.e. which are discharging into coastal waters as defined under Directive 2000/60/EC and which apply appropriate treatment in accordance with Article 7 of Directive 91/271/EEC on 1 January 2025, the obligation set out in the first subparagraph shall not apply until 31 December 2037. 2. For agglomerations discharging urban wastewater into less sensitive areas as referred to in Article 6(1) of Directive 91/271/EEC on 1 January 2025, the obligations set out in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, shall apply on 31 December 2037. 3. By 31 December 2035, Member States shall ensure that discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants treating urban wastewater from agglomerations of 1 000 p.e. and above but below 2 000 p.e. satisfy, before being discharged into receiving waters, the relevant requirements of secondary treatment set out in Part B and Table 1 of Annex I in accordance with the methods for monitoring and evaluation of results laid down in Part C of Annex I. Without prejudice to the possibility of using alternative methods as referred to in Part C, point 1, of Annex I, the maximum permitted number of samples which fail to conform to the parametric values of Part B and Table 1 of Annex I is set out in Part C and Table 4 of Annex I. Member States may derogate from the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph for a maximum period of: Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania may derogate from the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph for a maximum period of: Where Member States derogate from the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph, they shall ensure that their first national implementation programme referred to in Article 23 includes: The extensions of the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph shall apply only if the conditions of the second or third subparagraph and the fourth subparagraph are fulfilled. The Commission shall notify the Member States if those conditions are not fulfilled by 31 July 2028. 4. Urban wastewater discharges may be subject to treatment less stringent than that prescribed in paragraphs 1 and 3 until 31 December 2045 where they are discharged into: The conditions to apply the first subparagraph are that Member States concerned provide the Commission with detailed studies demonstrating that such discharges do not adversely affect the environment and human health and they do not prevent the receiving waters from meeting the relevant quality objectives and the relevant provisions of other relevant Union law. 5. The load expressed in p.e. shall be calculated on the basis of the maximum average weekly load entering the urban wastewater treatment plant during the year, excluding unusual weather situations such as those due to heavy rain. Article 7 Tertiary treatment 1. Member States shall ensure that discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants treating urban wastewater with a load of 150 000 p.e. and above and not applying tertiary treatment on 1 January 2025 satisfy, before being discharged into receiving waters, the relevant requirements of tertiary treatment in accordance with Part B and Table 2 of Annex I by: By 31 December 2039, Member States shall ensure that all discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants treating urban wastewater with a load of 150 000 p.e. and above satisfy, before being discharged into receiving waters, the relevant requirements of tertiary treatment referred to in Part B and Table 2 of Annex I. 2. By 31 December 2027, Member States shall establish and publish a list of areas on their territory that are sensitive to eutrophication. They shall include with that list information on whether the areas are phosphorus- or nitrogen-sensitive or both. They shall update that list every six years starting on 31 December 2033. The list referred to in the first subparagraph shall include the areas identified in Annex II. The requirement set out in the first subparagraph shall not apply where a Member State implements tertiary treatment in accordance with paragraph 5 in its entire territory. 3. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, Member States shall ensure that discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants treating urban wastewater from agglomerations of 10 000 p.e. and above satisfy, before being discharged into areas included in the list referred to in paragraph 2, the relevant requirements of tertiary treatment set out in Part B and Table 2 of Annex I by: 4. Member States may derogate from the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, point (d), for a maximum of eight years on condition that: The extension of the deadline referred to in this paragraph shall be effective only if the conditions of the first subparagraph are fulfilled. The Commission shall notify the Member States if those conditions are not fulfilled by 31 July 2028. However, urban wastewater treatment plants treating a load of 150 000 p.e. and above shall meet the deadlines set in paragraph 1. 5. Discharges of urban wastewater referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 shall meet the relevant requirements in Part B and Table 2 of Annex I in accordance with the methods for monitoring and evaluation of results laid down in Part C of Annex I. The annual mean of the samples for each parameter referred to in Table 2 of Annex I shall conform to the relevant parametric values set out in that table. 6. For urban wastewater treatment plants that are under construction, under major refurbishment as regards their tertiary treatment or were commissioned after 31 December 2020 and before 1 January 2025, the requirements relating to the nitrogen parameter as referred to in this Article shall apply at the latest five years from the deadlines established in paragraphs 1 and 3. 7. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 27 to amend Part C of Annex I in order to adapt the methods for monitoring and evaluation of results in relation to tertiary treatment to scientific and technical progress. 8. By way of derogation from paragraphs 3 and 5, Member States may decide that an individual urban wastewater treatment plant situated in an area included in the list referred to in paragraph 2 is not to be subject to the requirements set out in paragraphs 3 and 5 where it can be shown that the minimum percentage of reduction of the overall load entering all urban wastewater treatment plants in that area is: 9. Discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants of 10 000 p.e. and above into a catchment area of an area sensitive to eutrophication included in the list referred to in paragraph 2 shall also be subject to paragraphs 3, 5 and 8. 10. Member States shall ensure that discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants which are situated in an area included in the list referred to in paragraph 2 following one of the regular updates of the list required by that paragraph fulfil the requirements laid down in paragraphs 3 and 5 within seven years of the inclusion in that list. 11. Where the number of urban wastewater treatment plants that need to be upgraded to meet the objectives referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 at national level is not an integer, the number of urban wastewater treatment plants shall be rounded to the nearest integer. In the case of equidistance between two integers, the number shall be rounded down. Article 8 Quaternary treatment 1. Member States shall ensure that discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants treating urban wastewater with a load of 150 000 p.e. and above satisfy, before being discharged into receiving waters, the relevant requirements of quaternary treatment set out in Part B and Table 3 of Annex I in accordance with the methods of monitoring and evaluation of results laid down in Part C of Annex I by: The maximum permitted number of samples which fail to conform to the parametric values of Table 3 of Annex I is set out in Part C and Table 4 of Annex I. 2. By 31 December 2030, Member States shall have established a list of areas on their national territory where the concentration or the accumulation of micropollutants from urban wastewater treatment plants represents a risk for the environment or human health. Member States shall review that list in 2033, and thereafter every six years and update it if necessary. The list referred to in the first subparagraph shall include the following areas: The list referred to in the first subparagraph shall also include the following areas on the basis of an assessment of the risks for the environment or human health posed by the discharge of micropollutants in urban wastewater: The risk assessment referred to in the third subparagraph shall be communicated to the Commission on request. 3. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts establishing the format of the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 2, third subparagraph, and the method to be used for that risk assessment. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). 4. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, Member States shall ensure that discharges of urban wastewater from agglomerations of 10 000 p.e. and above satisfy, before being discharged into areas included in the list referred to in paragraph 2, the relevant requirements of quaternary treatment set out in Part B and Table 3 of Annex I in accordance with the methods of monitoring and evaluation of results laid down in Part C of Annex I by: The maximum permitted number of samples which fail to conform to the parametric values of Table 3 of Annex I is set out in Part C and Table 4 of Annex I. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 27 to amend Part C of Annex I in order to adapt the methods for monitoring and evaluation of results in relation to quaternary treatment to scientific and technical progress. 5. Member States shall ensure that discharges of urban wastewater from urban wastewater treatment plants which are situated in an area included in the list referred to in paragraph 2, following one of the regular updates of that list required by that paragraph, fulfil the requirements laid down in paragraph 4 and in Part B and Table 3 of Annex I within seven years of the inclusion in that list, but not later than the deadlines set out in paragraph 4. 6. The Commission may adopt implementing acts to establish the monitoring and sampling methods to be used by the Member States to determine the presence and quantities in urban wastewater of the indicators set out in Table 3 of Annex I. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). 7. Where the number of urban wastewater treatment plants that need to be upgraded to meet the objectives referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a) and (b), at national level is not an integer, the number of urban wastewater treatment plants shall be rounded to the nearest integer. In the case of equidistance between two integers, the number shall be rounded down. 8. Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Article, to ensure that the reuse of treated urban wastewater is safe for the environment and human health, Member States shall ensure that, where appropriate, urban wastewater that is reused or planned to be reused is treated in accordance with the requirements for quaternary treatment set out in Part B and Table 3 of Annex I. Member States shall ensure that the outcome of the risk assessments carried out under Regulation (EU) 2020/741 is taken into account where treated urban wastewater is reused for agricultural purposes. Article 9 Extended producer responsibility 1. Member States shall take measures to ensure that by 31 December 2028, producers who place any of the products listed in Annex III on the market have extended producer responsibility. Such measures shall ensure that those producers cover: 2. Member States shall exempt producers from their extended producer responsibility under paragraph 1 where the producers can demonstrate any of the following: 3. Member States shall ensure that the producers referred to in paragraph 1 exercise their extended producer responsibility collectively through an organisation that fulfils the minimum requirements set out in Article 10. Member States shall ensure that: 4. Member States shall ensure that: 5. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts to establish detailed criteria on the uniform application of the condition laid down in paragraph 2, point (b), to specific categories of product and their biodegradability or hazardousness. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2) no later than 31 December 2027. Article 10 Minimum requirements for producer responsibility organisations 1. Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that any producer responsibility organisation established under Article 9(3): Member States shall ensure that such measures include a national recognition procedure certifying the compliance of the producer responsibility organisations with the requirements set out in this paragraph prior to their effective establishment and operation. The provision of information to the public under this Article shall be without prejudice to preserving the confidentiality of business information in accordance with relevant Union and national law. 2. Member States shall establish an adequate monitoring and enforcement framework to ensure that producer responsibility organisations fulfil their obligations in a transparent manner, that the financial means of producer responsibility organisations are properly used and that all actors having extended producer responsibility report reliable data to the competent authorities and, when requested, to the producer responsibility organisations. 3. Where, in the territory of a Member State, there are multiple producer responsibility organisations, the Member State concerned shall appoint at least one body independent of private interests or entrust a public authority to oversee the implementation of Article 9. 4. A Member State shall ensure that the producers established on the territory of another Member State or in a third country, and placing products on that Member State’s market: 5. To ensure that the extended producer responsibility system is implemented as optimally as possible, in particular from a cost-benefit perspective, Member States shall organise regular dialogues on its implementation. This may include support for identifying measures to be taken by the competent authorities to inter alia: Member States shall ensure that those dialogues involve relevant stakeholders and, where relevant, associations of stakeholders involved in the implementation of extended producer responsibility, including producers and distributors, producer responsibility organisations, private or public operators of urban wastewater treatment plants, local authorities and civil society organisations. 6. By 1 January 2025, the Commission shall provide for the organisation of exchange of information, experience and best practices between Member States on the implementation of Article 9 and this Article and in particular on: The Commission shall publish the results of the exchange of information, experience and best practices on those and other relevant aspects and, where relevant, provide recommendations or guidelines, or both, to Member States. 7. On the basis of the information provided by Member States, the Commission shall establish and regularly update a list of the requests for exemption received by Member States from producers under Article 9(2). That list shall be made available on request to the competent authorities of the Member States. Article 11 Energy neutrality 1. Member States shall ensure that energy audits, as defined in Article 2, point (32), of Directive (EU) 2023/1791, of urban wastewater treatment plants and collecting systems in operation are carried out every four years. Those audits shall include an identification of the potential for cost-effective measures to reduce the use of energy and enhance the use and production of renewable energy, with a particular focus on identifying and utilising the potential for biogas production or the recovery and use of waste heat either on-site or via a district energy system, while reducing GHG emissions. The first energy audits shall be carried out: 2. Member States shall ensure that, at national level, the total annual energy from renewable sources, as defined in Article 2(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, generated on-site or off-site by or on behalf of the owners or the operators of urban wastewater treatment plants treating a load of 10 000 p.e. and above, and irrespective of whether that energy is used on-site or off-site by the owners or operators of those plants, is equivalent to at least: Renewable energy generated by or on behalf of the owners or operators of the urban wastewater treatment plant shall not comprise purchased renewable energy. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, if a Member State does not reach the objective referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), despite having implemented all energy efficiency measures and all measures necessary to enhance the production of renewable energy, in particular those identified in the energy audits referred to in paragraph 1, Member States may exceptionally allow the purchase of energy from non-fossil fuel sources. Those purchases shall be limited to a maximum of 35 % of non-fossil fuel energy in relation to the objective referred to in paragraph 2, point (d). 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, if a Member State does not reach the objective referred to in paragraph 2, point (c), despite having implemented all energy efficiency measures and all measures to enhance the production of renewable energy, in particular those identified in the energy audits referred to in paragraph 1, Member States may exceptionally allow the purchase of energy from non-fossil fuel sources. Those purchases shall be limited to a maximum of 5 percentage points of the objective referred to in paragraph 2, point (c). That derogation shall be granted only to Member States that can demonstrate by 31 December 2040 that 35 % of external non-fossil fuel energy as referred to in paragraph 3 will need to be purchased to reach the objective referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), taking into account all energy efficiency measures and all measures necessary to enhance the production of renewable energy, in particular those identified in the energy audits referred to in paragraph 1. 5. The Commission may adopt an implementing act for establishing the methods to assess whether the objectives in paragraph 2 have been met. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). Article 12 Transboundary cooperation 1. Without prejudice to relevant existing international agreements or arrangements on environmental water issues, where waters within the area of jurisdiction of a Member State are adversely affected by discharges of urban wastewater from another Member State or third-country, the Member State whose waters are affected shall notify the other Member State or the third country and the Commission of the relevant facts. That notification shall be immediate in the case of pollution that could significantly affect downstream water bodies. In the event of any discharge affecting health or the environment in another Member State, the Member State in whose territory the discharge has occurred shall ensure that the competent authority of the other Member State and the Commission are immediately informed. 2. Member States shall respond to each other in a timely manner, according to the type, importance and possible consequences of the incident, after the notification by another Member State in accordance with paragraph 1. The Member States concerned shall cooperate in order to identify the discharges in question and the measures to be taken at source to protect the waters that are affected in order to ensure conformity with this Directive. 3. The Member States concerned shall inform the Commission of any cooperation referred to in paragraph 1. The Commission shall participate in such cooperation at the request of the Member States concerned. Article 13 Local climatic conditions Member States shall ensure that the urban wastewater treatment plants built to comply with the requirements set out in Articles 6, 7 and 8 are designed, constructed, operated and maintained to ensure sufficient performance under all normal local climatic conditions. Without prejudice to measures taken under Article 13(1) of Directive (EU) 2022/2557, seasonal variations of the load and the vulnerability to climate change shall be assessed and taken into account when designing, constructing and operating the urban wastewater treatment plants and collecting systems. Article 14 Discharges of non-domestic wastewater 1. Member States shall ensure that the discharges of non-domestic wastewater into collecting systems and urban wastewater treatment plants are subject to prior regulations or specific authorisations, or both, by the competent authority or appropriate body. In the case of specific authorisations for discharges into collecting systems and urban wastewater treatment plants, Member States shall ensure that the competent authority: In the case of prior regulations for discharges into collecting systems and urban wastewater treatment plants, Member States shall ensure that the operators of collecting systems and urban wastewater treatment plants into which the non-domestic wastewater is discharged are consulted before those prior regulations are adopted. 2. Prior regulations and specific authorisations as referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that: Member States shall ensure that, for the discharge of non-domestic wastewater into collecting systems and urban wastewater treatment plants that discharge into catchment areas for abstraction points of water intended for human consumption, no specific authorisation is granted or no prior regulation allows such a discharge of non-domestic wastewater without taking into account the risk assessment and risk management of the catchment areas for abstraction points of water intended for human consumption as referred to in Article 8 of Directive (EU) 2020/2184 and the risk management measures taken pursuant to that Article. 3. Member States shall ensure that competent authorities or appropriate bodies take the appropriate measures, including a review of and, where necessary, the revocation of prior regulations and specific authorisations as referred to in paragraph 1, to identify, prevent and reduce as far as possible the sources of pollution in non-domestic wastewater referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article where any of the following situations arise: 4. Prior regulations and specific authorisations as referred to in paragraph 1 shall fulfil the requirements set out in paragraph 2. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 27 to amend requirements referred to in paragraph 2 in order to adapt it to technical and scientific progress in the field of environmental protection. 5. The specific authorisations referred to in paragraph 1 shall be reviewed and, where necessary, adapted at least every ten years. Prior regulations as referred to in paragraph 1 shall be reviewed at regular intervals and, where necessary, adapted. If the characteristics of the non-domestic wastewater, the urban wastewater treatment plant or the receiving water body change significantly, the specific authorisations shall be reviewed and adapted to those changes. Article 15 Water reuse and discharges of urban wastewater 1. Member States shall systematically promote the reuse of treated wastewater from all urban wastewater treatment plants where appropriate, especially in water-stressed areas, and for all appropriate purposes. The potential for the reuse of treated wastewater shall be assessed in a manner that takes into account the river basin management plans established under Directive 2000/60/EC (‘river basin management plans’) and Member States’ decisions under Article 2(2) of Regulation (EU) 2020/741. Member States shall ensure that, when treated urban wastewater is reused or if the reuse is planned, it does not endanger the ecological flow of the receiving waters and there is no adverse effect for the environment or human health. Where treated wastewater is reused for agricultural irrigation, it shall comply with the requirements of Regulation (EU) 2020/741. Where strategies on water resilience at Member State level are available, measures on promoting the reuse of treated wastewater and on the reuse itself shall be considered in those strategies. Where treated urban wastewater is reused for agricultural irrigation, Member States may derogate from the requirements for tertiary treatment in Part B and Table 2 of Annex I, for the fraction of treated urban wastewater that is exclusively destined for reuse in agricultural irrigation, where all of the following can be demonstrated: 2. Member States shall ensure that at least all discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants of 1 000 p.e. and above are subject to prior regulations or specific authorisations, or both. Such regulations and specific authorisations shall ensure that the requirements set out in Part B of Annex I are fulfilled. 3. Prior regulations and specific authorisations as referred to in paragraph 2 shall be reviewed at least every ten years and, if necessary, adapted. The provisions of the specific authorisations shall be updated in the cases where the characteristics of incoming urban wastewater or the discharges from the urban wastewater treatment plant or of the receiving water body change significantly, to ensure that the requirements set out in Part B of Annex I remain fulfilled. 4. Member States shall take all measures necessary to adapt their urban wastewater collection and treatment infrastructure to address increased loads of domestic wastewater, including the construction of new infrastructure where necessary. When taking measures as referred to in the first subparagraph, Member States shall be considered to comply with the environmental objectives set out in Article 4 of Directive 2000/60/EC if all the following conditions are met: If failure to prevent deterioration or failure to achieve the environmental objectives set out in Article 4 of Directive 2000/60/EC in a body of surface water is the result of a prior authorisation in point (a), that authorisation shall be specifically set out and the conditions referred to in the second subparagraph explained in the river basin management plans. Article 16 Biodegradable non-domestic wastewater 1. Member States shall establish requirements for the discharge of biodegradable non-domestic wastewater that are appropriate to the nature of the industry concerned and that ensure at least the same level of environmental protection as the requirements set out in part B of Annex I. 2. The requirements referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply when the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 17 Urban wastewater surveillance 1. Member States shall set up a national system for cooperation and coordination between competent authorities responsible for public health and competent authorities responsible for urban wastewater treatment with regard to: 2. Where a public health emergency is declared by the competent authority responsible for public health in a Member State, relevant public health parameters shall be monitored in urban wastewater from a representative distribution of the national population, to the extent that the relevant health parameters are found in urban wastewater. That monitoring shall continue until the competent authority declares that the public health emergency has ended, or for a longer period if deemed useful for other purposes by that competent authority. To determine whether there is a public health emergency, the competent authority shall consider Commission decisions adopted pursuant to Article 23(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2371, assessments of the ECDC, and decisions of the WHO taken in accordance with the International Health Regulations. 3. For agglomerations of 100 000 p.e. and above, Member States shall, by the last day of the second year from the date of adoption of the implementing act in the second subparagraph, ensure that antimicrobial resistance is monitored in urban wastewater. By 2 July 2026, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts in order to establish a minimum frequency of sampling and a harmonised methodology for measuring antimicrobial resistance in urban wastewater, taking into account at least all available data from national public health authorities and national authorities responsible for monitoring antimicrobial resistance. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). 4. Results from the monitoring referred to in this Article shall be reported in accordance with Article 22(1), point (h). Article 18 Risk assessment and management 1. By 31 December 2027, Member States shall identify and assess the risks caused by urban wastewater discharges to the environment and human health, taking into account seasonal fluctuations and extreme events, and at least the risks related to the following: 2. Where risks have been identified in accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall adopt appropriate measures to address them, including, where appropriate, the following measures: 3. The identification of the risks carried out in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article shall be reviewed every six years in line with the timing of the review of the river basin management plans and starting on 31 December 2033. A summary of the identified risks accompanied with a description of the measures adopted in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article shall be included in the appropriate river basin management plans and in the national implementation programmes referred to in Article 23 and communicated to the Commission on request. That summary shall be made available to the public. Article 19 Access to sanitation Without prejudice to the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality, and taking into account local and regional perspectives and circumstances for sanitation, Member States shall take all measures necessary to ensure access to sanitation for all, in particular for vulnerable and marginalised groups. For that purpose, Member States shall by 12 January 2029: Article 20 Sludge and resource recovery 1. Member States shall encourage the recovery of valuable resources and take the measures necessary to ensure that sludge management conforms to the waste hierarchy provided for in Article 4 of Directive 2008/98/EC. Such sludge management shall: 2. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 27 to supplement this Directive by specifying a combined minimum reuse and recycling rate for phosphorus from sludge and from urban wastewater not reused under the derogation of Article 15(1), taking into account available technologies, resources and the economic viability of phosphorus recovery as well as the phosphorus content of the sludge and the level of saturation of the national market with organic phosphorus from other sources while ensuring that there is safe sludge management and no adverse impact on the environment or human health. The Commission shall adopt those delegated acts by 2 January 2028. Article 21 Monitoring 1. Member States shall ensure that competent authorities or appropriate bodies monitor: 2. For all agglomerations referred to in Article 5(1) and (3), Member States shall ensure that competent authorities, appropriate bodies or operators of the collecting system carry out representative monitoring, at relevant points, of storm water overflows into water bodies and of discharges of urban runoff from separate systems, in order to estimate the concentration and loads of the parameters listed in Table 1 of Annex I, and, where relevant, in Table 2, as well as the content of microplastics and relevant pollutants. Member States may use the results of that monitoring for the purposes of modelling where appropriate. 3. For all agglomerations of 10 000 p.e. and above, Member States shall ensure that competent authorities or appropriate bodies monitor, at the inlets and outlets of urban wastewater treatment plants, the concentration and loads in the urban wastewater of the following elements: The pollutants and parameters referred to in points (a) and (b) may be excluded from the monitoring referred to in this paragraph as long as it can be demonstrated, inter alia on the basis of monitoring results, that they are absent in urban wastewater. For all agglomerations of above 10 000 p.e., Member States shall ensure that competent authorities or appropriate bodies monitor the presence of microplastics in the sludge when relevant and, in particular, when it is reused in agriculture. The monitoring referred to in this paragraph shall be carried out at the following frequencies: Those monitoring frequencies may be halved in subsequent years if the monitoring results for the pollutants referred to in this paragraph are below applicable environmental quality standards under Directive 2008/105/EC in three successive samples. The monitoring frequencies should be reviewed at least every year. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts in order to establish methodologies for measuring, estimating and modelling direct and indirect GHG emissions from urban wastewater treatment plants, and microplastics in urban wastewater and sludge. Those implementing acts shall be adopted by 2 July 2027 in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). 5. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts in order to establish a methodology for measuring ‘PFAS Total’ and ‘Sum of PFAS’ in urban wastewater. Those implementing acts shall be adopted by 2 January 2027 in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). 6. On the basis of the report of the Member States, the Commission may adopt implementing acts in order to specify a minimum list of relevant pollutants likely to be found in urban wastewater and to develop a methodology for identifying relevant pollutants likely to be found in urban wastewater, taking into account the local conditions and the risk assessment carried out under relevant Union law as well as criteria and frequency for revising the exclusion of some pollutants as set out in paragraph 3, second subparagraph, of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). Article 22 Information on monitoring of implementation 1. Member States, assisted by the European Environment Agency (EEA), shall: 2. Member States shall ensure that the Commission and the EEA have access to the data sets referred to in paragraph 1. 3. The information reported by Member States in accordance with Article 5 of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 shall be taken into account for the reporting required under this Article for those pollutants related to urban wastewater. With regard to the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the EEA shall provide the public with access to relevant data through the European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register established under Regulation (EC) No 166/2006. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts specifying the format of the information to be provided in accordance with paragraph 1. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2) by 31 December 2028 for information referred to in paragraph 1, points (e), (f), (g), (h), (j), (k) and (l). The Commission may adopt implementing acts in order to specify the format of the information to be provided in accordance with paragraph 1, points (a), (b), (c), (d) and (i). Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). Article 23 National implementation programme 1. By 1 January 2028, Member States shall establish a national implementation programme for this Directive. Those programmes shall include: Member States may continue using the available Union funding for the implementation of this Directive, in order to ensure that all citizens benefit equally from efficient collection and treatment of urban wastewater. Member States may equally exchange best practices on how to improve absorption of Union funds. Where a Member State establishes, during the implementation of its national implementation programme, that due to the necessity to preserve cultural heritage it is not possible to respect the deadline referred to in Article 3(2) or the deadline referred to in Article 6(3)or both in specific areas, that Member State shall update its national implementation programme. That update shall contain a list of the agglomerations with the areas concerned, a detailed justification demonstrating that the construction of the required infrastructure is particularly difficult due to the necessity to preserve cultural heritage, and an adjusted timeline to finalise the required infrastructure in those areas. Extensions of the deadlines referred to in Article 3(2) and Article 6(3) shall be area-specific and kept as short as possible, and shall not exceed 8 years. The updated national implementation programme shall be submitted to the Commission by 31 December of the year of that update. 2. By 1 January 2028, Member States shall submit to the Commission their national implementation programmes, except where they demonstrate, on the basis of the monitoring results referred to in Article 21, that they are in compliance with Articles 3 to 8. 3. Member States shall update their national implementation programmes at least every 6 years. They shall submit them to the Commission by 31 December of the year of the update, except where they can demonstrate that they are in compliance with Articles 3 to 8. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts in order to establish the methods and formats for submission of the national implementation programmes. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). Article 24 Information for the public 1. Member States shall ensure that adequate, easily accessible and up-to-date information on urban wastewater collection and treatment is available to the public online, in a user-friendly and customised way, for each agglomeration of above 1 000 p.e. or each relevant administrative area. The information shall include at least the data listed in Annex VI. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall also be provided by other means upon justified request. 2. In addition, where costs are recovered totally or partly through a water tariff system, Member States shall ensure that all households in agglomerations of above 10 000 p.e., and preferably above 1 000 p.e., connected to collecting systems receive regularly and at least once a year, in the most appropriate and easily accessible form, for example on their invoice, where available, or by digital means such as smart applications or websites, without having to request it, the following information: Where information regarding individual usage is not available, the information referred to in points (a) to (d) shall be provided at agglomeration level in a user-friendly manner via a website or smart application. 3. The Commission may adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 27 to amend paragraph 2 of this Article and Annex VI by updating the information to be provided to the public online and to the households connected to collecting systems in order to adapt those requirements to technical progress and the availability of data in the field. 4. The Commission may adopt implementing acts specifying the format and the methods of presenting the information to be provided in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 28(2). Article 25 Access to justice 1. Member States shall ensure that, in accordance with the relevant national legal system, members of the public concerned have access to a review procedure before a court of law, or another independent and impartial body established by law, to challenge the substantive or procedural legality of decisions, acts or omissions subject to Article 6, 7 or 8 where at least one of the following conditions is met: The review procedure shall be fair, equitable, timely and not prohibitively expensive, and shall provide for adequate and effective redress mechanisms, including injunctive relief where appropriate. 2. Standing in the review procedure shall not be conditional on the role that the member of the public concerned played during a participatory phase of the decision-making procedures under this Directive. 3. Member States shall determine at what stage the decisions, acts or omissions referred to in paragraph 1 may be challenged. 4. Member States shall ensure that practical information is made available to the public on access to administrative and judicial review procedures referred to in this Article. Article 26 Compensation 1. Member States shall ensure that, where damage to human health has occurred as a result of a violation of national measures that were adopted pursuant to this Directive, the individuals affected have the right to claim and obtain compensation for that damage from the relevant natural or legal persons, in accordance with national rules. 2. Member States shall ensure that, as part of the public concerned, non-governmental organisations promoting the protection of the environment or human health and meeting any requirements under national law are allowed to represent the individuals affected. Member States shall ensure that a claim for a violation leading to damage cannot be pursued twice by the individuals affected and by the non-governmental organisations referred to in this paragraph. 3. Member States shall ensure that national rules and procedures relating to claims for compensation are designed and applied in such a way that they do not render impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of the right to compensation for damage caused by a violation pursuant to paragraph 1. 4. Member States may establish the limitation periods for bringing actions for compensation referred to in paragraph 1. Such periods shall not begin to run before the violation has ceased and the person claiming the compensation knows or can reasonably be expected to know that he or she suffered damage from a violation pursuant to paragraph 1. 5. Member States shall ensure that information is made available to the public on their right to claim compensation for damage. Article 27 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 7(7), Article 8(4), Article 14(4), Article 20(2), and Article 24(3) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 1 January 2025. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 7(7), Article 8(4), Article 14(4), Article 20(2), and Article 24(3) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making. 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 7(7), Article 8(4), Article 14(4), Article 20(2) or Article 24(3) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 28 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the committee for the adaptation to scientific and technical progress and implementation of the directive on urban wastewater treatment established by Directive 91/271/EEC. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Article 29 Penalties 1. Without prejudice to the obligations of Member States under Directive (EU) 2024/1203 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 43 ) , Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties applicable to infringements of national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 2. Member States shall ensure that the penalties established pursuant to this Article give due regard to the following, as applicable: 3. Member States shall without undue delay notify the Commission of the rules and measures referred to in paragraph 1 and shall notify it of any subsequent amendments affecting them. Article 30 Evaluation 1. By 31 December 2033 and by 31 December 2040, the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of this Directive based in particular on the following elements: That evaluation shall, as a minimum, contain an analysis of: The Commission shall present a report on the main findings of the evaluation referred to in the first subparagraph to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions accompanied, where the Commission finds it appropriate, by relevant legislative proposals. 2. Member States shall provide the Commission with the information necessary for the preparation of the report referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph. Article 31 Review Every five years, the Commission shall present a report to the European Parliament and the Council on the implementation of this Directive. On the basis of that report, the Commission may send early warnings to Member States that are failing or at risk of failing to meet the objectives and deadlines laid down in Articles 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 11. Article 32 Repeal and transitional provisions 1. Directive 91/271/EEC, as amended by the acts listed in Part A of Annex VII to this Directive, is repealed with effect from 1 August 2027 without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for the transposition into national law of the Directives set out in Part B of Annex VII to this Directive. 2. In respect of Mayotte, Article 3(1) and Article 6(1) of this Directive shall apply from 31 December 2030 and Article 3(2) and Article 6(3) of this Directive shall apply from 31 December 2040. Article 3(1a), first indent, and Article 4(1a), first indent, of Directive 91/271/EEC shall continue to apply until 30 December 2030. 3. For urban wastewater discharges that are treated by urban wastewater treatment plants treating a load of 150 000 p.e. and above, Article 5 of Directive 91/271/EEC shall continue to apply: Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, for urban wastewater discharges from agglomerations of 10 000 p.e. and above, Article 5 of Directive 91/271/EEC shall continue to apply: 4. Article 7 of Directive 91/271/EEC shall continue to apply until 30 December 2037 to agglomerations of between 2 000 p.e. and 10 000 p.e. which discharge into coastal waters and apply appropriate treatment in accordance with Article 7 of that Directive on 1 January 2025. 5. Article 6 of Directive 91/271/EEC shall continue to apply until 30 December 2037 to agglomerations discharging into less sensitive areas and applying less stringent treatment in accordance with Article 6 of that Directive on 1 January 2025. 6. Article 15(4) of Directive 91/271/EEC shall apply to Member States until 31 December 2028. 7. Article 17 of Directive 91/271/EEC and Commission Implementing Decision 2014/431/EU ( 44 ) shall apply to Member States until 1 January 2028. 8. Article 33 Transposition 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Articles 2 to 11 and 14 to 26 and Annexes I, III, V and VI by 31 July 2027. They shall immediately communicate the text of those measures to the Commission. When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. They shall also include a statement that 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main measures of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 34 Entry into force and application This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Articles 12 and 13 and Annexes II and IV shall apply from 1 August 2027. Article 35 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 27 November 2024. For the European Parliament The President R. METSOLA For the Council The President BÓKA J. ( 1 ) OJ C 146, 27.4.2023, p. 35 . ( 2 ) OJ C, C/2023/250, 26.10.2023, ELI: . ( 3 ) Position of the European Parliament of 10 April 2024 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 5 November 2024. ( 4 ) Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban wastewater treatment ( OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 ). ( 5 ) See Part A of Annex VII. ( 6 ) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy ( OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) ( OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Directive 2006/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 February 2006 concerning the management of bathing water quality and repealing Directive 76/160/EEC ( OJ L 64, 4.3.2006, p. 37 ). ( 9 ) Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 establishing a framework for community action in the field of marine environmental policy (Marine Strategy Framework Directive) ( OJ L 164, 25.6.2008, p. 19 ). ( 10 ) Council Directive 91/676/EEC of 12 December 1991 concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources ( OJ L 375, 31.12.1991, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/842 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on binding annual greenhouse gas emission reductions by Member States from 2021 to 2030 contributing to climate action to meet commitments under the Paris Agreement and amending Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 ( OJ L 156, 19.6.2018, p. 26 ). ( 14 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1 ). ( 15 ) Directive (EU) 2018/844 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 2010/31/EU on the energy performance of buildings and Directive 2012/27/EU on energy efficiency ( OJ L 156, 19.6.2018, p. 75 ). ( 16 ) Directive (EU) 2023/1791 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2023 on energy efficiency and amending Regulation (EU) 2023/955 ( OJ L 231, 20.9.2023, p. 1 ). ( 17 ) Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC ( OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p. 1 ). ( 18 ) Regulation (EU) 2024/1787 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 on the reduction of methane emissions in the energy sector and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/942 ( OJ L, 2024/1787, 15.7.2024, ELI: ). ( 19 ) OJ L 186, 5.8.1995, p. 44 . ( 20 ) Directive (EU) 2022/2557 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on the resilience of critical entities and repealing Council Directive 2008/114/EC ( OJ L 333, 27.12.2022, p. 164 ). ( 21 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/741 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 May 2020 on minimum requirements for water reuse ( OJ L 177, 5.6.2020, p. 32 ). ( 22 ) Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/472 of 17 March 2021 on a common approach to establish a systematic surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 and its variants in wastewaters in the EU ( OJ L 98, 19.3.2021, p. 3 ). ( 23 ) WHO Guidelines on Sanitation and Health, 2018. ( 24 ) Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2020 on the quality of water intended for human consumption ( OJ L 435, 23.12.2020, p. 1 ). ( 25 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ( 26 ) Decision (EU) 2022/591 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 April 2022 on a General Union Environment Action Programme to 2030 ( OJ L 114, 12.4.2022, p. 22 ). ( 27 ) Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 January 2006 concerning the establishment of a European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register and amending Council Directives 91/689/EEC and 96/61/EC ( OJ L 33, 4.2.2006, p. 1 ). ( 28 ) Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to environmental information and repealing Council Directive 90/313/EEC ( OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26 ). ( 29 ) OJ L 124, 17.5.2005, p. 4 . ( 30 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ( 31 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ( 32 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 33 ) Directive 2011/83/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on consumer rights, amending Council Directive 93/13/EEC and Directive 1999/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 85/577/EEC and Directive 97/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 64 ). ( 34 ) Regulation (EU) 2022/2371 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 November 2022 on serious cross-border threats to health and repealing Decision No 1082/2013/EU ( OJ L 314, 6.12.2022, p. 26 ). ( 35 ) Directive 2008/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy, amending and subsequently repealing Council Directives 82/176/EEC, 83/513/EEC, 84/156/EEC, 84/491/EEC, 86/280/EEC and amending Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 348, 24.12.2008, p. 84 ). ( 36 ) Directive 2006/118/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on the protection of groundwater against pollution and deterioration ( OJ L 372, 27.12.2006, p. 19 ). ( 37 ) Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2013 on the Common Fisheries Policy, amending Council Regulations (EC) No 1954/2003 and (EC) No 1224/2009 and repealing Council Regulations (EC) No 2371/2002 and (EC) No 639/2004 and Council Decision 2004/585/EC ( OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 22 ). ( 38 ) Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora ( OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 ). ( 39 ) Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild birds ( OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7 ). ( 40 ) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial and livestock rearing emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 ). ( 41 ) Council Directive 86/278/EEC of 12 June 1986 on the protection of the environment, and in particular of the soil, when sewage sludge is used in agriculture ( OJ L 181, 4.7.1986, p. 6 ). ( 42 ) Decision No 2455/2001/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2001 establishing the list of priority substances in the field of water policy and amending Directive 2000/60/EC ( OJ L 331, 15.12.2001, p. 1 ). ( 43 ) Directive (EU) 2024/1203 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 April 2024 on the protection of the environment through criminal law and replacing Directives 2008/99/EC and 2009/123/EC ( OJ L, 2024/1203, 30.4.2024, ELI: ). ( 44 ) Commission Implementing Decision 2014/431/EU of 26 June 2014 concerning formats for reporting on the national programmes for the implementation of Council Directive 91/271/EEC ( OJ L 197, 4.7.2014, p. 77 ). ANNEX I REQUIREMENTS FOR URBAN WASTEWATER Part A Collecting systems Collecting systems shall take into account urban wastewater treatment requirements. The design, construction and maintenance of collecting systems shall be undertaken in accordance with the best technical knowledge not entailing excessive costs, in particular regarding: Part B Discharge from urban wastewater treatment plants to receiving waters Part C Methods for monitoring and evaluation of results Note 1: The parameter can be replaced by another parameter: total organic carbon (TOC) or total oxygen demand (TOD) if a relationship can be established between BOD 5 and the substitute parameter. Note 2: Member States shall measure either the Chemical oxygen demand (COD) or the Total Organic Carbon. Note 3: This requirement is optional. Note 4: Reduction in relation to the load of the influent. Table 2: Requirements for tertiary treatment of discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants referred to in Article 7(1) or from urban waste water treatment plants serving agglomerations referred to in Article 7(3). For discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants referred to in Article 7(1), both parameters shall apply. For agglomerations referred to in Article 7(3), one or both parameters may be applied depending on the local situation. The values for concentration or for the percentage of reduction shall apply. Note 1: Reduction in relation to the load of the influent or to the load generated in an agglomeration if the same level of environmental protection can be ensured. Note 2: If a fraction of treated urban wastewater is used for agricultural irrigation, nutrients in that fraction may be included in the calculation of the influent load and be excluded from the discharged load. Note 3: In exceptional situations due to specific local circumstances, natural nitrogen retention may be taken into account in the calculation of the minimum percentage reduction in Member States where natural nitrogen retention was taken into account in the calculation of the minimum percentage reduction of nitrogen referred to under Table 2 of Annex I to Directive 91/271/EEC and where it is demonstrated that part of the nitrogen originated from urban wastewater can be eliminated in the receiving waters until 31 December 2037 for the calculation of the minimum percentage reduction of nitrogen referred to in Table 2 of this Annex if all the following conditions are fulfilled: Note 4: This requirement shall apply on 1 January 2025 to existing urban wastewater treatment plants obliged to meet the deadlines established under Article 7(1) and to agglomerations under Article 7(3). Until those deadlines are met, the obligations of Article 32(3) shall apply to those urban wastewater treatment plants. Note 5: Where the temperature in the effluent of the biological reactor is below 12 o C, the results of the samples taken may be excluded from the calculation of the annual mean for nitrogen as referred to in point (4)(c) of Part C of this Annex where all the following can be demonstrated: Where the temperature in the effluent of the biological reactor is below 5 o C the results of the samples taken may be excluded from the calculation of the annual mean for nitrogen as referred to in point (4)(c) of Part C of this Annex. Table 3: Requirements for quaternary treatment of discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants referred to in Article 8(1) and or from urban wastewater treatment plants serving agglomerations referred to in Article 8(4). Note 1: The concentration of the organic substances referred to in points (a) and (b) shall be measured. Note 2: The percentage of removal shall be calculated on dry weather flow for at least six substances. The number of substances in category 1 shall be twice the number of substances in category 2. If fewer than six substances can be measured in sufficient concentration, the competent authority shall designate other substances to calculate the minimum percentage of removal when it is necessary. The average of the specific percentages of removal of all single substances used in the calculation shall be used in order to assess whether the required 80 % minimum percentage of removal has been reached. Table 4: Requirement for samples ANNEX II AREAS SENSITIVE TO EUTROPHICATION Areas located in the catchments of the Baltic Sea, the Black Sea, the North Sea and the Adriatic Sea identified as sensitive to eutrophication under Directive 2008/56/EC or 2000/60/EC. The following elements shall be taken into account when considering which nutrient should be reduced by further treatment: Surface freshwaters intended for the abstraction of drinking water which could contain more than the concentration of nitrate laid down under the relevant provisions of Directive (EU) 2020/2184 if protective action is not taken. Areas where further treatment than that prescribed in Article 7 of this Directive is necessary to comply with other Union acts in the environmental field, including in particular water bodies covered by Directive 2000/60/EC which are at risk of not maintaining or achieving good ecological status or potential. Any other areas found by the Member States to be sensitive to eutrophication. ANNEX III LIST OF PRODUCTS COVERED BY EXTENDED PRODUCER RESPONSIBILITY Medicinal products for human use falling within the scope of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) . Cosmetic products falling within the scope of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 2 ) . ( 1 ) Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use ( OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 67 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on cosmetic products ( OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 59 ). ANNEX IV INDUSTRIAL SECTORS Milk-processing Manufacture of fruit and vegetable products Manufacture and bottling of soft drinks Potato-processing Meat industry Breweries Production of alcohol and alcoholic beverages Manufacture of animal feed from plant products Manufacture of gelatine and of glue from hides, skin and bones Malt-houses Fish-processing industry ANNEX V CONTENT OF THE INTEGRATED URBAN WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS The measures to be taken to achieve the objectives referred to in point 2 in accordance with the deadlines set in that point accompanied with a timeline for the implementation of the measures and a distinction between measures already in place and to be taken. It shall also contain a clear identification of the actors involved and their responsibilities in the implementation of the integrated urban wastewater management plan. ANNEX VI INFORMATION FOR THE PUBLIC the competent authority and the operator(s) responsible for urban wastewater collection and treatment services, including information on the ownership structure of the operators and their contact information; where relevant, a justification for why a certain load of urban wastewater is not collected or treated; total annual investment costs and total annual operational costs, with a distinction between collection and treatment costs, total annual costs related to staff, energy, consumables, administration and other costs as well as average annual investment and operational costs per cubic meter of urban wastewater collected and treated, and per average household where costs are recovered totally or partly through a water tariff system or per agglomeration level in other cases; information on how the costs referred to in point (5) are covered and, where costs are recovered through a tariff system, information on the structure of the tariff per cubic meter of urban wastewater collected and treated information on the structure of the tariff either per cubic meter of urban wastewater collected and treated or per cubic meter of water supplied, including fixed and variable costs and a breakdown between costs for collection, treatment, administration and other costs; investment plans for urban wastewater collection and treatment infrastructure at agglomeration level, with expected impacts on urban wastewater service tariffs, and intended financial and societal benefits; the total direct GHG emissions (in tonnes of CO 2 equivalent) produced or avoided per year by the operation of urban wastewater collection and treatment infrastructure of 10 000 p.e. and above in each agglomeration and, when available, the total indirect GHG emissions (in tonnes of CO 2 equivalent) produced in particular during the construction of that infrastructure; a summary of the nature and statistics regarding complaints and of the answers provided by the urban wastewater treatment plant operators on matters falling within the scope of this Directive; upon justified request, consumers shall be given access to historical data for information under points (2), (4), (8) and (9), dating back to 10 years, and not earlier than 1 January 2025. ANNEX VII Part A Repealed Directive with list of the successive amendments thereto (referred to in Article 32) Part B Time limits for transposition into national law (referred to in Article 32) ANNEX VIII Correlation table ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)