Corrigendum to Commission Decision 2012/481/EU of 16 August 2012 establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the EU Ecolabel for printed paper ( Official Journal of the European Union L 223 of 21 August 2012 ) On page 58, Subcriterion 2(a), List of hazard statements and risk phrases: on page 62, Criterion 3: ‘ Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the test result of the recyclability for wet strength agents and removability for adhesives. The reference test methods are PTS method PTS-RH 021/97 (for wet strength agents), INGEDE Method 12 (for non-soluble adhesive removability), or equivalent test methods. The deinkability shall be proven by using the “Deinking Scorecard” ( 1 ) of the European Recovered Paper Council or equivalent test methods. Testing must be performed on three types of paper: uncoated, coated and surface-sized paper. If a type of printing ink is only sold for one or two specific types of paper, it is sufficient to test the paper type(s) in question. The applicant shall provide a declaration that coated and laminated printed paper products are in compliance with point 3(b). Where a part of a printed paper product is easily removable (for instance a plastic cover or a reusable exercise book cover), the recyclability test may be made without this component. The easiness of removal of the non-paper components shall be proven via a declaration of the paper collecting company, the recycling company or an equivalent organisation. Test methods shown by a competent and independent third party as giving equivalent results may also be used.’, ‘ Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the test result of the recyclability for wet strength agents and removability for adhesives. The reference test methods are PTS method PTS-RH 021/97 (for wet strength agents), INGEDE Method 12 (for non-soluble adhesive removability) or equivalent test methods. The deinkability shall be proven by using the “Deinking Scorecard” ( 1 ) of the European Recovered Paper Council or equivalent test methods. Testing must be performed on three types of paper: uncoated, coated and surface-sized paper. If a type of printing ink is only sold for one or two specific types of paper, it is sufficient to test the paper type(s) in question. The applicant shall provide a declaration that coated and laminated printed paper products are in compliance with point 3(c). Where a part of a printed paper product is easily removable (for instance a plastic cover or a reusable exercise book cover), the recyclability test may be made without this component. The easiness of removal of the non-paper components shall be proven via a declaration of the paper collecting company, the recycling company or an equivalent organisation. Test methods shown by a competent and independent third party as giving equivalent results may also be used.’; on page 64, Subcriterion 5(b): ‘(b) Waste paper The amount of waste paper “X” produced shall be: ‘(b) Waste paper The amount of waste paper “X” produced shall be: on page 65, Criterion 9: ‘ Criterion 9 — Information on the product The following information shall appear on the product: “Please collect used paper for recycling”. Assessment and verification: the applicant shall provide a sample of the product packaging bearing the information required.’, ‘ Criterion 9 — Information on the product The following information shall appear on the product: “Please collect used paper for recycling”. Assessment and verification: the applicant shall provide a sample of the product bearing the information required.’.