COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2020/2155 of 14 October 2020 supplementing Directive (EU) 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing an optional common European Union scheme for rating the smart readiness of buildings (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and the Council of 19 May 2010 on the energy performance of buildings ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 8(10) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter and scope This Regulation establishes an optional common Union scheme for rating the smart readiness of buildings that is to say the definition of the smart readiness indicator and a common methodology by which it is to be calculated. The methodology consists of calculating smart readiness scores of buildings or building units and deriving smart readiness rating of buildings or building units. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Smart readiness indicator 1. The smart readiness indicator shall allow for rating and communicating the smart readiness of buildings and building units to economic operators and other stakeholders, in particular planners and building operators. 2. The smart readiness indicator shall allow for the assessment of the capabilities of a building or building unit to adapt its operation to the needs of the occupant and of the grid and to improve its energy efficiency and overall in-use performance. The smart readiness indicator shall cover features for increased energy savings, benchmarking and flexibility, and enhanced functionalities and capabilities provided by more interconnected and intelligent devices. 3. The smart readiness indicator shall include the smart readiness rating of a building or building unit and a set of smart readiness scores that reflect the smart readiness of buildings, building units and systems along predefined key functionalities, impact criteria and technical domains. 4. The smart readiness indicator shall include, where possible, additional information on inclusiveness and connectivity of the building, on interoperability and cybersecurity of systems, and on data protection. Article 4 Methodology for calculating the smart readiness indicator 1. The methodology for calculating the smart readiness indicator shall be based on the assessment of smart-ready services present or planned at design stage in a building or building unit, and of smart-ready services that are considered relevant for that building or building unit. 2. The calculation of the smart readiness scores shall be based on a common Union methodological framework set out in Annexes I to VI. 3. The standard calculation methodology set out in Annexes I to VI may be adapted in accordance with Annex VII, in particular by making a link to energy performance calculations in the scope of energy performance certification. 4. The methodology for calculating the smart readiness indicator shall be used in accordance with the conditions set out in this Regulation, in particular regarding the qualification of experts. Article 5 Smart readiness rating The smart readiness rating of a building or building unit shall be based on the smart readiness scores calculated for the building or building unit in accordance with Annex VIII. Article 6 Optionality of the scheme 1. The smart readiness indicator scheme shall be an optional common Union scheme. 2. Member States may decide if they implement the smart readiness indicator on their national territory, or parts thereof. They may also choose to implement the scheme only to certain categories of buildings. 3. Member States that implement the smart readiness indicator scheme may choose to apply it on a voluntary or mandatory basis for buildings or building units located on their territory. 4. Member States that decide to implement the smart readiness indicator scheme on their national territory, or parts thereof, shall notify the Commission prior to implementing the scheme. 5. Member States may decide to modify, adapt, or terminate the implementation of the scheme at any time without providing any justification to that end. They shall notify the Commission of any such decision. Article 7 Smart readiness indicator certificate 1. The smart readiness indicator of a building or building unit shall be communicated to economic operators and other interested parties in a certificate. 2. The smart readiness indicator certificate shall include the information specified in Annex IX. Article 8 Smart readiness indicator experts 1. Member States that decide to implement the smart readiness indicator shall ensure that the assessment of the smart readiness of buildings or building units with a view to issuing a smart readiness certificate is carried out by experts that are qualified or accredited. The experts may operate as self-employed or be employed by public bodies or private enterprises. 2. Member States that decide to implement the smart readiness indicator scheme shall lay down requirements on the qualification or accreditation of smart readiness indicator experts and ensure that those requirements include competence criteria, including in the ICT field. Article 9 Control system of the smart readiness indicator scheme 1. Member States that decide to implement the smart readiness indicator scheme shall establish an independent control system for smart readiness indicator certificates. Where relevant, those Member States may rely on the independent control systems that are already in place, such as those for energy performance certification schemes. 2. The independent control system shall ensure the validity of the smart readiness indicator certificates issued on the Member State’s territory. Article 10 Review The Commission, after consultation of the experts referred to in Article 23 of Directive 2010/31/EU, may review, as appropriate, this Regulation by 1 January 2026 and, if necessary, make proposals. Article 11 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 14 October 2020. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 153, 18.6.2010, p. 13 . ( 2 ) Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products ( OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2017 setting a framework for energy labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU ( OJ L 198, 28.7.2017, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC ( OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p. 1 ). ANNEX I Calculation of smart readiness scores The smart readiness of a building or building unit reflects the capabilities of the building or building unit to adapt its operation to the needs of the occupants and the grid, and to improve its energy efficiency and overall in-use performance. The smart readiness of a building or building unit is determined on the basis of the assessment of smart-ready services present or planned in, or relevant for, the building or building unit, and their functionality level. The smart readiness of a building or building unit is expressed by a rating that derives from a total smart readiness score expressed as a percentage and that represents the ratio between the smart readiness of the building or building unit compared to the maximum smart readiness that it could reach. The calculation of the smart readiness scores is based on pre-defined weighting factors in line with Annexes III, V and VII, the value of which may depend on climatic conditions and other relevant aspects, such as the type of building. The calculation of the smart readiness scores of a building or building unit relies on the assessment of the smart-ready services that are present, or planned at design stage, and on their functionality level. The assessment aims to determine with sufficient reliability what services are present or planned, and if so, the functionality level for each of those services. For this purpose, where they are available, digital models of buildings, including building information models or digital twins, may be used. The smart-ready services that can be present in a building are listed in a pre-defined smart-ready service catalogue as set out in Annex VI and are organised in pre-defined technical domains as set out in Annex IV. ANNEX II Smart readiness impact criteria The smart readiness impact criteria considered in the calculation protocol set out in Annex I are the following: ANNEX III Weighting of impact criteria in key functionalities Each impact criterion set out in Annex II of this Regulation is considered for only one of the three key functionalities, as set out in points 2 to 4. For each key functionality, Member States shall define the respective weighting factors of relevant impact criteria. For the ‘energy performance and operation’ key functionality, the relevant impact criteria are ‘energy efficiency’ and ‘maintenance and fault prediction’. For the ‘response to user needs’ key functionality, the relevant impact criteria are ‘comfort’, ‘convenience’, ‘information to occupants’ and ‘health, well-being & accessibility’. For the ‘energy flexibility’ key functionality, the relevant impact criterion is ‘energy flexibility & storage’. ANNEX IV Technical domains The smart readiness technical domains considered in the calculation protocol set out in Annex I to this Regulation are the following: ANNEX V Weighting of technical domains Each technical domain is weighted for each of the impact criterion and the weighting factors characterise the influence of the technical domain on the impact criterion. Technical domains’ weighting factors are expressed as a percentage, and for each impact criterion, the sum of the weighting factors of the technical domains equals to 100 %. Member States define the climatic zones that are used, where relevant, in the determination of weighting factors. For this purpose, Member States may use, where available, relevant Union guidance. The weighting factors of technical domains may differ between residential and non-residential buildings for some impact criteria. Member States define the weighting factors and, for this purpose, are encouraged to use, where available, relevant Union guidance. They may also take into account possible impacts from climate change. ANNEX VI Smart ready service catalogue For the purpose of calculating smart readiness scores in accordance with the methodology set out in Annex I, Member States make available at least one smart-ready catalogue to be used by experts as the basis for identifying and assessing smart-ready services. A smart-ready service catalogue includes the list of smart-ready services to be considered for calculating the smart readiness score, related functionality levels, and corresponding individual scores for the impact criteria. The definition and any subsequent update of smart-ready catalogues reflect the current state of the art of smart-ready technologies. Member States are encouraged to provide guidelines to experts on the most effective way to identify and assess smart-ready services using, where available, relevant Union guidance. Member States may decide to make available several smart-ready catalogues, for instance for different building types. ANNEX VII Possible adaptation of the standard calculation process To avoid unfairly penalising a building or building unit, some smart-ready services may be omitted in the calculation of the smart readiness scores, in case those services are not relevant for that building or building unit. Member States define the conditions under which such adaptations are relevant and allowed. Weighting factors of those technical domains for which the (climatic) energy balance approach would be used under the standard calculation may be calculated on the basis of the consumptions as evaluated in the energy performance certificate of the building or building unit in question. ANNEX VIII Smart readiness rating The smart readiness rating is expressed on the basis of seven smart readiness classes, from highest smart readiness to lowest smart readiness. Each smart readiness class corresponds to a range of total smart readiness scores as follows: 90 – 100 %; 80 – 90 %; 65 – 80 %; 50 - 65 %; 35 – 50 %; 20 – 35 %; < 20 %. ANNEX IX Content of the smart readiness indicator certificate The information contained in the smart readiness indicator and conveyed to the end user includes the following: