COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2018/1288 of 24 September 2018 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family Prodhynet's iodine based products (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation is granted to Prodhynet SA for the same biocidal product family Prodhynet's iodine based products with authorisation number EU-0018497-0000. The Union authorisation is valid from 15 October 2018 until 30 September 2028. The Union authorisation is subject to compliance with the SPC set out in the Annex. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 24 September 2018. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 414/2013 of 6 May 2013 specifying a procedure for the authorisation of same biocidal products in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 125, 7.5.2013, p. 4 ). ( 3 ) Commission delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/2100 of 4 September 2017 setting out scientific criteria for the determination of endocrine-disrupting properties pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and Council ( OJ L 301, 17.11.2017, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) ECHA opinion of 25 January 2018 on the Union authorisation of the same biocidal product family PRODHYNET'S iodine based products (UBP-C-1177988-02-00/F). ( 5 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/2013 of 18 April 2013 on changes of biocidal products authorised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 109, 19.4.2013, p. 4 ). Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family PRODHYNET's iodine based products Product type 3 - Veterinary hygiene (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0018497-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0018497-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL - META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1 – Manual or automated dipping after milking 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging None: see directions for use meta SPC 1 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill the dipping cup manually or automatically with the ready to use product. Apply by dipping manually or automatically on animal's teats on the full length of the teat after milking. Leave the product until next milking. Keep the cows standing until the product has dried (at least 5 minutes). At the next milking, use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. Where necessary, repeat the application after each milking. Clean the application equipment regularly with warm water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Take the contaminated clothes and shoes off immediately. Wash them before wearing them again. FIRST AID INSTRUCTIONS Refer to the safety data sheet available for professional user: it contains an emergency phone number. Large spillage: Mark out, dyke up with an inert absorbant and pump in an emergency tank. Keep in suitable, properly labelled and closed containers for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. The paper towels used for removing the product and drying the teats are disposed in the normal and domestic waste. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 2 years in HDPE Do not store at a temperature higher than 30 °C. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 2. Use # 1 – Manual or automated dipping, foaming or spraying before milking 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Eliminate all visible dirt before applying the product. Manual or automatic dipping/foaming/spraying on animal's teats on the full length of the teat before milking. Let the product act at least one minute. Use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. See also general instructions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For manual dipping/foaming application: Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information)/ eye protection. For manual spraying applications wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information)/protective clothing /eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for post-milking disinfection. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.2. Use description Table 3. Use # 2 – Manual or automated dipping, foaming or spraying after milking 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Manual or automatic dipping / foaming / spraying on animal's teats on the full length of the teat after milking. Leave the product until next milking. Keep the cows standing until the product has dried. (at least 5 minutes) At the next milking, use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. See also general instructions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For manual spraying applications wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information)/protective clothing /eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for each use. Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill the dipping/foaming cup/sprayer manually or automatically with the ready to use product. Where necessary repeat the application at each milking Clean the application equipment regularly with warm water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use-specific risk mitigation measures for each use. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Take the contaminated clothes and shoes off immediately. Wash them before wearing them again. FIRST AID INSTRUCTIONS Refer to the safety data sheet available for professional user: it contains an emergency phone number. Large spillage: Mark out, dyke up with an inert absorbant and pump in an emergency tank. Keep in suitable, properly labelled and closed containers for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. The paper towels used for removing the product and drying the teats are disposed in the normal and domestic waste. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 2 years in HDPE Do not store at a temperature higher than 30 °C. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 4. Use # 1 – Manual or automated dipping, foaming or spraying before milking 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Prepare a dilution at 10 % (v/v: 10 ml product, add water up to 100 ml) for bactericidal and yeasticidal activity. Fill the dipping / foaming cup / sprayer manually or automatically with the prepared dilution. Eliminate all visible dirt before applying the product. Manual or automatic dipping/foaming/spraying on animal's teats on the full length of the teat before milking. Let the product act at least one minute. Use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. See also general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For manual spraying applications wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information)/protective clothing /eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for post-milking disinfection. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.2. Use description Table 5 - Use # 2 – Manual or automated dipping, foaming or spraying after milking 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Prepare a dilution at 10 % (v/v: 10 ml product, add water up to 100 ml) for bactericidal, yeasticidal and algaecidal activity or 20 % (v/v: 20 ml product, add water up to 100 ml) in case virucidal activity is also needed. Fill the dipping / foaming cup / sprayer manually or automatically with the prepared dilution. Manual or automatic dipping / foaming / spraying on animal's teats on the full length of the teat after milking. Leave the product until next milking. Keep the cows standing until the product has dried (at least 5 minutes). At the next milking, use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. See also general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For manual spraying applications wear chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) /protective clothing/eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for each use. Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill the dipping / foaming cup / sprayer manually or automatically with the prepared dilution. Where necessary, repeat the application at each milking Clean the application equipment regularly with warm water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use-specific risk mitigation measures for each use. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Take the contaminated clothes and shoes off immediately. Wash them before wearing them again. In case of faintness, get medical advice/attention. Show this safety data sheet to the doctor. FIRST AID INSTRUCTIONS Refer to the safety data sheet available for professional user: it contains an emergency phone number. Large spillage: Mark out, dyke up with an inert absorbant and pump in an emergency tank. Keep in suitable, properly labelled and closed containers for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. The paper towels used for removing the product and drying the teats are disposed in the normal and domestic waste. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 2 years in HDPE Do not store at a temperature higher than 30 °C. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 4 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4 4.1. Use description Table 6. Use # 1 – Manual or automated dipping after milking 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 4 ) OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill the dipping cup manually or automatically with the ready to use product. Apply by dipping manually or automatically on animal's teats on the full length of the teat after milking. Leave the product until next milking. Keep the cows standing until the product has dried (at least 5 minutes). At the next milking, use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. Where necessary, repeat the application after each milking. Clean the application equipment regularly with warm water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Take the contaminated clothes and shoes off immediately. Wash them before wearing them again. FIRST AID INSTRUCTIONS Refer to the safety data sheet available for professional user: it contains an emergency phone number. Large spillage: Mark out, dyke up with an inert absorbant and pump in an emergency tank. Keep in suitable, properly labelled and closed containers for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. The paper towels used for removing the product and drying the teats are disposed in the normal and domestic waste. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 2 years in HDPE Do not store at a temperature higher than 30 °C. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 5 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 5 4.1. Use description Table 7. Use # 1 – Manual or automated dipping, foaming or spraying before milking 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Fill the dipping / foaming cup / sprayer manually or automatically with the ready to use product. Eliminate all visible dirt before applying the product. Manual or automatic dipping / foaming / spraying on animal's teats on the full length of the teat before milking. Let the product act at least one minute. Use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. See also general instructions for use of meta SPC5. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For manual dipping/foaming application: Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information)/ eye protection. For manual spraying applications wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information)/protective clothing /eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for post-milking disinfection. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.2. Use description Table 8. Use # 2 – Manual or automated dipping, foaming or spraying after milking 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Fill the dipping / foaming cup / sprayer manually or automatically with the ready to use product. Manual or automatic dipping / foaming / spraying on animal's teats on the full length of the teat after milking. Leave the product until next milking. Keep the cows standing until the product has dried. (at least 5 minutes) At the next milking, use the teat cleaning and wiping method systematically before attaching the milking cluster. See also general instructions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For manual spraying applications wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information)/protective clothing/eye protection. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 5 ) OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for each use. Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Where necessary repeat the application at each milking Clean the application equipment regularly with warm water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use-specific risk mitigation measures for each use. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Take the contaminated clothes and shoes off immediately. Wash them before wearing them again. FIRST AID INSTRUCTIONS Refer to the safety data sheet available for professional user: it contains an emergency phone number. Large spillage: Mark out, dyke up with an inert absorbant and pump in an emergency tank. Keep in suitable, properly labelled and closed containers for disposal. Never return spills in original containers for re-use. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. The paper towels used for removing the product and drying the teats are disposed in the normal and domestic waste. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 2 years in HDPE Do not store at a temperature higher than 30 °C. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC3. ( 4 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC4. ( 5 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC5.