REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 11 April 2024 on shipments of waste, amending Regulations (EU) No 1257/2013 and (EU) 2020/1056 and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , After consulting the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: TITLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation lays down measures to protect the environment and human health and to contribute to climate neutrality and to achieving a circular economy and zero pollution by preventing or reducing the adverse impacts which can result from shipments of waste and from the treatment of the waste at its destination. It establishes procedures and control regimes for shipments of waste, depending on the origin, destination and route of the shipment, the type of waste and the type of treatment to be applied to the waste at its destination. Article 2 1. This Regulation applies to: 2. This Regulation does not apply to: 3. For imports of waste generated by armed forces or relief organisations during situations of crisis, or during peacemaking or peacekeeping operations, where such waste is shipped by the armed forces or relief organisations concerned or on their behalf, directly or indirectly, to the country of destination, only Article 51(6) and (7) and Article 53(5) shall apply. 4. For shipments of waste from the Antarctic to third countries which transit through the Union, Articles 39 and 59 shall apply. 5. For transport of waste exclusively within a Member State, only Article 36 shall apply. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: In addition, the definitions of ‘waste’, ‘hazardous waste’, ‘waste producer’, ‘waste holder’, ‘dealer’, ‘broker’, ‘waste management’, ‘re-use’, ‘treatment’, ‘recovery’, ‘preparing for re-use’, ‘recycling’ and ‘disposal’, laid down in Article 3, points (1), (2), (5) to (9), (13) to (15), (16), (17) and (19) of Directive 2008/98/EC, respectively, shall apply. TITLE II SHIPMENTS WITHIN THE UNION WITH OR WITHOUT TRANSIT THROUGH THIRD COUNTRIES Article 4 Overall procedural framework 1. Shipments of all wastes destined for disposal shall be prohibited, except if consent is obtained in accordance with Article 11. In order to obtain consent in accordance with Article 11 for a shipment destined for disposal, the procedure of prior written notification and consent, laid down in Chapter 1, shall apply. 2. Shipments of the following wastes destined for recovery shall be subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent, laid down in Chapter 1: 3. Paragraph 2 shall apply to shipments of mixed municipal waste collected from private households, from other waste producers or from both, as well as to mixed municipal waste which has been subject to a waste treatment operation that has not substantially altered its properties, including refuse-derived fuels processed from mixed municipal waste, where such waste is destined for recovery operations. Shipments of such waste destined for disposal shall be prohibited. 4. Shipments of the following wastes destined for recovery shall be subject to the general information requirements laid down in Article 18, if the quantity of waste shipped exceeds 20 kg: 5. By way of derogation from Article 4(1) and (2), shipments of waste explicitly destined for laboratory analysis or experimental treatment trials to assess either the physical or chemical characteristics of the waste or to determine its suitability for recovery or disposal shall be subject to the general information requirements laid down in Article 18 where all of the following conditions are fulfilled: CHAPTER 1 Prior written notification and consent Article 5 Notification 1. Where a notifier intends to ship waste referred to in Article 4(1), (2) or (3), the notifier shall submit a prior written notification (‘notification’) to all competent authorities concerned. A notifier referred to in Article 3, point (6)(a)(ii), (iii) or (iv), may only submit a notification where the notifier has obtained a permit or is registered in accordance with Chapter IV of Directive 2008/98/EC. Where a notifier submits a general notification for several shipments as referred to in Article 13, the notifier shall also comply with the requirements laid down in that Article. Where a shipment is destined for a pre-consented facility pursuant to Article 14, the procedural requirements in paragraphs 12, 14, 15 and 16 of that Article shall apply. Where a shipment is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal, Article 15 shall also apply. 2. The notification shall include the following documents: The notifier shall provide the information indicated in the notification document and, where relevant, the information indicated in the movement document. When the notifier is not the original waste producer as referred to in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), the notifier shall ensure that the original waste producer or one of the persons indicated in Article 3, point (6)(a)(ii), (iii) or (v), where practicable, also signs the notification document. A dealer or broker shall ensure they have a written authorisation from one of the persons referred to in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), to act on their behalf, and that such written authorisation is included in the notification. 3. The notification document or annex thereto shall contain the information and documentation listed in Part 1 of Annex II. The movement document or annex thereto shall contain the information and documentation referred to in Part 2 of Annex II, to the extent possible at the time of notification. 4. Where requested by any of the competent authorities concerned, the notifier shall provide the information and documentation required under paragraph 3 and the additional information and documentation set out in Part 3 of Annex II to all competent authorities concerned. The competent authority which made the request shall inform the other competent authorities concerned of that request. 5. A notification shall be considered properly carried out once the competent authority of dispatch is satisfied that the notification document and movement document have been completed in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4. 6. A notification shall be considered properly completed once all the competent authorities concerned are satisfied that the notification document and movement document have been completed in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 or once all information and documentation requested by them in accordance with paragraph 4 have been received. 7. The notifier shall provide a copy of the contract concluded in accordance with Article 6 and a declaration certifying its existence in accordance with Annex IA to the competent authorities concerned at the time of notification. 8. The notifier shall provide a declaration that a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance has been established in accordance with Article 7 by completing the appropriate part of the notification document. The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance as referred to in Article 7 or, if the competent authorities concerned so allow, a declaration certifying its existence in accordance with the form set out in Annex IA shall be provided to the competent authorities concerned as part of the notification document at the time of notification. By way of derogation from the second subparagraph, the documentation referred to in that subparagraph may, where the competent authorities concerned so allow, be provided after the notification is submitted, at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document in accordance with Article 16(2). 9. The notification shall cover the shipment from the location from which the shipment starts and cover any interim or non-interim recovery or interim or non-interim disposal. Where subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal is carried out in a country other than the first country of destination, the non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal and the location of that recovery or disposal shall be indicated in the notification and Article 15(7) applies. 10. Only one waste identification code as mentioned in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV shall be specified in the notification document and the movement document. In cases where wastes are not classified under one single entry in either Annex III, Annex IIIB or Annex IV, only one waste identification code from the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC shall be specified in the notification document and the movement document, except for: 11. Wastes or mixtures of wastes specified in accordance with paragraph 10of this Article may be further specified by providing the relevant waste identification codes from the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC and other relevant identification codes. Article 6 Contract 1. Shipments of waste for which a notification is required shall be subject to the requirement of the conclusion of a contract between the notifier and the consignee for the recovery or disposal of the waste. If the consignee is not the operator of the facility for the recovery or disposal of the notified waste, the contract shall also be signed by the operator of the facility. 2. The contract referred to in paragraph 1 shall be concluded and effective at the time of notification and shall remain effective for the duration of the shipment until a certificate is issued in accordance with Article 15(5), Article 16(6), or, where appropriate, Article 15(4). The contract shall be consistent with the corresponding notification document and the movement document and at least contain information on the notifier, the consignee and the facility, the identity of the persons representing each party, the notification number, the designation and composition of the waste, the waste identification codes, the quantity of waste covered by the contract, the recovery or disposal operation and the period of validity of the contract. 3. The contract shall include obligations: 4. Where the waste is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal, the contract shall include the following additional obligations: 5. Where the waste is shipped between two establishments under the control of the same legal entity, the contract referred to in paragraph 1 may be replaced by a declaration by that legal entity. That declaration shall cover the obligations referred to in paragraph 3. Article 7 Financial guarantee or equivalent insurance 1. Shipments for which a notification is required shall be subject to the requirement of a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance, covering all of the following: 2. The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall cover costs arising in the context of all the following cases: 3. The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall be established by the notifier or by another natural or legal person on behalf of the notifier and shall be effective at the time of notification or, if the competent authority which approves the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance so allows, at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document in accordance with Article 16(2). The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall apply to the shipment at the latest from when the shipment starts. 4. The competent authority of dispatch shall approve the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance, including the form, wording and amount of the cover. 5. The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall be valid for and cover the shipment and completion of recovery or disposal. The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall be released when the competent authority that has approved it has received the certificate referred to in Article 16(6) or, where appropriate, the certificate referred to in Article 15(5) as regards interim recovery or interim disposal. 6. By way of derogation from paragraph 5, where the waste is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal and subsequent recovery or subsequent disposal is carried out in the country of destination, the competent authorities of dispatch and destination may agree that the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is to be released once the competent authority concerned has received the certificate referred to in Article 15(4). In that case, the competent authority which decides to release the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall immediately inform the other competent authorities concerned of its decision, and any subsequent shipment to a recovery or disposal facility shall be covered by a new financial guarantee or equivalent insurance unless the competent authority of destination is satisfied that such a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is not required. In those circumstances, the competent authority of destination shall be responsible for obligations arising in the case of take-back where the shipment or the subsequent recovery or subsequent disposal cannot be completed as intended, as referred to in Article 22, or in the case of an illegal shipment, as referred to in Article 25. 7. The competent authority within the Union which has approved the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall have access to that guarantee or insurance and shall make use of the funding, including for the purpose of payments to other authorities concerned, in order to meet the obligations arising under Articles 24 and 26. 8. In the case of a general notification pursuant to Article 13, a financial guarantee or equivalent insurance covering parts of the general notification may be established, instead of one covering the entire general notification. In such cases, the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall apply to the parts of the notified shipment which it covers at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document in accordance with Article 16(2). 9. The financial guarantee or equivalent insurance referred to in paragraph 8 of this Article shall be released when the competent authority that approved it receives the certificate referred to in Article 16(6) or, where relevant, in Article 15(5), as regards interim recovery or interim disposal for the waste. Paragraph 6 of this Article shall apply mutatis mutandis . 10. The Commission shall assess the feasibility of establishing a simple, risk-based and harmonised calculation method for determining the amount of financial guarantees or equivalent insurances and, if appropriate, adopt an implementing act to establish such a simple, risk-based and harmonised calculation method. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2). In carrying out the assessment referred to in the first subparagraph the Commission shall take into account, inter alia, the relevant rules of the Member States relating to the calculation of the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance as referred to in this Article. Article 8 Requests for information and documentation by the competent authorities concerned 1. If the notification is considered not to be properly carried out as referred to in Article 5(5), the competent authority of dispatch shall request information and documentation from the notifier in accordance with Article 5(3) and, where applicable, with Article 5(4). 2. The request for information and documentation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be submitted to the notifier as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after submission of the notification. 3. The notifier shall provide the information and documentation referred to in paragraph 1 as soon as possible, and no later than 10 working days after the request by the competent authority of dispatch. If requested by the notifier, the competent authority of dispatch may extend that deadline by a reasonable time if the notifier provides a reasoned explanation why such an extension is necessary to be able to provide the requested information and documentation. 4. Where, after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, the competent authority of dispatch still considers that the notification has not been properly carried out as referred to in Article 5(5), or additional information and documentation as referred to in Article 5(4) is still required, it may as soon as possible, and no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, make up to two more requests for information and documentation from the notifier in accordance with paragraph 2. Paragraph 3 shall apply to any such request mutatis mutandis . 5. The competent authority of dispatch may decide that the notification is not valid and is not to be further processed, if the information and documentation provided is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier, within the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, or where a first request pursuant to paragraph 4 was made, within the deadline referred to in that paragraph. The competent authority of dispatch shall decide that the notification is not valid and is not to be processed further, if the information and documentation provided upon the final request made in accordance with paragraph 4, is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier, within the deadline referred to in paragraph 4. The competent authority of dispatch shall inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned of its decision pursuant to this paragraph as soon as possible, but no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, or, where applicable, paragraph 4. 6. Where the competent authority of dispatch considers that the notification has been properly carried out as referred to in Article 5(5), it shall, as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after submission of the properly carried out notification, or within seven working days of the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 3, or, where applicable, paragraph 4, inform the notifier and other competent authorities concerned thereof. 7. Where the competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit considers that information and documentation in accordance with Article 5(3) or additional information and documentation as referred to in Article 5(4) is required, it shall, as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after receipt of the information as referred to in paragraph 6, request that information and documentation from the notifier and inform the other competent authorities of that request. 8. The notifier shall provide the information and documentation referred to in paragraph 7, as soon as possible, but no later than 10 working days after the request by the competent authority concerned. If requested by the notifier, the competent authority concerned may extend the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph by a reasonable time, if the notifier provides a reasoned explanation why that such an extension is necessary to be able to provide the requested information and documentation. 9. Where the competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit considers that information and documentation pursuant to Article 5(3) or additional information and documentation pursuant to in Article 5(4) is still required, the competent authority concerned may as soon as possible, but no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 8, make up to two more requests for information and documentation from the notifier in accordance with paragraph 7. Paragraph 8 shall apply to any such request mutatis mutandis . 10. The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit may decide that the notification is not valid and is not to be further processed if the information and documentation provided is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier within the deadline referred to in paragraph 8 or, where a first request pursuant to paragraph 9 was made, within the deadline referred to in that paragraph. The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit shall decide that the notification is not valid and is not processed further if the information and documentation provided upon the final request made in accordance with paragraph 8, is not sufficient or where no information has been provided by the notifier within the deadline referred to in paragraph 8. The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit shall inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned of its decision pursuant to this paragraph, as soon as possible, but no later than seven working days after the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 8, or, where applicable, paragraph 9. 11. The competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit shall inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned that it is satisfied with the properly carried out notification as soon as possible, but no later than three working days after receipt of the information as referred to in paragraph 6 or that it is satisfied with the information and documentation as soon as possible, but no later than three working days after the requested information and documentation have been provided by the notifier pursuant to paragraph 8 and, where relevant, paragraph 9. 12. Where the notification has been properly completed, as referred to in Article 5(6), taking into account the information referred to in paragraph 11, the competent authority of destination shall immediately inform the notifier and the competent authority of dispatch and any competent authority of transit concerned. 13. Where, within 30 working days of the day after the submission of the notification or of the information and documentation having been provided in accordance with paragraph 3 or 4 the competent authority of dispatch has not acted in accordance with paragraph 1, 5 or6, it shall provide the notifier with a reasoned explanation upon request. Where, within 30 working days of the expiry of the deadline referred to in paragraph 7, or of information and documentation having been provided in accordance with paragraph 8 or 9, the competent authority of destination or any competent authority of transit has not acted in accordance with paragraph 7 or paragraph 9, 10, 11 or 12, it shall provide the notifier with a reasoned explanation upon request. Article 9 Consent by the competent authorities and time periods for shipment, recovery or disposal 1. The competent authorities of destination, dispatch and transit shall take, within 30 days of the date on which the notifier has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12) that the notification has been properly completed, one of the following decisions, which shall be duly reasoned, as regards the shipment: By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the competent authority of dispatch may take a decision in accordance with the first subparagraph, point (c) or (d), after having received the notification and before having considered it properly carried out, if it is evident that the conditions in Article 11 have not been fulfilled or that there are grounds for objection in accordance with Article 12. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, a competent authority concerned may take a decision in accordance with the first subparagraph, point (c) or (d), before the date on which the notifier has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12), once the notification has been properly carried out, as referred to in Article 5(5). Tacit consent by the competent authorities of transit may be assumed if no objection is lodged within the 30-day time limit referred to in the first subparagraph. 2. The competent authorities of dispatch, destination, and, where appropriate, transit, shall inform the notifier of their decision and the reasons therefor within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, and inform the other competent authorities concerned of that decision. The competent authority shall immediately inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned of decisions taken in accordance with paragraph 1, second and third subparagraphs. Tacit consents referred to in the paragraph 1, fourth subparagraph, shall be valid for the period indicated in the written consent given in accordance with the first subparagraph by the competent authority of destination. Where, within 30 days of the date on which the notifier, the competent authority of dispatch or a competent authority of transit concerned has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12), any of the competent authorities concerned has not taken a decision in accordance with paragraph 1, first subparagraph, it shall provide the notifier with a reasoned explanation upon request. 3. If a notifier submits a notification in accordance with Article 5 and, where relevant, with Article 13, to ship, compared to a consented notification, the same type of waste from the same location in the country of dispatch to the same consignee and the same facility and whereby the countries of transit, if any, are the same, the competent authorities concerned shall take into consideration any information previously submitted in accordance with Article 5(2), (3) and (4) or Article 13(2) and (3) and shall take a decision in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article as soon as possible. 4. A written consent to a shipment shall expire on the earliest date at the end of validity periods as indicated by the competent authorities concerned. It shall not cover a period of more than one year. 5. The shipment shall take place only after fulfilment of the requirements set out in Article 16(1) and (2) and during the period of validity of the tacit or written consent of all competent authorities concerned in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article. The waste shall have been received by the facility for recovery or disposal before the end of the period of validity of the tacit or written consent of all competent authorities concerned. 6. The recovery or disposal of waste in relation to a shipment shall be completed no later than one year after the receipt of the waste by the facility that recovers or disposes of the waste, unless a shorter period is indicated by the competent authorities concerned in their decision. 7. The competent authorities concerned shall withdraw their tacit or written consent, at the request of the notifier or where they have knowledge of any of the following: 8. The competent authority concerned shall inform the notifier, the other competent authorities concerned and the consignee of any withdrawal of consent, including the reason for such withdrawal. 9. Where consent by any of the competent authorities concerned is withdrawn in accordance with paragraph 7 of this Article, the shipment or the treatment of the waste shall, where applicable, not be allowed to continue and Article 22 or 25 shall apply, as relevant. Article 10 Conditions to consent to a shipment 1. The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down conditions for their consent to a notified shipment. Such conditions shall be duly reasoned and may be based on one or more of the conditions listed in Article 11 or of the grounds listed in Article 12. 2. The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down conditions in respect of the transport of waste within their national jurisdiction. Such transport conditions shall not be more stringent than those laid down in respect of the transport of waste occurring wholly within their national jurisdiction and shall take due account of existing agreements, in particular relevant international agreements. 3. The competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down a condition that their consent is to be considered withdrawn if the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is not applicable at the latest at the time of completion of the movement document pursuant to Article 16(2), as required by Article 7(3). 4. Conditions shall be specified in, or annexed to, the notification document by the competent authority that lays them down. 5. The competent authority of destination may also, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), lay down a condition that the facility which receives the waste shall keep a regular record of inputs, outputs and/or balances for wastes and the related recovery operations or disposal operations as specified in the notification, and for the period of validity of the notification. Such records shall be signed by a person legally responsible for the facility and shall be submitted to the competent authority of destination within one month of completion of the notified recovery operation or disposal operation. Article 11 Conditions for shipments of waste destined for disposal 1. Where a notification is submitted regarding a shipment destined for disposal in accordance with Article 5, the competent authorities of dispatch and of destination shall not give their consent to that shipment, within the 30-day limit referred to in Article 9(1), unless all the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. By derogation from paragraph 1, point (a), where the notifier demonstrates that the waste concerned is produced in a Member State of dispatch in such a small quantity overall per year that the provision of new specialised disposal facilities within that Member State would not be economically viable, the conditions set out in paragraph 1, points (a)(ii) and (iii), shall not apply. 3. Where a competent authority of transit gives consent to a shipment in accordance with Article 9(1) only the conditions set out in paragraph 1, points (b), (c), (e) and (f), of this Article shall be considered. 4. Information on consents given by competent authorities in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be referred to in the report in accordance with Article 73. The Commission shall inform all Member States of such consents taken in the previous calendar year. 5. By 21 May 2027, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act establishing detailed criteria for the uniform application of the conditions laid down in paragraph 1, point (a), to specify how the technical feasibility and economic viability referred to in points (a)(i) and (ii) of that paragraph are to be demonstrated by notifiers and assessed by competent authorities. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2). Article 12 Objections to shipments of waste destined for recovery 1. Where a notification is submitted regarding a shipment of waste destined for recovery in accordance with Article 5, the competent authorities of destination and dispatch may, within the 30-day time limit referred to in Article 9(1), raise reasoned objections based on one or more of the following grounds: 2. The competent authorities of transit may, within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, raise reasoned objections to the shipment of waste destined for recovery. Any such objection shall be based only on the grounds set out in paragraph 1, points (c), (f), (g) and (h). 3. Where, within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, the competent authorities consider that the problems which gave rise to their objections have been resolved, they shall immediately inform the notifier thereof. 4. Where the problems giving rise to the objections are not resolved within the 30-day time limit referred to in paragraph 1, the notification of the shipment of waste destined for recovery shall cease to be valid. In cases where the notifier still intends to carry out the shipment, a new notification shall be submitted, unless all the competent authorities concerned and the notifier agree otherwise. 5. Objections raised by competent authorities on the grounds set out in paragraph 1, points (d) and (e), of this Article and the reasons for those objections shall be communicated to the Commission in accordance with Article 73. 6. In accordance with Article 9(2), the competent authorities shall inform the notifier of the reasons for their objections to a shipment. 7. The Member States of dispatch shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the national legislation on which objections raised by competent authorities in accordance with paragraph 1, point (d), may be based, and shall state to which waste and recovery operations as well as the recovery or disposal operations of residual waste generated through the recovery of the waste concerned those objections apply, before such national legislation is invoked as grounds for reasoned objections. The Member States of destination shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of decisions or national legislation on which objections raised by competent authorities in accordance with paragraph 1, point (e), may be based and shall state to which waste and recovery operations those objections apply, before such decisions or national legislation is invoked as grounds for reasoned objections. Article 13 General notification 1. The notifier may submit a general notification covering several shipments where all the following requirements are fulfilled: 2. The notifier may indicate in an annex attached to the notification document one or more possible alternative routings. The movement document completed in accordance with Article 16(2) shall provide information on the routing indicated in the notification document that is to be followed, as well as on any alternative routings to be followed in case of unforeseen circumstances and indicated in the notification document. 3. The competent authorities concerned may make their agreement to the use of a general notification subject to the subsequent provision of additional information and documentation, in accordance with Article 5(3) to (6). Article 14 Pre-consented recovery facilities 1. A legal or natural person owning or exercising control over a recovery facility may submit a request for that facility to be pre-consented to the competent authority which has jurisdiction over the facility, as designated pursuant to Article 75. Facilities that only carry out operation R13 shall not be eligible to submit a request as referred to in the first subparagraph. 2. The request referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the following information: 3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend paragraph 2 of this Article as regards the information to be included in the request. 4. The procedure referred to in paragraphs 5 to 10 of this Article shall apply to pre-consent a facility for which a request was submitted in accordance with paragraph 1. 5. The competent authority shall, within 55 days after the date of receipt of a request submitted pursuant to paragraph 1 and containing the information as referred to in paragraph 2, assess the request and decide whether to approve it. 6. Where the legal or natural person referred to in paragraph 1 has provided all the information referred to in paragraph 2, the competent authority shall approve the request and issue a pre-consent for the facility concerned. The pre-consent may contain conditions relating to the duration of the pre-consent, the types and quantities of waste covered by the pre-consent, the technology used or other conditions necessary to ensure that the waste is managed in an environmentally sound manner. 7. By way of derogation from paragraph 6, the competent authority may refuse to approve the request for pre-consent if it is not satisfied that issuing the pre-consent will ensure that the waste will be managed in accordance with the waste hierarchy and other requirements laid down in Directive 2008/98/EC or, where relevant, that best available techniques will be applied in accordance with conclusions established under Directive 2010/75/EU. 8. The decision to approve or refuse the request for pre-consent shall be communicated to the legal or natural person that submitted the request as soon as it is taken by the competent authority and shall be duly reasoned. 9. The pre-consent of a recovery facility shall be valid for 10 years, unless stated otherwise in the decision to approve the request for pre-consent. During that period the competent authority shall conduct at least one inspection in accordance with Article 60. Additional inspections shall be conducted if needed on the basis of the risk-based assessment approach as referred to in Article 62. 10. A pre-consent of a recovery facility may be revoked at any time by the competent authority, if information becomes available which shows that the information provided in accordance with paragraph 2 is false or that the conditions in paragraph 6 are no longer fulfilled. A decision to revoke a pre-consent shall be duly reasoned and communicated to the facility concerned. 11. The legal or natural person referred to in paragraph 1 shall immediately inform the competent authority concerned of any change in the information submitted in accordance with paragraph 2. The competent authority concerned shall duly assess those changes and, if necessary, update or revoke the pre-consent. 12. In the case of a general notification submitted in accordance with Article 13 relating to shipments destined to a pre-consented facility, the period of validity of the consent referred to in Article 9(4) shall be extended to three years. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the competent authorities concerned may decide, in duly justified cases, to extend the period of validity for a period shorter than 3 years. 13. The competent authorities that have issued a pre-consent to a facility in accordance with this Article shall, using the form set out in Annex VI, inform the Commission and, where appropriate, the OECD Secretariat of the following: 14. By way of derogation from Articles 9, 10 and 12, the consent given in accordance with Article 9(1), the conditions imposed in accordance with Article 10 or the objections raised in accordance with Article 12 by all the competent authorities concerned with respect of a notification for a shipment destined for a pre-consented facility shall be subject to a time limit of seven working days after the date on which the notifier has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12) that the notification has been properly completed. 15. If one or more competent authorities wish to request additional information in accordance with Article 8(2), (4), (7) or (9), in relation to a notification for shipments to a pre-consented facility, the periods mentioned in those paragraphs, as well as in Article 8(3) and (8), shall be shortened to: 16. Notwithstanding paragraph 14, a competent authority concerned may decide that more time is needed in order to receive further information or documentation from the notifier. In such cases, that competent authority shall, within seven working days of the date on which the notifier has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12) that the notification has been properly completed, inform the notifier and the other competent authorities concerned. The total time needed to take one of the decisions as referred to in Article 9(1) shall not exceed 30 days from the date on which the notifier has been informed in accordance with Article 8(12) that the notification has been properly completed. Article 15 Additional provisions regarding interim recovery and interim disposal 1. Where a shipment is destined for interim recovery or interim disposal, all the facilities where subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal is envisaged shall also be indicated in the notification document in addition to the initial interim recovery or interim disposal. 2. The competent authorities of dispatch and destination shall only give their consent to a shipment of waste destined for an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation if they consider that the conditions in Article 11 are fulfilled or they have no reason to raise an objection, in accordance with Article 12, concerning the shipment or shipments to the facilities carrying out any subsequent interim or non-interim recovery or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal. 3. Within two working days of the receipt of the waste by the facility which carries out the interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation, that facility shall provide confirmation to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned that the waste has been received. That confirmation shall be supplied in or annexed to the movement document. 4. As soon as possible, but no later than 30 days after completion of the interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation, and no later than one year, or the shorter period referred to in Article 9(6), after the receipt of the waste, the facility carrying out that operation shall, under its responsibility, provide a certificate to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned that the operation has been completed. That certificate shall be supplied in or annexed to the movement document. 5. When a recovery or disposal facility which carries out an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation delivers the waste for any subsequent interim or non-interim recovery operation or subsequent interim or non-interim disposal operation to a facility located in the country of destination, it shall obtain as soon as possible and no later than one year, or the shorter period referred to in Article 9(6), after delivery of the waste a certificate from that facility that the subsequent interim or non-interim recovery and interim or non-interim disposal operation has been completed. The facility carrying out an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation as referred to in paragraph 3 shall promptly transmit, the relevant certificates to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned, identifying the shipments to which the certificates pertain. 6. In order to ensure the consistency of the content of the certificate in the first subparagraph of paragraph 5 throughout the Union, the Commission shall, in good time before adopting the implementing act pursuant to Article 27(5), and at the latest by 21 May 2025, adopt a delegated act supplementing this Article establishing the information to be provided in such a certificate. That delegated act shall be adopted in accordance with Article 80. 7. Where a delivery as referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article is made to a facility located in the initial country of dispatch or in another Member State and it concerns shipments of waste as referred to in Article 4(1), (2) or (3), a new notification shall be required in accordance with this Regulation. 8. Where a delivery as referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article is made to a facility in a third country and it concerns shipments as referred to in Article 4(1), (2) or (3), a new notification shall be required in accordance with this Regulation and the provisions concerning the competent authorities concerned shall also apply to the initial competent authority of the initial country of dispatch. Article 16 Requirements following consent to a shipment 1. After the competent authorities concerned have given consent to a notified shipment, all undertakings involved shall complete the movement document, or, in the case of a general notification, the movement documents at the points indicated. They shall ensure that the information in the movement document is made electronically available via a system referred to in Article 27, including during the time of transport of waste, to the other natural and legal persons involved in the shipment, the competent authorities concerned and the authorities involved in inspections. 2. Once the notifier has received written consent from the competent authorities of dispatch, destination and transit, or may assume tacit consent by the competent authority of transit, the notifier shall provide the actual date of shipment and complete the movement document to the extent possible, in accordance with the instructions for completing the notification and movement documents in Annex IA and IB in accordance with Annex IC, and submit it to the competent authorities concerned and to the other natural and legal persons involved in the shipment, at least two working days before the shipment starts. However, information on the actual quantity of the waste, carrier or carriers and, where applicable, container identification number may be submitted at the latest before the start of the shipment. 3. The notifier shall ensure that, in addition to making the movement document available in accordance with paragraph 1, the notification document containing the consents of and the conditions imposed by the competent authorities concerned is made electronically available, including during the transport of waste, to the competent authorities concerned and to the authorities involved in inspections. 4. Where the documents referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 cannot be made available online during the transport of waste, the notifier and the carrier or carriers shall ensure that the documents are available by other means in the transport vehicle. In such cases, the notifier shall ensure that any changes or additions to the documents during the transport of waste are submitted via a system referred to in Article 27. 5. The facility shall, within two working days of receipt of the waste, provide confirmation to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned that the waste has been received. That confirmation shall be supplied in, or annexed to, the movement document. 6. The facility carrying out a non-interim recovery operation or non-interim disposal operation shall, as soon as possible and no later than 30 days after completion of that operation, and no later than one year, or the shorter period referred to in Article 9(6), after receipt of the waste, under its responsibility, provide a certificate that the non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal has been completed. 7. The certificate referred to in paragraph 6, shall be submitted to the notifier and the competent authorities concerned. Article 17 Changes after consent 1. If any essential change is made to the details or conditions of the consent, the notifier shall inform the competent authorities concerned and the consignee immediately and, where possible, before a shipment starts. Essential changes shall be deemed to be, inter alia, changes compared to those indicated in the notification in the quantity of waste, in the routing, including possible alternative routings, the date or dates of shipment or the carrier or carriers, or changes to the duration of the shipment, due to unforeseen circumstances occurring after the start of the shipment, leading to a shipment exceeding its period of validity. 2. In the case of an essential change as referred to in paragraph 1, a new notification shall be submitted, unless all the competent authorities concerned consider that no new notification is required and inform the notifier thereof. The competent authorities shall inform the notifier as soon as possible but no later than five working days after receipt of the information pursuant to paragraph 1. A planned shipment shall not take place until the notifier has been informed by the competent authorities concerned. Where a shipment has already started, the notifier shall ensure that the consignment is halted as soon as practicable until the notifier is informed by the competent authorities concerned whether a new notification is required. 3. Where essential changes referred to in paragraph 1 involve competent authorities other than those concerned in the original notification, a new notification shall be submitted. CHAPTER 2 General information requirements Article 18 General information requirements 1. Shipments of waste referred to in Article 4(4) and (5) shall be subject to the general information requirements set out in paragraphs 2 to 10 of this Article. 2. A shipment referred to in paragraph 1 may only be arranged by the person who arranges the shipment referred to in Article 3, points (7)(ii), (iii) and (iv), when that person has obtained a permit or is registered in accordance with Chapter IV of Directive 2008/98/EC. 3. The person who arranges the shipment shall only ship waste to a waste recovery facility which has obtained a permit or registration in accordance with Chapter IV of Directive 2008/98/EC. The facility shall present the permit or proof of registration to the person who arranges the shipment before the shipment occurs. 4. All undertakings involved in the shipment shall complete the form set out in Annex VII with the relevant information at the points indicated and ensure that the information is made electronically available in accordance with Article 27, including during the transport of waste, to the other persons involved in the shipment, the competent authorities concerned and the authorities involved in inspections. Where the person who arranges the shipment is not the original waste producer referred to in Article 3, point (7)(i), the person who arranges the shipment shall ensure that the original waste producer or one of the persons indicated in Article 3, point (7)(ii), (iii) or (v), where practicable, also signs the Annex VII document. 5. The person who arranges the shipment shall complete the form set out in Annex VII with the relevant information to the extent possible, no later than two working days before the shipment starts. However, information on the actual quantity of the waste, the carrier or carriers and, where applicable, the container identification number may be submitted at the latest before the start of the shipment. 6. Where the information referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 cannot be made available online during the transport of waste, the person who arranges the shipment and the carrier or carriers shall ensure that the information is available by other means in the transport vehicle, provided that the information is consistent with the information made available electronically in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5. In such cases, the person who arranges the shipment shall ensure that any changes or additions to the documents during the transport of waste are submitted via a system referred to in Article 27. 7. Where a shipment is destined for interim recovery, the facility where the interim or non-interim recovery directly following the initial interim recovery is envisaged, and the R-codes of those operations, shall also be indicated in the Annex VII document in addition to the initial interim recovery, as well as, where practicable, the facilities where subsequent interim or non-interim recovery is envisaged and the R-codes of the related recovery operations. 8. The recovery facility or the laboratory shall, within two working days of receipt of the waste, provide confirmation to the person who arranges the shipment that the waste has been received by completing the relevant information contained in Annex VII. Where the recovery facility or the laboratory has no access to a system as referred to in Article 27, it shall provide the confirmation via the person who arranges the shipment. 9. The recovery facility shall, as soon as possible and no later than 30 days after completion of the recovery operation, and no later than one year after receipt of the waste, under its responsibility, provide a certificate, that the recovery has been completed by completing the relevant information contained in Annex VII. Where the recovery facility has no access to a system referred to in Article 27, it shall provide the certificate via the person who arranges the shipment. 10. All shipments of waste referred to in Article 4(4) and (5) shall be subject to the requirement of the conclusion of a contract between the person who arranges the shipment and the consignee for the recovery of the waste. If the consignee is not the operator of the facility, the contract shall also be signed by the operator of the facility. The contract referred to in the first subparagraph shall be concluded and effective at the latest by the time the Annex VII document is completed in accordance with paragraph 5 and shall remain effective for the duration of the shipment until a certificate is issued in accordance with paragraph 9. The contract shall be consistent with the corresponding Annex VII documents and at least contain information on the person who arranges the shipment, the consignee and the facility, the identity of the persons representing each party, the description of the waste, the waste identification codes, the quantity of waste covered by the contract, the recovery operation and the period of validity of the contract. The contract shall include an obligation that where the shipment of waste or its recovery cannot be completed as intended or where it has been effected as an illegal shipment, the person who arranges the shipment or, where that person is not in a position to ensure completion of the shipment of waste or its recovery, the consignee, is to take the waste back or ensure that it is recovered in an alternative way, and, if necessary, that it is stored in the meantime. 11. The person who arranges the shipment or the consignee shall provide a copy of the contract referred to in paragraph 10 and of any agreement pursuant to Article 4(5) to the authorities involved in inspections at their request. 12. The information required in Annex VII shall be available for inspection, enforcement, planning and statistical purposes by Member States and the Commission, in accordance with Article 27 and national legislation. 13. The information referred to in paragraphs 2 to 9 shall be treated as confidential where that is required by Union or national legislation. 14. Where the waste is shipped between two establishments under the control of the same legal entity, the contract referred to in paragraph 10 may be replaced by a declaration by that legal entity. That declaration shall cover mutatis mutandis the obligations referred to in paragraph 10. 15. By 21 May 2026, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 80 to supplement this Regulation by setting out instructions on how to complete the Annex VII document. CHAPTER 3 Mixing waste, documentation and access to information Article 19 Prohibition on mixing waste during shipment From the start of the shipment until the receipt of the waste by a recovery or disposal facility, the waste, as specified in the notification or as referred to in Article 18, shall not be mixed with other waste or other substances or objects. Article 20 Keeping of documents and information 1. The competent authorities, the notifier, the consignee and the facility which receives the waste shall keep in the Union all information and documents submitted or exchanged in relation to notified shipments for at least five years from the date on which a certificate has been provided in accordance with Articles 15(4) or 16(6). In the case of general notifications in accordance with Article 13, the obligation referred to in the first subparagraph shall apply from the date on which the last certificate has been provided in accordance with Articles 15(4) or 16(6). 2. Information provided pursuant to Article 18 shall be kept in the Union for at least five years from the date on which a certificate has been provided in accordance with Article 18(9), by the person who arranges the shipment, the consignee and the facility which receives the waste. 3. The competent authorities shall keep in the Union all information and documents submitted or exchanged in relation to illegal shipments for at least five years from the date on which a take-back or alternative recovery or disposal has been completed. Article 21 Publication of information on shipments The Commission shall publish the information on notifications of shipments and on shipments subject to the general information requirements as referred to in Annex XII via its website and update it on a monthly basis. The Commission shall for that purpose extract the relevant data from the central system as referred to in Article 27. CHAPTER 4 Take-back procedures and obligations Article 22 Take-back when a consented shipment cannot be completed as intended 1. Where any of the competent authorities concerned becomes aware that a shipment of waste, or its recovery or disposal, to which the competent authorities concerned have given consent, cannot be completed as intended in accordance with the terms of the notification and movement documents or contract referred to Article 6, and where such shipment is not an illegal shipment, such authority shall immediately inform the competent authority of dispatch thereof. Where a recovery or disposal facility rejects a shipment received, it shall immediately inform the competent authority of destination. 2. The competent authority of dispatch shall ensure that, except in cases referred to in paragraph 3, the waste in question is taken back to its area of jurisdiction or elsewhere within the country of dispatch by the notifier, or, where relevant, by a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 11 or 12, in order to arrange for its disposal or recovery. Where that is impracticable, that competent authority itself or a natural or legal person on its behalf shall comply with this Article. The take-back referred to in the first subparagraph shall take place within 90 days, or such other period as may be agreed between the competent authorities concerned, after the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware or has been advised by the competent authorities of destination or transit that the consented shipment of waste or its recovery or disposal cannot be completed as intended and has been informed of the reasons therefor. Such advice may result from information submitted to the competent authorities of destination or transit, inter alia, by other competent authorities. 3. The take-back obligation set out in paragraph 2 shall not apply if the competent authorities of dispatch, transit and destination concerned are satisfied that the waste can be recovered or disposed of in an alternative way in the country of destination or elsewhere by the notifier, or, where relevant, by a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 11 or 12, or, if that is impracticable, by the competent authority of dispatch or by a natural or legal person on its behalf. The take-back obligation set out in paragraph 2 shall not apply if the waste shipped has, in the course of the operation at the facility concerned, been irreversibly mixed with other waste, so that its composition or nature has changed or that the waste in question can no longer be separated before a competent authority concerned has become aware of the fact that the notified shipment cannot be completed as referred to in paragraph 1. Such mixture of wastes shall be recovered or disposed of in an alternative way in accordance with the first subparagraph of this paragraph. 4. In cases of alternative arrangements as referred to in paragraph 3, the notifier, or, where relevant, the person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 11 or 12, or, if that is impracticable, the competent authority of dispatch or the natural or legal person on its behalf, shall ensure that the waste concerned is managed in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with Article 59. 5. In cases of take-back as referred to in paragraph 2, a new notification shall be submitted, unless the competent authorities concerned agree that a duly reasoned request by the initial competent authority of dispatch is sufficient. A new notification, where appropriate, shall be submitted by the initial notifier or, where relevant, a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 11 or 12, or, if that is also impracticable, by the initial competent authority of dispatch or by a natural or legal person on its behalf. The competent authorities shall not oppose or object to the return of waste from a shipment that cannot be completed as intended or to the related recovery and disposal operation. 6. In cases of alternative arrangements outside the initial country of destination as referred to in paragraph 3, a new notification, where appropriate, shall be submitted by the initial notifier or, where relevant, a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 11 or 12 or, if that is impracticable, by the initial competent authority of dispatch or by a natural or legal person on its behalf. When such a new notification is submitted by the notifier, it shall also be submitted to the competent authority of the initial country of dispatch. 7. In cases of alternative arrangements in the initial country of destination as referred to in paragraph 3, a new notification shall not be required and a duly reasoned request shall suffice. Such a duly reasoned request, seeking agreement to the alternative arrangement, shall be submitted to the competent authorities of destination and dispatch by the initial notifier or, if that is impracticable, to the competent authority of destination by the initial competent authority of dispatch. 8. If no new notification is to be submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 or 7, a new movement document shall be completed in accordance with Article 15 or Article 16 by the initial notifier or, where relevant, a person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 11 or 12 or, if that is impracticable, by the initial competent authority of dispatch or by a natural or legal person on its behalf. Where a new notification is submitted by the initial competent authority of dispatch in accordance with paragraph 5 or 6, a new financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall not be required. 9. The obligation of the notifier or, where applicable, the obligation of the country of dispatch to take the waste back or arrange for alternative recovery or disposal shall end when the facility issues the certificate of non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal referred to in Article 16(6), or, where appropriate, in Article 15(5). In the case of interim recovery or interim disposal referred to in Article 7(6), the obligation of the country of dispatch shall end when the facility issues the certificate referred to in Article 15(4). Where a facility issues a certificate of recovery or disposal in such a way that it results in an illegal shipment, with the consequence that the financial guarantee is released, Article 25(8) and Article 26(2) shall apply. 10. Where waste from a shipment which cannot be completed as intended, or its recovery or disposal, is discovered within a Member State, the competent authority with jurisdiction over the area where the waste was discovered shall be responsible for ensuring that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal in an alternative way. 11. Where a notifier specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(iv), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article and Article 24, the original waste producer, the new waste producer or the collector specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), respectively who authorised the dealer or broker to act on its behalf shall be deemed to be the notifier for the purposes of those take-back obligations. 12. Where a notifier specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article and Article 24, the waste holder specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(v), shall be deemed to be the notifier for the purpose of those take-back obligations. Article 23 Take-back when a shipment subject to general information requirements cannot be completed as intended 1. Where a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5), or its recovery, cannot be completed as intended, in accordance with the Annex VII document or the contract referred to in Article 18(10), and where such shipment is not an illegal shipment, the person who has arranged the shipment in accordance with Article 18 shall immediately inform the competent authority of dispatch thereof. In such cases, the person who arranges the shipment or the consignee, following the obligations of the contract referred to in Article 18(10), shall take the waste back to the country of dispatch or ensure its recovery in an alternative way in the country of destination or elsewhere, and ensure, if necessary, that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal in an alternative way. The take-back or recovery of the waste in an alternative way shall take place within 90 days, or any other period agreed between the competent authorities concerned, after the date on which the person who arranges the shipment informed the competent authority of dispatch in accordance with the first subparagraph. 2. In cases of alternative arrangements as referred to in paragraph 1, the person who arranges the shipment or the consignee, as relevant, shall ensure that the waste concerned is managed in an environmentally sound manner and in accordance with Article 59. 3. In cases of take back or alternative arrangements outside the initial country of destination, as referred to in paragraph 1, relevant information in the Annex VII document shall be completed and submitted by the person who arranged the shipment initially, in accordance with Article 18. Where the shipment for take-back or destined for alternative arrangements is subject to Article 4(1), (2) or (3), Article 22 shall apply mutatis mutandis . 4. Where the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware that a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5), or its recovery, has not been completed as intended and that the obligations to take the waste back or arrange for its alternative recovery in accordance with paragraph 1 have not been fulfilled, the competent authority of dispatch shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the person that has arranged the shipment takes the waste back or arranges for its recovery in an alternative way and ensures, if necessary, that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal in an alternative way. Where it is impracticable for the person that has arranged the shipment to fulfil the take-back obligations, those obligations shall be fulfilled by a person deemed to be the person who arranges the shipment in accordance with paragraph 5 or 6, where relevant. 5. Where the person who arranges the shipment specified in Article 3, point (7)(iv), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article or Article 24, the original waste producer, the new waste producer or the collector specified in Article 3, point (7)(i), (ii) or (iii), respectively, who authorised the dealer or broker to act on its behalf shall be deemed to be the person who arranges the shipment for the purpose of those take-back obligations. 6. Where the person who arranges the shipment specified in Article 3, point (7)(i), (ii) or (iii), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article or Article 24, the waste holder specified in Article 3, point (7)(v), shall be deemed to be the person who arranges the shipment for the purpose of those take-back obligations. 7. Where it is impracticable for the person who arranges the shipment or a person deemed responsible in accordance with paragraph 5 or 6 to fulfil the take-back obligations set out in paragraph 4, the competent authority of dispatch or a natural or legal person on its behalf shall be deemed to be responsible for the obligations under this Article. Article 24 Costs of take-back when a shipment cannot be completed as intended 1. Costs arising from the return or recovery or disposal in an alternative way of waste from a shipment that cannot be completed as intended, including costs of transport of waste, recovery or disposal pursuant to Article 22(2) or (3), and, as of the date on which the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware that a shipment of waste or the recovery or disposal cannot be completed as intended, storage costs pursuant to Article 22(10) shall be charged in accordance with the following order to: 2. Before charging costs to someone other than the initial notifier, the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance referred to in Article 7 shall be used. If there is no financial guarantee or equivalent insurance or if the costs exceed the amount of the cover of the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance the costs shall be charged in accordance with the order indicated in paragraph 1. 3. This Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to costs arising from the take-back or alternative recovery of waste in accordance with Article 23. 4. This Article shall be without prejudice to Union and national law concerning liability. Article 25 Take-back when a shipment is illegal 1. Where a competent authority discovers a shipment that it considers to be an illegal shipment, it shall immediately inform the other competent authorities concerned. 2. Where the responsibility for an illegal shipment can be imputed to the notifier, the competent authority of dispatch shall ensure that the waste is taken back by: 3. The take-back obligation set out in paragraph 2 shall not apply if the competent authorities of dispatch, transit and destination concerned and, where relevant, the notifier or person deemed to be the notifier, agree and are satisfied that the waste can be: In the event of export or import, recovery or disposal in an alternative way as agreed upon pursuant to the first subparagraph shall only take place if the take-back in accordance with paragraph 2 is impracticable. 4. In the case of recovery or disposal in alternative way as referred to in paragraph 3, the notifier, or, where relevant, the person deemed to be the notifier in accordance with paragraph 6 or 7, or, if that is impracticable, the competent authority of dispatch or the natural or legal person on its behalf, shall ensure that the waste concerned is managed in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with Article 59. 5. The take-back, recovery or disposal referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 shall take place within 30 days, or such other period as may be agreed between the competent authorities concerned, following the date on which the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware of, or has been advised by the competent authorities of destination or transit of, the illegal shipment, and informed of the reasons therefor. Such advice may result from information submitted to the competent authorities of destination or transit, inter alia, by other competent authorities. In the case of take-back as referred to in the paragraph 2, points (a), (b) and (c), a new notification shall be submitted, unless the competent authorities concerned agree that a duly reasoned request by the initial competent authority of dispatch is sufficient. If a new notification is required, it shall be submitted by the person or authority determined in accordance with paragraph 2. The competent authorities shall not oppose or object to the return of waste of an illegal shipment. In the case of recovery or disposal in an alternative way as referred to in paragraph 3, carried out outside the country where the illegal shipment has been discovered, a new notification shall be submitted by the person or authority listed in that paragraph and in accordance with the order indicated in therein. The competent authorities concerned shall cooperate, as necessary, to ensure that the waste is taken back or recovered or disposed of in an alternative way as referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3. 6. Where a notifier specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(iv), fails to fulfil any of the take-back obligations set out in this Article or Article 26, the original waste producer, the new waste producer or the collector specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), respectively, who authorised that dealer or broker to act on its behalf shall be deemed to be the notifier for the purposes of those take-back obligations. 7. Where a notifier specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(i), (ii) or (iii), fails to fulfil any of the take back obligations set out in this Article or Article 26, the waste holder as specified in Article 3, point (6)(a)(v), shall be deemed to be the notifier for the purposes of those take-back obligations. 8. Where the responsibility for an illegal shipment can be imputed to the consignee, the competent authority of destination shall ensure that the waste is recovered or disposed of in an environmentally sound manner by: The recovery or disposal referred to in the first subparagraph shall take place within 30 days, or such other period as may be agreed between the competent authorities concerned, following the date on which the competent authority of destination becomes aware of, or has been advised by the competent authorities of dispatch or transit of, the illegal shipment and informed of the reasons therefor. Such advice may result from information submitted to the competent authorities of dispatch and transit, inter alia, by other competent authorities. The competent authorities concerned shall cooperate, as necessary, in the recovery or disposal of the waste in accordance with this paragraph. 9. If no new notification is required, a new movement document shall be completed in accordance with Articles 15 or 16 by the person responsible for take-back or, if that is impracticable, by the initial competent authority of dispatch. Where a new notification is submitted by the initial competent authority of dispatch, which carries out the take-back in accordance with paragraph 2, point (c), a new financial guarantee or equivalent insurance shall not be required. 10. In cases where responsibility for the illegal shipment cannot be imputed to either the notifier or the consignee, the competent authorities concerned shall cooperate to ensure that the waste is recovered or disposed of. 11. Where an illegal shipment is discovered after completion of an interim recovery operation or interim disposal operation as referred to in Article 7(6), the obligation of the country of dispatch to take the waste back or arrange for recovery or disposal in an alternative way shall end when the facility has issued the certificate referred to in Article 15(4). Where a facility issues a certificate of recovery or disposal in such a way that it results in an illegal shipment, with the consequence that the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance is released, paragraph 8 of this Article and Article 26(2) shall apply. 12. Where the waste from an illegal shipment is discovered within a Member State, the competent authority with jurisdiction over the area where the waste was discovered shall be responsible for ensuring that arrangements are made for the safe storage of the waste pending its return or non-interim recovery or non-interim disposal in an alternative way. 13. Articles 37, 39 and 40 and any export prohibitions contained in a delegated act as referred to in Article 45(6) shall not apply in cases where illegal shipments are returned to the country of dispatch and that country of dispatch is a country covered by the prohibitions set out in those provisions. 14. If a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5) is considered to be an illegal shipment, this Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person who arranges the shipment and to the competent authorities concerned. 15. This Article shall apply without prejudice to Union and national law on liability. Article 26 Costs for take-back when a shipment is illegal 1. Costs arising from the take-back or recovery or disposal in an alternative way of waste from an illegal shipment, including costs for its transport of waste, recovery or disposal, pursuant to Article 25(2) or (3) and, from date on which the competent authority of dispatch becomes aware that a shipment is illegal, storage costs pursuant to Article 25(12), shall be charged to: 2. Costs arising from recovery or disposal pursuant to Article 25(8), including possible transport and storage costs pursuant to Article 25(12), shall be charged to the consignee; or, if that is impracticable, to the competent authority of destination. 3. Costs arising from recovery or disposal pursuant to Article 25(10), including possible transport and storage costs pursuant to Article 25(12), shall be charged to: 4. In cases where a notification has been submitted and the notifier does not fulfil its responsibilities for the costs being charged, the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance referred to in Article 7 shall be used before charging costs in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 to someone other than the notifier or the consignee respectively. Where the costs exceed the amount of cover provided by the financial guarantee or equivalent insurance, the costs shall be charged in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2 and 3. 5. If a shipment of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5) is considered to be illegal, this Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person who arranges the shipment and to the competent authorities concerned. 6. This Article shall apply without prejudice to Union and national law concerning liability. CHAPTER 5 General provisions Article 27 Electronic submission and exchange of information 1. The following information and documents shall be submitted and exchanged by electronic means, via the hub of the central system referred to in paragraph 3 or via other available interoperable systems or software in accordance with paragraph 4: 2. In order to keep the list of information and documentation, required under paragraph 1, up to date with any changes to the systems for the exchange and submission by electronic means, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend paragraph 1 in order to amend the list of information and documentation. 3. The Commission shall operate a central system that allows for the electronic submission and exchange of information and documents referred to in paragraph 1. That central system shall provide a hub to be used for the exchange in real time of the information and documents referred to in paragraph 1 between available systems or software for electronic data interchange. The hub referred to in the first subparagraph shall also be used for the exchange in real time of information and documents as referred to in paragraph 1 for shipments within the Union with transit via third countries, export from the Union, import into the Union and transit through the Union, where the competent authorities, customs offices of export, exit and entry, authorities involved in inspections and economic operators in third countries connect with that hub via an available system or software, in which case paragraph 4 shall apply mutatis mutandis , or via the website referred to in the third subparagraph of this paragraph. That central system shall also provide a website for preparing and processing the information and documents referred to in paragraph 1 for shipments within the Union, for shipments within the Union with transit via third countries, exporting from the Union, importing into the Union and transiting through the Union. Such website may be used by the competent authorities, authorities involved in inspections and economic operators in the Member States and in third countries that do not use systems or software for electronic data interchange, to submit and exchange directly, by electronic means, the information and documents referred to in paragraph 1. Software referred to in the first, second and third subparagraphs shall be interoperable with the central system referred to in paragraph 3, exchange information and documents via that central system in real time and be operated in accordance with the requirements and rules laid down in the implementing acts adopted by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 5. The central system shall facilitate the keeping of documents in accordance with Article 20. That central system shall also provide for its interoperability with the environment for electronic freight transport information established under Regulation (EU) 2020/1056. Within four years of the adoption of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 5, the Commission shall ensure the interconnection of that central system with the European Union Single Window Environment for Customs through the European Union Customs Single Window — Certificate Exchange System established by Regulation (EU) 2022/2399. 4. Member States may operate their own available systems or software allowing for the preparation and processing of the information and documents referred to in paragraph 1 by competent authorities, authorities involved in inspections and, where appropriate, economic operators in the Member States and for the electronic submission and exchange of information and documents referred to in paragraph 1. The Member States shall ensure that those systems and software are interoperable with the central system referred to in paragraph 3, are operated in accordance with the requirements and rules laid down in the implementing acts adopted by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 5 and allow for the exchange of information and documents via the hub of the central system in real time. The systems referred to in the first subparagraph shall facilitate the keeping of documents in accordance with Article 20. 5. At the latest by 21 May 2025, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts to establish: Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2). 6. The functionality of the central system shall be reviewed by the Commission every two years. The findings of those reviews shall be communicated to the European Parliament and the Member States. The review shall take into account feedback from users, such as competent authorities and notifiers. Article 28 Language 1. Any notification, information, documentation or other communication submitted pursuant to the provisions of this Title shall be provided in a language acceptable to the competent authorities concerned. 2. The notifier and the consignee, or, where applicable, the person who arranges the shipment, shall provide the competent authorities concerned with authorised translations of the communications referred to in paragraph 1 into a language which is acceptable to them, where they so request. 3. By 21 May 2028, the Commission shall incorporate a function into the central system referred to in Article 27(3), which provides courtesy translations of the communications referred to in paragraph 1. Article 29 Classification issues 1. When deciding whether an object or substance resulting from a production process the primary aim of which is not the production of that object or substance shall be considered to be waste, Member States shall apply Article 5 of Directive 2008/98/EC. When deciding whether waste which has undergone a recycling or other recovery operation is to be considered to have ceased to be waste, Member States shall apply Article 6 of Directive 2008/98/EC. When deciding whether an object or substance is to be considered as a used good and not as waste, Member States shall ensure that at least the following conditions are fulfilled: The provisions in the third subparagraph shall apply without prejudice to Article 23(2) and Annex VI to Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 43 ) and Article 72(2) and Annex XIV to Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 44 ) . 2. If the competent authorities of dispatch and of destination cannot agree on the classification as regards the distinction between waste and non-waste, taking into account the provisions in paragraph 1, and any conditions or decisions taken at Union level or by Member States pursuant to Article 5 or 6 of Directive 2008/98/EC, the object or substance shall be treated as if it were waste for the purpose of the shipment. This shall be without prejudice to the right of the country of destination to deal with the shipped material in accordance with its national legislation, following arrival of the shipped material and where such legislation is in accordance with Union or international law. 3. The Commission may adopt implementing acts in order to establish detailed criteria for the uniform application of the conditions laid down in paragraph 1, third subparagraph, to specific substances or objects for which the distinction between used goods and waste is of particular importance for the export of waste from the Union. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2). 4. If the competent authorities of dispatch and of destination cannot agree on the classification of waste destined for recovery as being listed in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV, or not listed in any of those Annexes, the shipment of that waste shall be subject to Article 4(2). 5. If the competent authorities of dispatch and of destination cannot agree on the classification of the waste treatment operation as being recovery or disposal, the provisions of this Regulation regarding disposal shall apply. 6. In order to facilitate the harmonised classification of waste listed in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV in the Union, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to supplement this Regulation by establishing criteria, such as contamination thresholds, on the basis of which certain wastes shall be classified in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB or Annex IV. 7. If the competent authorities of dispatch and destination cannot agree on the classification of the waste treatment operation as an interim or non-interim operation, the provisions of this Regulation on interim operations shall apply. Article 30 Administrative costs Appropriate and proportionate administrative costs for implementing the notification and supervision procedures and normal costs for appropriate analyses and inspections may be charged by the competent authorities concerned or authorities involved in inspections to the notifier and, where relevant, the person who arranges the shipment. Member States shall notify the Commission of provisions applied at national level in relation to such costs. The Commission shall make that information publicly available. Article 31 Border-area agreements 1. In exceptional cases and where the specific geographical or demographical situation warrants such a step, Member States may conclude bilateral agreements making the notification procedure for shipments of specific flows of waste less stringent in respect of cross-border shipments to the nearest suitable facility located in the border area between the two Member States concerned. 2. Bilateral agreements as referred to in paragraph 1 may also be concluded where waste is shipped from and treated in the country of dispatch but transits through another Member State. 3. Member States may also conclude bilateral agreements as referred to in paragraph 1 with countries that are members of the EFTA (European Free Trade Association). Agreements concluded pursuant to the first subparagraph shall require that the waste be managed in the EFTA country concerned in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with Article 59. 4. Agreements concluded under this Article shall be notified to the Commission before they take effect. Article 32 Shipments between an outermost region and the Member State of which it is part By way of derogation from Article 9(1) and (2), for shipments between an outermost region and the Member State of which it is part, that require transit through another Member State, tacit consent by the competent authority of transit may be assumed if no objection is lodged within seven working days of the date on which the notifier is informed in accordance with Article 8(12) that the notification has been properly completed. That tacit consent shall be valid for the same period as indicated in the written consent given by the competent authority of destination in accordance with Article 9(1). Article 33 Shipments from Faroe Islands to Denmark Denmark may adopt a decision to treat imports of waste from the Faroe Islands into Denmark, which have not transited through any other country, under Article 36 of this Regulation. If Denmark adopts such a decision, it shall be notified to the Commission. CHAPTER 6 Shipments within the Union with transit via third countries Article 34 Shipments of waste destined for disposal Where a shipment is carried out within the Union and transits through one or more third countries, and the waste is destined for disposal, Articles 4 to 17 and Articles 19 to 30 shall apply mutatis mutandis , subject to the following adaptations and additional requirements: Article 35 Shipments of waste destined for recovery 1. Where a shipment is carried out within the Union and transits through one or more third countries to which the OECD Decision of the Council on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Wastes Destined for Recovery Operations ( 45 ) (‘the OECD Decision’), does not apply, and the waste is destined for recovery, Article 34 shall apply. 2. Where a shipment is carried out within the Union, including a shipment between localities in the same Member State, and transits through one or more third countries to which the OECD Decision applies, and the waste is destined for recovery, Articles 4 to 30 shall apply mutatis mutandis , subject to the following adaptations and additional requirements: TITLE III TRANSPORT OF WASTE EXCLUSIVELY WITHIN A MEMBER STATE Article 36 Transport of waste exclusively within a Member State 1. Each Member State shall establish an appropriate regime for the supervision and control of the transport of waste taking place exclusively within its national jurisdiction. That regime shall take account of the need for coherence with the Union system established by Titles II and VII. 2. Member States shall inform the Commission of their regime for supervision and control of the transport of waste. The Commission shall inform the other Member States thereof. TITLE IV EXPORTS FROM THE UNION TO THIRD COUNTRIES CHAPTER 1 Exports of waste for disposal Article 37 Prohibition of exports of waste destined for disposal 1. Exports from the Union of waste destined for disposal shall be prohibited. 2. The prohibition in paragraph 1 shall not apply to exports of waste destined for disposal to EFTA countries which are also Parties to the Basel Convention. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, exports of waste destined for disposal to an EFTA country that is a Party to the Basel Convention shall be prohibited: 4. The prohibition set out in paragraph 1 shall not apply to waste that is subject to a take-back obligation pursuant to Article 22 or 25. Article 38 Procedures for exports of waste destined for disposal to EFTA countries 1. Where waste is exported from the Union to an EFTA country that is a Party to the Basel Convention and destined for disposal in that country, the provisions of Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis , with the adaptations and additional provisions set out in paragraphs 2 and 3. 2. The following adaptations shall apply: 3. The following additional provisions shall apply: 4. The shipment may take place only if all the following conditions are fulfilled: 5. Where waste is exported, it shall be destined for disposal operations within a facility which, under applicable national law, is operating or is authorised to operate in the country of destination. 6. Where a customs office of export or a customs office of exit discovers an illegal shipment, it shall without delay inform the competent authority in the country of the customs office thereof. That competent authority shall: CHAPTER 2 Exports of waste for recovery Section 1 Exports of hazardous and certain other waste to countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply Article 39 Prohibition of exports of hazardous and certain other wastes 1. Exports from the Union of the following wastes destined for recovery in countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply shall be prohibited: 2. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to waste that is subject to a take-back obligation pursuant to Article 22 or 25. 3. Member States may, in exceptional cases, provide, on the basis of documentary evidence provided by the notifier, that a specific hazardous waste listed in Annex V to this Regulation or in the list of waste referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC is excluded from the export prohibition referred to in paragraph 1, where it does not display any of the properties listed in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, taking into account the criteria and applicable cut-off values and concentration limits for the classification of waste as hazardous as specified in that Annex. Where a hazardous property of a waste has been assessed by a test and by using the concentrations of hazardous substances as indicated in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, the results of the test shall prevail. 4. The fact that waste is not listed as hazardous in Annex V or in the list of waste as referred to in Article 7 of Directive 2008/98/EC, or that it is listed in Part 1, List B of Annex V, shall not preclude, in exceptional cases, characterisation of such waste as hazardous and therefore subject to the export prohibition if it displays any of the properties listed in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, taking into account the criteria and applicable cut-off values and concentration limits for the classification of waste as hazardous, specified therein. Where a hazardous property of a waste has been assessed by a test and by using the concentrations of hazardous substances as indicated in Annex III to Directive 2008/98/EC, the results of the test shall prevail. 5. In the cases referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4, the competent authority concerned shall inform the envisaged competent authority of destination prior to taking a decision to consent to planned shipments to that country. Member States shall notify such cases to the Commission before the end of each calendar year. The Commission shall forward that information to all Member States, to the Secretariat of the Basel Convention where the information refers to an entry listed in the Basel Convention and to the OECD Secretariat where the information refers to an entry listed in the OECD Decision. On the basis of the information provided, the Commission may make comments and is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex V. Section 2 Exports of non-hazardous waste to countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply Article 40 Prohibition of exports of non-hazardous waste 1. Exports from the Union of the following wastes destined for recovery in countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply shall be prohibited: 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to exports of wastes or mixtures of wastes destined for recovery to a country included in the list of countries established in accordance with Article 41, for the non-hazardous wastes and mixtures of non-hazardous wastes specified in that list. Such export may only take place on the condition that the waste is: 3. Exports allowed in accordance with paragraph 2 shall: 4. In the case of exports in accordance with paragraph 2, the provisions of Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis . Where such exports are subject to the general information requirements laid down in Article 18, the person who arranges the shipment shall ensure that the information to be provided by the facility pursuant to Article 18(8) and (9) is submitted via a system referred to in Article 27, unless the facility is connected to a system referred to in Article 27. Where such exports are subject to the procedure of prior written notification and consent, the procedures referred to in Article 38 shall apply with the following adaptations: Article 41 List of countries to which exports of non-hazardous waste from the Union for recovery are authorised 1. The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 80 to supplement this Regulation by establishing a list of countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply and to which exports of non-hazardous wastes and mixtures of non-hazardous wastes from the Union for recovery are authorised (‘list of countries to which exports are authorised’). That list shall include countries which have submitted a request pursuant to Article 42(1) and have demonstrated compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42(3), based on an assessment carried out by the Commission pursuant to Article 43, and have agreed to comply with Article 42(5). 2. The list referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the following information: 3. The list referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted by 21 November 2026, unless no country submits a request pursuant to Article 42(1) or no country complies with the requirements set out in Article 42(3) at that time. By 21 August 2024, the Commission shall contact all countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply, to provide them with the necessary information on the possibility for those countries to be included in the list of countries to which exports are authorised. In order to be included in the list of countries to which exports are authorised adopted by 21 November 2026, the countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply shall submit their request pursuant to Article 42(1) by 21 February 2025. 4. The Commission shall regularly, and at least every two years following its establishment, update the list of countries to which exports are authorised, in order to: 5. After receiving the information and evidence referred to in Article 42(5), the Commission may request additional information from the country concerned to demonstrate that it continues to comply with the requirements set out in Article 42(3). 6. Where information becomes available which shows in a plausible manner that the requirements set out in Article 42 are no longer fulfilled for a country already included in the list referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall invite that country to provide its views on that information, within a maximum period of two months from the invitation, together with relevant supporting evidence demonstrating continued compliance with those requirements. That period may be extended by an additional period of two months where the country concerned makes a reasoned request for such extension. 7. Where the country concerned does not provide its views and the requested supporting evidence within the time limit referred to in paragraph 6 or where the provided evidence is insufficient to demonstrate continued compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42, the Commission shall remove that country from the list without undue delay. 8. The Commission may at any time contact a country included in the list referred to in paragraph 1 to obtain information which is relevant to ensure that that country continues to comply with the requirements set out in Article 42. Article 42 Requirements for inclusion in the list of countries to which exports are authorised 1. Countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply and which intend to receive certain wastes or mixtures of wastes referred to in Article 40(1) from the Union for recovery shall submit a request to the Commission indicating their willingness to receive those specific wastes or mixtures of wastes and to be included in the list referred to in Article 41. Such request and all related documentation or other communication shall be provided in the English language. 2. The request referred to in paragraph 1 shall be submitted using the form set out in Annex VIII and contain all the information specified therein. 3. The country making the request shall demonstrate that it has put in place and implements all necessary measures to ensure that the waste concerned will be managed in an environmentally sound manner as referred to in Article 59. To that end, the country making the request shall demonstrate that: 4. No earlier than 21 May 2029, countries to which the OECD Decision does not apply and which intend to receive plastic waste referred to in Article 39(1)(d) from the Union for recycling may submit a request to the Commission indicating their willingness to receive such waste and to be included in the list referred to in Article 41. Such request and all related documentation or other communication shall be provided in the English language. In addition to the requirements set out in paragraphs 2 and 3, the country making the request shall also demonstrate all of the following: 5. In the event of any change to the information provided to the Commission under paragraph 3, the countries included in the list referred to in Article 41 shall provide an update of the information specified in the form set out in Annex VIII, together with relevant supporting evidence without delay. The countries included in the list referred to in Article 41 shall in any case, on the fifth year after their initial inclusion, provide to the Commission an update of the information specified in the form set out in Annex VIII, together with relevant supporting evidence. Article 43 Assessment of the request for inclusion in the list of countries to which exports are authorised 1. The Commission shall assess the requests submitted pursuant to Article 42 without delay and, if it is satisfied that the requirements set out in that Article are complied with, it shall include the country making the request in the list of countries to which exports are authorised. The assessment shall be based on the information and supporting evidence provided by the country making the request, as well as other relevant information, and determine if the country making the request complies with the requirements set out in Article 42, including whether it has put in place and implements all necessary measures to ensure that the wastes and mixtures of wastes concerned will be managed in an environmentally sound manner as referred to in Article 59, and that there are no substantial adverse effects on the management of domestic waste in the country concerned as a consequence of the waste exported from the Union. In order to perform this assessment, the Commission shall use, as points of reference, the relevant provisions in the legislation and guidance referred to in Annex IX. 2. Where, during the course of its assessment, the Commission considers that the information provided by the country making the request is incomplete or insufficient to demonstrate compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42, it shall give that country an opportunity to provide additional information within a maximum period of three months. That period may be extended by an additional period of three months where the requesting country makes a reasoned request for such extension. 3. Where the country making the request does not provide the additional information within the time limit referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, or where the provided additional information is still considered to be incomplete or insufficient to demonstrate compliance with the requirements set out in Article 42, the Commission shall inform without undue delay the country making the request that it cannot be included in the list of countries to which exports are authorised and that its request will no longer be processed. In such a case, the Commission shall also inform the country making the request of the reasons for that conclusion. The country making the request may submit a new request pursuant to Article 42. 4. The Commission shall assess the requests submitted pursuant to Article 42(4) without undue delay and, if it is satisfied that the requirements set out in Article 42(3) and (4) are complied with, it is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 80 to include the country making the request in the list of countries to which exports are authorised. In order to perform this assessment, the Commission shall use, as points of reference, the relevant provisions in the legislation and guidance referred to in Annex IX. Section 3 Exports to countries to which the OECD Decision applies Article 44 General regime for exports of waste 1. Where waste referred to in Article 4(2) to (5) is exported from the Union and destined for recovery in countries to which the OECD Decision applies, with or without transit through countries to which the OECD Decision applies, the provisions of Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis , with the adaptations and additional provisions listed in paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 6. 2. The following adaptations shall apply: 3. As regards exports of waste referred to in Article 4(2), the adaptations and additional provisions listed in Article 38(2), points (a) to (e), and Article 38(3), points (b) to (g), shall apply. 4. As regards exports of waste listed referred to in Article 4(4), the person who arranges the shipment shall ensure that the information to be provided by the facility in accordance with Article 18(8) and (9) shall be included in a system referred to in Article 27, unless those facilities are connected to a system referred to in Article 27. 5. The shipment of waste subject to the prior written notification and consent may take place only if all the following conditions are fulfilled: 6. Where an export as referred to in paragraph 1 of waste referred to in Article 4(2) is in transit through a country to which the OECD Decision does not apply, the following adaptations shall apply: 7. Where waste is exported, it shall be destined for recovery operations within a facility which, under applicable national law, is operating or is authorised to operate in the country of destination. 8. Article 38(6) shall apply. Article 45 Monitoring of export and safeguard procedure 1. The Commission shall monitor the exports of waste from the Union to countries to which the OECD Decision applies, with a view to ensuring that such exports do not lead to significant environmental or human health damage in the country of destination or that waste imported from the Union is not shipped onwards to third countries. As part of its monitoring, the Commission shall assess requests from natural or legal persons which are accompanied by relevant information and data showing that management of waste exported from the Union does not fulfil the requirements of environmentally sound management as referred to in Article 59 in a third country to which the OECD Decision applies, or that such exports cause substantial adverse effects on the management of waste generated in that country. 2. In cases where: the Commission shall request the competent authorities of the country concerned to provide, within 60 days, information on the conditions under which the waste in question is recovered, the effect of the export of the waste from the Union on the management of the waste generated in that country and the ability of the country concerned to manage this waste in an environmentally sound manner as referred to in Article 59. The Commission may grant an extension of this time limit if the country concerned makes a reasoned request for an extension thereof. 3. The request referred to in paragraph 2 shall aim to verify that the country concerned has: 4. For the purpose of the verifications referred to in paragraph 3, the Commission shall, where relevant, consult relevant stakeholders. 5. The Commission shall exercise specific scrutiny with regard to exports of plastic waste to countries to which the OECD Decision applies. The Commission shall by 21 May 2026 assess whether countries to which the OECD Decision applies and which import significant volumes of plastic waste from the Union comply with this Article. 6. Where, further to the request referred to in paragraph 2, the country concerned does not provide sufficient evidence as referred to in paragraph 3 that the waste concerned is managed in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with Article 59, or that there are no substantial adverse effects on the management of waste generated in that country as a consequence of the waste exported from the Union, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to supplement this Regulation by prohibiting the export of the waste concerned to this country. A prohibition shall only be lifted by the Commission where it has sufficient evidence that the waste concerned will be managed in an environmentally sound manner and that there are no substantial adverse effects on the management of waste generated in that country as a consequence of the waste exported from the Union. CHAPTER 3 Additional obligations Article 46 Obligations on exporters 1. The notifier or the person who arranges the shipment shall only export waste from the Union if it can demonstrate that the facilities which are to receive the waste in the country of destination will manage it in an environmentally sound manner as referred to in Article 59. 2. The notifier or person who arranges the shipment shall not export waste to a facility which does not comply with criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X. 3. In order to fulfil the obligation referred to in paragraph 1, the notifier or person who arranges the shipment intending to export waste from the Union shall ensure that the facilities which will manage the waste in the country of destination have been subject to an audit. This audit shall be carried out by a third party which shall be independent from the notifier or person who arranges the shipment as well as from the audited facility and have appropriate qualifications in the areas of audits and waste treatment. When commissioning an audit, the notifier or a person who arranges the shipment shall verify that the third party complies with the requirements laid down in Part A of Annex X and has been authorised or accredited by a national official body to perform audits as defined in this Article. 4. The audit referred to in paragraph 3 shall include both physical and documentary checks and shall verify compliance of the facility concerned with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X. 5. A notifier or person who arranges the shipment intending to export waste shall ensure, prior to exporting waste, that the facility which will manage the waste in the country of destination has been subject to an audit referred to in paragraph 3 carried out no longer than two years prior to exporting waste to the facility concerned and which has demonstrated compliance of the facility with the criteria in Part B of Annex X. With a view to fulfilling this obligation, the notifier or a person who arranges the shipment shall either: The notifier or person who arranges the shipment shall also commission an ad hoc audit without delay in case it receives reliable information that a facility no longer complies with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X. Where the ad hoc audit demonstrates that a facility no longer complies with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X, the notifier or the person who arranges the shipment shall immediately stop the export of waste to that facility and inform the competent authorities of dispatch concerned. 6. A notifier or person who arranges the shipment that has commissioned an audit for a given facility in accordance with paragraph 3 shall ensure that such audit be made available to other notifiers or persons who arrange shipments intending to export waste to the facility in question, under fair commercial conditions. 7. A notifier or a person who arranges the shipment shall notify the Commission of audits they have commissioned in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 5, and which have demonstrated compliance of a facility with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X. The notification shall contain the following information: A notifier or a person who arranges the shipment may notify the Commission of an audit commissioned by the audited facility itself, provided that the notifier or the person who arranges the shipment has verified that the audit had been conducted in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 and demonstrated compliance of the facility with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X. Such notification shall contain information in accordance with the first subparagraph, points (a) and (c) to (f). 8. The Commission shall establish and keep an up to date register with information received in accordance with paragraph 7. The Commission shall make the information in the register publicly available. 9. Upon request by a competent authority or an authority involved in inspections, a notifier or person who arranges the shipment shall provide documentary evidence that audits as referred to in paragraph 3 have been carried out in all facilities to which they are exporting the waste in question. Such documentary evidence shall be provided in a language acceptable to the authorities concerned. 10. A notifier or person who arranges the shipment exporting waste outside the Union shall on a yearly basis make information on how they comply with their obligations under this Article publicly available by electronic means. 11. Where an international agreement between the Union and a third country to which the OECD Decision applies recognises that the facilities in that third country will manage waste in an environmentally sound manner, as referred to in Article 59 and in accordance with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X, notifiers or persons who arrange shipments intending to export waste to that third country shall be exempted from the obligation laid down in paragraphs 3 to 7 and 9. A notifier or a person who arranges the shipment exporting waste from the Union to a facility in a third country with which the Union has concluded an international agreement shall carry out ad hoc audit without delay in the event it receives reliable information that a facility no longer complies with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X. The notifier or person who arranges the shipment shall in such a case notify the competent authorities of dispatch of that reliable information as well as its plans to carry out an ad hoc audit. Where an ad hoc audit demonstrates that a facility no longer complies with the criteria laid down in Part B of Annex X, the notifier or the person who arranges the shipment shall immediately stop the export of waste to that facility and inform the competent authorities of dispatch concerned. 12. The Commission shall make the relevant international agreements referred to in paragraph 11 publicly available on its website. 13. The Commission may adopt guidelines with regard to the application of this Article. Article 47 Obligations on Member States of export 1. In case of exports from the Union, Member States shall take all the measures necessary to ensure that legal and natural persons under their national jurisdiction do not export waste in cases where the conditions laid down in Articles 39 to 46 for such export are not met or where exported waste is not managed in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with Article 59. 2. Where Member States are in possession of reliable information indicating that natural or legal persons exporting waste from the Union are not complying with their obligations under Article 46 they shall carry out the necessary verifications. CHAPTER 4 General provisions Article 48 Exports to the Antarctic Exports of waste from the Union to the Antarctic shall be prohibited. Article 49 Exports to overseas countries or territories 1. Exports from the Union to an overseas country or territory of waste destined for disposal in that country or territory shall be prohibited. 2. As regards exports of waste destined for recovery in overseas countries or territories, the prohibition set out in Article 39 shall apply mutatis mutandis . 3. As regards exports of waste destined for recovery in overseas countries or territories not covered by the prohibition set out in Article 39, the provisions of Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis . TITLE V IMPORTS INTO THE UNION FROM THIRD COUNTRIES CHAPTER 1 Imports of waste for disposal Article 50 Prohibition of imports of waste destined for disposal 1. Imports into the Union of waste destined for disposal shall be prohibited except imports coming from: 2. In exceptional cases, Member States may conclude bilateral agreements and arrangements for the disposal of specific waste in those Member States, where such waste will not be managed in an environmentally sound manner in the country of dispatch. These agreements and arrangements shall: 3. Bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements referred to in paragraph 1, points (b) and (c), shall be based on the procedural requirements of Article 51. 4. The countries referred to in paragraph 1, points (a), (b) and (c), shall be required to present a prior duly reasoned request to the competent authority of the Member State of destination on the basis that they do not have and cannot reasonably acquire the technical capacity and the necessary facilities in order to dispose of the waste in an environmentally sound manner as referred to in Article 59. Article 51 Procedural requirements for imports of waste destined for disposal or during situations of crisis, or during peacemaking or peacekeeping operations 1. Where waste destined for disposal is imported into the Union from countries that are Parties to the Basel Convention, or in cases referred to in Article 50(1), point (d), the provisions of Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis , with the adaptations and additional provisions set out in paragraphs 2 and 3. 2. The following adaptations shall apply: 3. The following additional provisions shall apply: 4. The shipment may take place only if all the following conditions are fulfilled: 5. Where a customs office of entry discovers an illegal shipment, it shall without delay inform the competent authority in the country of that customs office. That competent authority shall: 6. Where waste generated by armed forces or relief organisations during situations of crisis, or during peacemaking or peacekeeping operations, is imported by those armed forces or relief organisations or by a natural or legal person on their behalf, such entities shall inform any competent authority of transit and the competent authority of destination in the Union, or in urgent cases where the disposal or recovery facility is not known at the time of the shipment, the competent authority responsible for the area of the first place of destination in advance concerning the shipment and its destination. The information provided pursuant to the first subparagraph shall accompany the shipment, unless it is provided via a system in accordance with Article 27. 7. The Commission shall adopt an implementing act detailing the information to be provided in accordance with paragraph 6, the first subparagraph, and the related timing. Such information shall be sufficient to enable authorities to carry out inspections, and provide details on the persons involved in the shipments, the date of the shipment, the waste quantity, the waste identification, the designation and composition of the waste, the recovery or disposal facility, the code for the recovery or disposal operation and the countries involved. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2). CHAPTER 2 Imports of waste for recovery Article 52 Prohibition of imports of waste destined for recovery 1. Imports into the Union of waste destined for recovery shall be prohibited except for imports coming from: 2. In exceptional cases, individual Member States may conclude bilateral agreements and arrangements for the recovery of specific waste in those Member States, where such waste will not be managed in an environmentally sound manner, in the country of dispatch. In such cases Article 50(2), second subparagraph, shall apply. 3. Bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements entered into in accordance with paragraph 1, points (c) and (d), shall be based on the procedural requirements set out in Article 51 in so far as may be relevant. Article 53 Procedural requirements for imports from a country to which the OECD Decision applies or from other areas during situations of crisis or during peacemaking or peacekeeping operations 1. Where waste destined for recovery is imported into the Union from countries and through countries to which the OECD Decision applies, or in cases referred to in Article 52(1), point (e), the provisions of Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis , with the adaptations and additional provisions set out in paragraphs 2 and 3. 2. The following adaptations shall apply: 3. Article 51(3) shall also apply. 4. The shipment may take place only if all the following conditions are fulfilled: 5. The provisions in Article 51(5) and (6) shall apply. Article 54 Procedural requirements for imports from or through a country to which the OECD Decision does not apply Where waste destined for recovery is imported into the Union from a country to which the OECD Decision does not apply or through any country to which the OECD Decision does not apply and which is also Party to the Basel Convention, Article 51 shall apply mutatis mutandis . CHAPTER 3 Additional obligations Article 55 Obligations of competent authorities of destination in the Union 1. In the case of imports into the Union, the competent authority of destination in the Union shall require and take the necessary steps to ensure that any waste shipped into its area of jurisdiction is managed without endangering human health and in an environmentally sound manner in accordance with Article 59 of this Regulation, and in accordance with Article 13 of Directive 2008/98/EC and other Union law on waste, in particular the Union legislation referred to in Annex IX, Part 1, throughout the duration of the shipment, including recovery or disposal in the country of destination. 2. The competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 shall also prohibit imports of waste from third countries where it has reason to believe that the waste will not be managed in accordance with the requirements set out in paragraph 1. CHAPTER 4 Imports from overseas countries or territories Article 56 Imports from overseas countries or territories 1. Where waste is imported into the Union from overseas countries or territories, Title II shall apply mutatis mutandis . 2. An overseas country or territory and the Member State to which it is linked may apply national procedures of that Member State to shipments from the overseas country or territory to that Member State in case no other countries are involved in the shipment as country of transit. Where a Member State applies national procedures to such shipments, it shall notify the Commission thereof. TITLE VI TRANSIT THROUGH THE UNION FROM AND TO THIRD COUNTRIES Article 57 Transit through the Union of waste destined for disposal Where waste destined for disposal is shipped through Member States from and to third countries, Article 51 shall apply mutatis mutandis , with the following adaptations and additional provisions: Article 58 Transit through the Union of waste destined for recovery 1. Where waste destined for recovery is shipped through Member States from and to a country to which the OECD Decision does not apply, Article 57 shall apply mutatis mutandis . 2. Where waste destined for recovery is shipped through Member States from and to a country to which the OECD Decision applies, Article 53 shall apply mutatis mutandis , with the following adaptations and additional provisions: 3. Where waste destined for recovery is shipped through Member States from a country to which the OECD Decision does not apply to a country to which the OECD Decision applies or vice versa, paragraph 1 shall apply as regards the country to which the OECD Decision does not apply and paragraph 2 shall apply as regards the country to which the OECD Decision applies. TITLE VII ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND MANAGEMENT AND ENFORCEMENT CHAPTER 1 Environmentally sound management Article 59 Environmentally sound management 1. The waste producer, the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment and any other undertaking involved in a shipment of waste or its recovery or disposal shall take the necessary steps to ensure that the waste is managed without endangering human health and in an environmentally sound manner throughout the duration of the shipment and during the recovery and disposal of the waste. 2. For the purposes of export of waste, the waste shall be deemed to be managed in an environmentally sound manner as regards recovery or disposal, if it can be demonstrated that the waste, as well as any residual waste generated through recovery or disposal, will be managed in accordance with human health, climate and environmental protection requirements that are considered equivalent to human health and environmental protection requirements under Union legislation. When assessing such equivalence, full compliance with requirements stemming from Union legislation shall not be required, but it shall be demonstrated that the requirements applied in the country of destination ensure a similar level of protection of human health and the environment than the requirements stemming from Union legislation. In order to perform the equivalence assessment, the relevant provisions of Union legislation and the international guidance referred to in Annex IX shall be used as points of reference. CHAPTER 2 Enforcement Section 1 Inspections by the Member States and penalties Article 60 Inspections 1. Member States shall, for the purpose of enforcing this Regulation, ensure that inspections of establishments, undertakings, brokers and dealers in accordance with Article 34 of Directive 2008/98/EC, and inspections of shipments of waste and of the related recovery or disposal, are carried out. 2. Inspections of shipments shall take place at least in one of the following points: Article 61 Documentation and evidence 1. Inspections of shipments shall include at least verification of documents, confirmation of the identity of the actors involved in those shipments and, where appropriate, physical checking of the waste. 2. In order to ascertain that a substance or object being carried by road, rail, air, sea or inland waterway is not waste, the authorities involved in inspections may require the natural or legal person who is in possession of the substance or object concerned, or who arranges the carriage thereof, to submit documentary evidence: For the purpose of the first subparagraph, the protection of the substance or object concerned against damage during transportation, loading and unloading, such as adequate packaging and appropriate stacking, shall also be ascertained. In order to distinguish between used goods and waste, for the purpose of inspection, the conditions laid down in Article 29(1), third subparagraph, shall apply, as well as any criteria established pursuant to Article 29(3), where applicable. This paragraph shall be without prejudice to the application of Article 23(2) and Annex VI to Directive 2012/19/EU and to the application of Article 72(2) and Annex XIV to Regulation (EU) 2023/1542. 3. The authorities involved in inspections may conclude that the substance or object concerned is waste where: Where the authorities have concluded that a substance or object is waste in accordance with the first subparagraph, the carriage of the substance or object concerned or the shipment of waste concerned shall be considered as an illegal shipment. Consequently, it shall be dealt with in accordance with Articles 25 and 26 and the authorities involved in inspections shall, without delay, inform the competent authority of the country where the inspection concerned took place accordingly. 4. In order to ascertain whether a shipment of waste complies with this Regulation, the authorities involved in inspections may require the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste holder, the carrier, the consignee and the facility that receives the waste to submit relevant documentary evidence to them within a period specified by them, and may detain the waste in a shipment and, when necessary, the means of transport containing the waste, as well as suspend the transport of the waste until such documentation has been provided. 5. In order to ascertain whether a shipment of waste subject to the general information requirements set out in Article 18 is destined for recovery operations which are in accordance with Article 59, the authorities involved in inspections may require the person who arranges the shipment and the consignee to submit relevant documentary evidence provided by the interim and non-interim recovery facility and, if necessary, approved by the competent authority of destination. In cases of export from the Union, the authorities involved in inspections shall require documentary evidence on the audit carried out in accordance with Article 46. 6. Where the evidence referred to in paragraph 4 or 5 has not been submitted to the authorities involved in inspections within the period specified by them, or they consider the evidence and information available to them to be insufficient to reach a conclusion, the shipment concerned shall be considered as an illegal shipment and shall be dealt with in accordance with Articles 25 and 26. The authorities involved in inspections shall, without delay, inform the competent authority of the country where the inspection concerned took place accordingly. 7. The Commission is empowered to adopt, by means of implementing acts, a correlation table between the codes of the combined nomenclature, provided for in Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 and the entries of waste listed in Annex III, Annex IIIA, Annex IIIB, Annex IV, and Annex V to this Regulation. The Commission shall keep these acts updated, in order to reflect changes to that nomenclature and to the entries listed in those Annexes, as well as to include any new waste-related codes of the Harmonised System Nomenclature that the World Customs Organisation may adopt. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 81(2). Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1245 ( 46 ) shall remain in force until the empowerment referred to in the present Article is exercised by the Commission. Article 62 Inspection plans 1. Member States shall ensure that, in respect of their entire geographical territory, one or more plans are established, either separately or as a clearly defined part of other plans, for inspections to be carried out pursuant to Article 60(1) (‘inspection plan’). Inspection plans shall be based on a risk assessment covering specific waste streams and sources of illegal shipments, the results of previous inspections and considering, where appropriate, intelligence-based data such as data on investigations by police and customs authorities and analyses of criminal activities as well as reliable information from natural or legal persons on possible illegal shipments, relevant information related to the management of waste being shipped and information showing that a shipment bears similarities with shipments previously identified as illegal shipments. That risk assessment shall in particular take into account the need for conducting verifications of whether natural and legal persons exporting waste from the Union comply with the obligations established in Article 46. That risk assessment shall aim, inter alia, to identify the minimum number and frequency of inspections required, including physical checks on establishments, undertakings, brokers, dealers and shipments of waste or on the related recovery or disposal. 2. Inspection plans shall include, at least, the following elements: 3. An inspection plan shall be reviewed at least every three years and, where appropriate, updated. That review shall evaluate to which extent the objectives and other elements of that inspection plan have been implemented. 4. Without prejudice to applicable confidentiality requirements, Member States shall notify the Commission of the inspection plans referred to in paragraph 1 and any substantial revisions thereof every three years, and for the first time one year after the date of entry into force of this Regulation. 5. The Commission shall review the inspection plans notified by the Member States in accordance with paragraph 4 and, if appropriate, draw up reports, based on the review of these plans, on the implementation of this Article. Such reports may include, inter alia, recommendations on priorities of inspections and on enforcement cooperation and coordination between the relevant authorities involved in inspections. Such reports may also be presented, where appropriate, in the meetings of the waste shipment enforcement group established under Article 66 and shall be made available to the European Parliament and to the Council. Article 63 Penalties 1. Without prejudice to the obligations of Member States under Directive 2008/99/EC, Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties applicable to infringements of this Regulation and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are applied. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. 2. Member States shall ensure that the penalties established pursuant to this Article give due regard to the following, as applicable: 3. The Member States shall at least be able to impose the following penalties in case of infringements of this Regulation, where relevant: 4. Member States shall without delay notify the Commission of the rules and measures referred to in paragraph 1 and of any subsequent amendments affecting them. Section 2 Enforcement cooperation Article 64 Enforcement cooperation at national level Member States shall maintain or establish, as regards all relevant authorities involved in enforcement of this Regulation in their territory, including competent authorities and the authorities involved in inspections, effective mechanisms to enable them to cooperate and coordinate domestically concerning the development and implementation of enforcement policies and activities to address illegal shipments of waste, including for the establishment and implementation of the inspection plans. Article 65 Enforcement cooperation between Member States 1. Member States shall cooperate, bilaterally and multilaterally, with one another in order to facilitate the prevention and detection of illegal shipments. They shall exchange relevant information related to such prevention and detection, including on shipments of waste, flows of waste, operators and facilities, and share experience and knowledge on enforcement measures, including the risk assessment carried out pursuant to Article 62(1), within established structures, in particular, through the waste shipment enforcement group established under Article 66. 2. Member States shall identify the authority or authorities and the members of their permanent staff responsible for the cooperation referred to in paragraph 1 and also identify an authority or authorities and responsible members of their permanent staff as the focal points for the physical checks referred to in Article 61(1). The Member States shall send that information to the Commission which shall compile the information and make it available to the identified authorities and members of their permanent staff. 3. At the request of an authority in another Member State, an authority of a Member State may take enforcement action against persons suspected of being engaged in the illegal shipment of waste who are present in that Member State. Article 66 Waste shipment enforcement group 1. An enforcement group shall be established to facilitate and improve cooperation and coordination between the Member States in order to prevent and detect illegal shipments (the ‘waste shipment enforcement group’). 2. The waste shipment enforcement group shall consist of up to three representatives per Member State, selected from the designated permanent staff responsible for the cooperation referred to in Article 65(2) or from permanent staff of other relevant authorities involved in the enforcement of this Regulation, to be nominated by the Member States, which will inform the Commission. That group shall be co-chaired by the representative or representatives of the Commission and by a representative of a Member State elected by the group. 3. The waste shipment enforcement group shall be a forum for sharing information relevant for the prevention and detection of illegal shipments, including information and intelligence on general trends relating to illegal shipments of waste, risk-based assessments carried out by the authorities of the Member States, and experience and knowledge on enforcement measures, as well as for exchanging views on best practices and for facilitating cooperation and coordination between relevant authorities. The waste shipment enforcement group may examine any technical question relating to the enforcement of this Regulation raised by the chairpersons, either on their own initiative or at the request of the members of the group or the committee referred to in Article 81. 4. The waste shipment enforcement group shall meet regularly, at least once a year. In addition to the members referred to in paragraph 2, the chairpersons may invite to the meetings or parts of the meetings, where appropriate, representatives of other relevant institutions, bodies, offices, agencies, networks or other stakeholders. 5. The Commission shall convey the opinions expressed in the waste shipment enforcement group to the committee referred to in Article 81. Section 3 Actions performed by the Commission Article 67 General provisions 1. Without prejudice to Regulation (EC) No 515/97, the Commission shall exercise the powers conferred by Articles 67 to 71 in order to support and complement the enforcement activities of the Member States and to contribute to a uniform implementation of this Regulation throughout the Union. 2. The Commission may exercise the powers conferred onto it by this Regulation with respect to shipments of waste that fall under the scope of application of this Regulation pursuant to Article 2(1), which are of a complex nature and potentially have serious adverse effects on human health or the environment and where the investigation needed has a cross-border dimension involving at least two countries. The Commission may initiate actions according to these powers on its own initiative, on the request of the authorities of one or more Member States, or on a complaint if there is sufficient suspicion that the carriage of the substance or object concerned or the shipment of waste concerned constitutes an illegal shipment. The Commission may also forward such complaints to the competent authorities of the Member States concerned. If the Commission decides not to act, it shall reply to the authority of the Member States or the persons who sent the complaint in a reasonable time, stating the reasons why they believe there is no sufficient suspicion, unless there are reasons of public interest, such as protecting the confidentiality of administrative or criminal proceedings, not to do so. The Commission shall also provide the Member States with assistance in organising close and regular cooperation between their competent authorities pursuant to Article 71. 3. In exercising its powers, the Commission shall take into account the inspections, prosecuting, legal or administrative proceedings in progress or already carried out in respect of the same shipments by the authorities of a Member State pursuant to this Regulation and shall ensure not to interfere with such proceedings. When exercising its powers, the Commission shall take into account any request of postponement from an authority of a Member State through its permanent staff responsible for cooperation or through the focal points referred to in Article 65(2). 4. On completion of its actions, the Commission shall draw up a report. If the Commission concludes that the carriage of the substance or object concerned or the shipment of waste concerned constitutes an illegal shipment, it shall inform the competent authorities of the country or countries concerned accordingly and recommend that such an illegal shipment is dealt with in accordance with Articles 25 and 26. The Commission may also recommend certain follow-up to the relevant authorities of the Member States, and, where necessary inform the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies concerned. 5. Reports drawn up on the basis of paragraph 4, together with all evidence in support and annexed thereto, shall constitute admissible evidence: The power of the Court of Justice of the European Union and national courts and competent authorities to freely assess the evidential value of the reports drawn up by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 4 shall not be affected by this Regulation. Article 68 Inspections by the Commission 1. The Commission may, in accordance with Article 67, carry out inspections of shipments pursuant to Article 60(1) and (2) of this Regulation. 2. The Commission shall only carry out an inspection where there is sufficient suspicion for an illegal shipment of waste. 3. The Commission shall prepare and conduct inspections in close cooperation with the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned. Such cooperation shall include the exchange of information and the exchange of views on the planning of the inspections and the steps that will be taken. The Commission shall take into account any inspections, ongoing prosecuting, legal or administrative proceedings by administrative or judicial authorities of a Member State. The Commission shall give notice 15 days in advance of the object, purpose and legal basis of inspections to the permanent staff responsible for cooperation or the focal points referred to in Article 65(2) in the Member State concerned in whose territory the inspection is to be conducted, so that relevant authorities may provide the requisite assistance. To that end, officials of the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned shall be given opportunity to participate in the inspections. In urgent cases, if it is not possible to respect the 15 days’ notice, the Commission shall give notice at the first useful moment. In addition, upon request of the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned, the inspections shall be carried out jointly by the Commission and the relevant authorities of that Member State. 4. The staff and other accompanying persons authorised by the Commission to conduct an inspection shall exercise their powers upon production of a written authorisation specifying the subject matter and purpose of the inspection. 5. The staff of the Commission that conduct an inspection shall be empowered to: 6. The notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee and the facility that receives the waste shall cooperate with the Commission in the course of its inspections. 7. The authorities of the Member States involved in inspections on the shipments of waste in whose territory the inspection of the Commission is to be conducted shall, at the request of the Commission, provide the necessary assistance to the staff of the Commission. 8. The notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee and the facility that receives the waste are required to submit themselves to inspections of the Commission. 9. Where the Commission finds that the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste opposes an inspection, the relevant authorities of the Member State concerned shall, afford the Commission the necessary assistance, requesting where appropriate the assistance of enforcement authorities, so as to enable the Commission to conduct its inspection. If such an assistance requires authorisation from a judicial authority according to national rules, such authorisation shall be applied for. Article 69 Requests for information 1. The Commission may interview any natural or legal person who consents to be interviewed for the purpose of collecting all necessary information relating to the relevant waste shipments. 2. Where such an interview is conducted in the premises of an establishment, undertaking, broker or dealer, the Commission shall inform the permanent staff responsible for cooperation or the focal points referred to in Article 65(2) in the Member State concerned in whose territory the interview takes place. If so requested by the authority of that Member State, its officials may assist the staff of the Commission to conduct the interview. The invitation to an interview shall be sent to the person in question with at least 10 working days’ notice. That notice period may be shortened with the express consent of the person concerned or on duly reasoned grounds of urgency of the inspection. In the latter case, the notice period shall not be less than 24 hours. The invitation shall include a list of the rights of the person concerned, in particular the right to be assisted by a person of his or her choice. 3. The Commission may request legal or natural persons responsible for an establishment or an undertaking, or any broker and dealer to provide all necessary information relating to the relevant waste shipments. The Commission shall state the legal basis and the purpose of the request, specify what information is required and fix the time-limit within which the information is to be provided. 4. The Commission shall without delay make available the request to the relevant authorities of the Member State in whose territory the seat of the establishment, undertaking, broker or dealer is situated and to the authorities of the Member State whose territory is affected. 5. Where the establishment, undertaking, broker or dealer does not provide the requested information, or the Commission considers the information it received to be insufficient to reach a conclusion, the second sentence of Article 61(6) shall apply, mutatis mutandis . Article 70 Procedural guarantees 1. The Commission shall carry out inspections and request information in compliance with the procedural guarantees of the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste set out in this Article. 2. The notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste shall have: The Commission shall seek evidence for and against the notifier, the person who arranges the shipment, the waste producer, the waste holder, the waste carrier, the consignee or the facility that receives the waste, and carry out inspections and request information objectively and impartially and in accordance with the principle of the presumption of innocence. 3. The Commission shall ensure the confidentiality of the inspections, of the interview and of the request carried out pursuant to this section. Information transmitted or obtained in the course of the inspections, interview and requests pursuant to this section shall be subject to data protection rules. Article 71 Mutual assistance For the purposes of applying this Regulation and without prejudice to Articles 64 and 65 of this Regulation, Regulation (EC) No 515/97, except for Article 2a, Articles 18a to 18e, Titles IV to VII, and the Annex, shall apply mutatis mutandis to the cooperation between the relevant authorities of the Member States and the Commission implementing the provisions in this section. TITLE VIII FINAL PROVISIONS Article 72 Format of communications Where the provisions in Article 27 do not apply or where actors outside the Union are not connected to the central system referred to in Article 27(3), the relevant actors may submit and exchange information and documents referred to in this Regulation by post, fax, email with digital signature, email without digital signature followed by post or, where agreed between the actors concerned, by email without digital signature. In case of email with digital signature, any stamp or signature required shall be replaced by the digital signature. Article 73 Reporting 1. Before the end of each calendar year, each Member State shall submit to the Commission a copy of the report it has drawn up and submitted to the Secretariat of that Convention for the previous calendar year in accordance with Article 13(3) of the Basel Convention. 2. Before the end of each calendar year, Member States shall also draw up a report for the previous calendar year, based on the additional reporting questionnaire in Annex XI, and submit it to the Commission. Within a month of submission of that report to the Commission, Member States shall make the section of that report relating to Articles 25, 60(1) and 63(1), including Table 7 of Annex XI, publicly available, electronically via the internet, together with any explanation that the Member States consider to be appropriate, and inform the Commission on the related hyperlinks. The Commission shall compile a list of the Member States’ hyperlinks and make it publicly available on its website. 3. The reports drawn up by Member States in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be submitted to the Commission electronically. 4. The Commission shall review the data reported in accordance with this Article and publish a report with the results of its review. In addition, the Commission shall address in that report the following elements: The European Environment Agency shall support the Commission in the task of monitoring the implementation of this Regulation by, where appropriate, drawing up reports providing an analysis of the shipments of specific waste streams, and of their environmental impacts. The report mentioned in the first subparagraph shall be drawn up for the first time by 31 December 2029 and every three years thereafter. 5. After 21 May 2029, the Commission shall draw up a report assessing whether the implementation of the provisions contained in Articles 39 to 46 has ensured the environmentally sound management of plastic waste, both in the EU and in countries where such waste has been exported from the Union, as well as no significant adverse effects occurred on the treatment of domestic waste in importing countries. It shall take into consideration information and elements provided by Member States involved in export of plastic waste, by the competent authorities of the countries of import, as well as by economic operators and civil society organisations. The report shall also provide information on the evolution of the capacity of waste operators in the Union to manage plastic waste generated in the Member States and imported into the Union in an environmentally sound manner. The report shall also assess if the provisions on the shipments of waste between Member States have contributed to improving the management of plastic waste, especially looking at the classification of plastic waste under entry EU3011. This report shall be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal to amend this Regulation, which could include stricter conditions on the export of plastic waste to third countries, including export prohibitions. Article 74 International cooperation Member States, where appropriate and necessary in liaison with the Commission, shall cooperate with other Parties to the Basel Convention and inter-State organisations, inter alia, via the exchange or sharing of information, the promotion of environmentally sound technology and the development of appropriate codes of good practice. Article 75 Designation of competent authorities Member States shall designate the competent authority or authorities responsible for the implementation of this Regulation. Each Member State shall designate only one single competent authority of transit. Article 76 Designation of correspondents Member States and the Commission shall each designate one or more correspondents responsible for informing or advising persons or undertakings making enquiries relating to the implementation of this Regulation. The Commission correspondent shall forward to the correspondents of the Member States any questions put to him or her which concern the Member States, and vice versa. Article 77 Designation of customs offices of entry and exit Member States may designate specific customs offices of entry and exit for shipments of waste entering and leaving the Union. Where a Member State decides to designate such customs offices, no other border crossing points within that Member State shall be used for the purposes of shipments entering or leaving the Union. Article 78 Notification of, and information regarding, designations 1. Member States shall notify the Commission of designations of: 2. In relation to the designations referred to in paragraph 1, Member States shall provide the Commission with the following information: 3. Member States shall immediately notify the Commission of any changes in the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. 4. The information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, as well as any changes in that information shall be submitted to the Commission electronically. 5. The Commission shall publish on its website lists of the designated competent authorities, correspondents and, where relevant, customs offices of entry and exit, and shall update those lists as appropriate. Article 79 Amendment to Annexes I to X and XII 1. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annexes IA, IB, IC, II, III, IIIA, IIIB, IV, V, VI and VII in order to take account of changes agreed under the Basel Convention and the OECD Decision. 2. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IC, in order to adapt it to the implementation of Article 27, after 21 May 2026. 3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IIIA, in order to, following the submission of a request by a Member State or on its own initiative, include in that Annex mixtures of two or more wastes listed in Annex III, provided that the composition of those mixtures of wastes does not impair their environmentally sound recovery and where it is demonstrated that the mixture of wastes in question will be managed in an environmentally sound manner within the Union, and provide that one or more of the entries in Annex IIIA shall only apply for shipments between Member States where it is demonstrated that the mixture of wastes in question is expected not to be managed in an environmentally sound manner in countries to which the OECD Decision applies. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IIIB, in order to, following the submission of a request by a Member State or on its own initiative, include in that Annex non-hazardous wastes not listed in Annex III, Annex IV or Annex V, where it is demonstrated that the waste in question will be managed in an environmentally sound manner within the Union. 5. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex VIII as regards the form and content of the information referred to in that Annex, based on experience gained during implementation of this Regulation and to update the form and information in that Annex regarding Union legislation and international guidance as regards environmentally sound management on the basis of developments in the relevant international fora or at Union level and to take account of scientific and technical progress. 6. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex IX, in order to update the lists of Union legislation and international guidance as regards environmentally sound management on the basis of developments at Union level or in the relevant international fora. 7. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex X as regards the criteria contained in that Annex, based on experiences gained during implementation of this Regulation and to update the information in that Annex regarding Union legislation and international guidance on the basis of developments in the relevant international fora or at Union level as regards environmentally sound management and to take account of scientific and technical progress. 8. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 80 to amend Annex XII as regards the information contained in that Annex, based on experience gained during implementation of this Regulation. Article 80 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The delegation of power referred to in Articles 14(3), 15(6), 18(15), 27(2), 29(6), 39(5), 41(1), 43(4), 45(6), and Article 79 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from the date of entry into force of this Regulation. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Articles 14(3), 15(6), 18(15), 27(2), 29(6), 39(5), 41(1), 43(4), 45(6), and Article 79 may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making. 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Articles 14(3), 15(6), 18(15), 27(2), 29(6), 39(5), 41(1), 43(4), 45(6), or Article 79 shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 81 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the committee established by Article 39 of Directive 2008/98/EC. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Where the committee delivers no opinion, the Commission shall not adopt the draft implementing act and the third subparagraph of Article 5(4) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Article 82 Amendment of Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013 Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013 is amended as follows: Article 83 Amendment of Regulation (EU) 2020/1056 Regulation (EU) 2020/1056 is amended as follows: Article 84 Review By 31 December 2035, the Commission shall, taking into account, inter alia, the reports drawn up in accordance with Article 73, and the review referred to in Article 62(5), carry out a review of this Regulation and submit a report on the results thereof to the European Parliament and to the Council, accompanied, if the Commission deems it appropriate, by a legislative proposal. The Commission shall, during its review and as a part of its report, assess in particular: The Commission shall, during its review and as a part of its report, assess in addition whether the principle of equality in Union law has been respected, evaluate in this context possible impacts on any Member State’s competitiveness, and take rectifying measures where deemed necessary. Article 85 Repeal and transitional provisions 1. Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 is repealed with effect from 20 May 2024. 2. However, the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 shall continue to apply until 21 May 2026 except for: 3. Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 shall also continue to apply to shipments for which a notification has been submitted in accordance with Article 4 of that Regulation and for which the competent authority of destination has given its acknowledgement in accordance with Article 8 of that Regulation before 21 May 2026. For those shipments, the provisions of this Regulation shall not apply. 4. Commission Regulation (EC) No 1418/2007 ( 47 ) is repealed with effect from 21 May 2027. 5. The recovery or disposal of waste in a shipment for which the competent authorities concerned have given their consent in accordance with Article 9 of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 shall be completed not later than one year from 21 May 2026. 6. Shipment for which the competent authorities concerned have given their consent in accordance with Article 14(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 shall be completed not later than three years from 21 May 2026. 7. A pre-consent of a facility in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 shall cease to be valid not later than five years from 20 May 2024. 8. Article 86 Entry into force and application 1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . 2. It shall apply from 21 May 2026. 3. However, in relation to the following provisions, the following dates of application shall apply: This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 April 2024. For the European Parliament The President R. METSOLA For the Council The President H. LAHBIB ( 1 ) OJ C 275, 18.7.2022, p. 95 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 27 February 2024 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 25 March 2024. ( 3 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste ( OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) OJ L 39, 16.2.1993, p. 3 . ( 6 ) Council Decision 93/98/EEC of 1 February 1993 on the conclusion, on behalf of the Community, of the Convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal (Basel Convention) ( OJ L 39, 16.2.1993, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Amendment to the Basel Convention (‘Ban Amendment’) adopted by Decision III/1 of the Parties to the Basel Convention. ( 8 ) Council Decision 97/640/EC of 22 September 1997 on the approval, on behalf of the Community, of the amendment to the Convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal (Basel Convention), as laid down in Decision III/1 of the Conference of the Parties ( OJ L 272, 4.10.1997, p. 45 ) and Council Regulation (EC) No 120/97 of 20 January 1997 amending Regulation (EEC) No 259/93 on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community ( OJ L 22, 24.1.1997, p. 14 ). ( 9 ) OECD/LEGAL/0266. ( 10 ) Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (Animal by-products Regulation) ( OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on ship recycling and amending Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 and Directive 2009/16/EC ( OJ L 330, 10.12.2013, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1021 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on persistent organic pollutants ( OJ L 169, 25.6.2019, p. 45 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) ( OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste ( OJ L 182, 16.7.1999, p. 1 ). ( 15 ) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 ). ( 16 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2020 on electronic freight transport information ( OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 33 ). ( 17 ) Regulation (EU) 2022/2399 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 November 2022 establishing the European Union Single Window Environment for Customs and amending Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 ( OJ L 317, 9.12.2022, p. 1 ). ( 18 ) OJ L 124, 17.5.2005, p. 4 . ( 19 ) Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to environmental information and repealing Council Directive 90/313/EEC ( OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26 ). ( 20 ) European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of 20 December 1994 on packaging and packaging waste ( OJ L 365, 31.12.1994, p. 10 ). ( 21 ) Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment ( OJ L 155, 12.6.2019, p. 1 ). ( 22 ) Commission Regulation (EU) 2023/2055 of 25 September 2023 amending Annex XVII to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) as regards synthetic polymer microparticles ( OJ L 238, 27.9.2023, p. 67 ). ( 23 ) Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 September 2000 on end-of life vehicles ( OJ L 269, 21.10.2000, p. 34 ). ( 24 ) Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on preventing plastic pellet losses to reduce microplastic pollution (COM(2023) 645 final). ( 25 ) Council Decision 2013/755/EU of 25 November 2013 on the association of the overseas countries and territories with the European Union (‘Overseas Association Decision’) ( OJ L 344, 19.12.2013, p. 1 ). ( 26 ) Directive 2008/99/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on the protection of the environment through criminal law ( OJ L 328, 6.12.2008, p. 28 ). ( 27 ) Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 September 2013 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1073/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (Euratom) No 1074/1999 ( OJ L 248, 18.9.2013, p. 1 ). ( 28 ) Council Regulation (EC) No 515/97 of 13 March 1997 on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on customs and agricultural matters ( OJ L 82, 22.3.1997, p. 1 ). ( 29 ) Council Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 of 11 November 1996 concerning on-the-spot checks and inspections carried out by the Commission in order to protect the European Communities’ financial interests against fraud and other irregularities ( OJ L 292, 15.11.1996, p. 2 ). ( 30 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ( 31 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff ( OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1 ). ( 32 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ( 33 ) Directive (EU) 2019/883 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on port reception facilities for the delivery of waste from ships, amending Directive 2010/65/EU and repealing Directive 2000/59/EC ( OJ L 151, 7.6.2019, p. 116 ). ( 34 ) Council Directive 2006/117/Euratom of 20 November 2006 on the supervision and control of shipments of radioactive waste and spent fuel ( OJ L 337, 5.12.2006, p. 21 ). ( 35 ) Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment ( OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 ). ( 36 ) Regulation (EC) No 767/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the placing on the market and use of feed, amending European Parliament and Council Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 and repealing Council Directive 79/373/EEC, Commission Directive 80/511/EEC, Council Directives 82/471/EEC, 83/228/EEC, 93/74/EEC, 93/113/EC and 96/25/EC and Commission Decision 2004/217/EC ( OJ L 229, 1.9.2009, p. 1 ). ( 37 ) Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991. ( 38 ) Directive 2009/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the geological storage of carbon dioxide and amending Council Directive 85/337/EEC, European Parliament and Council Directives 2000/60/EC, 2001/80/EC, 2004/35/EC, 2006/12/EC, 2008/1/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 ( OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 114 ). ( 39 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1 ). ( 40 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447 of 24 November 2015 laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 558 ). ( 41 ) Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 September 2015 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical regulations and of rules on Information Society services ( OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1 ). ( 42 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) ( OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1 ). ( 43 ) Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) ( OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38 ). ( 44 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2023 concerning batteries and waste batteries, amending Directive 2008/98/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and repealing Directive 2006/66/EC ( OJ L 191, 28.7.2023, p. 1 ). ( 45 ) OECD/LEGAL/0266. ( 46 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1245 of 28 July 2016 setting out a preliminary correlation table between codes of the Combined Nomenclature provided for in Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 and entries of waste listed in Annexes III, IV and V to Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on shipments of waste ( OJ L 204, 29.7.2016, p. 11 ). ( 47 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 1418/2007 of 29 November 2007 concerning the export for recovery of certain waste listed in Annex III or IIIA to Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council to certain countries to which the OECD Decision on the control of transboundary movements of wastes does not apply ( OJ L 316, 4.12.2007, p. 6 ). ANNEX IA ANNEX IB ANNEX IC SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE NOTIFICATION AND MOVEMENT DOCUMENTS From 21 May 2026, documents and information must be submitted via electronic means in accordance with Article 27, as required in the relevant provisions in this Regulation. In the cases of shipments involving third countries (as per Titles IV, V and VI), for which paper documents can be used, paper-based procedures remain valid insofar as no access to the systems referred to in Article 27 is possible. Annex IC of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 can be consulted for general guidance on completing the notification and movement documents, in particular when completing documents in paper format where still relevant. ANNEX II INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTATION RELATED TO NOTIFICATION Part 1: Information to be provided when submitting the notification document: Part 2: Information to be provided in, or annexed to, the movement document: Provide all information listed in Part 1, updated in accordance with the points set out below, and the other additional information specified: Part 3: Additional information and documentation that may be requested by the competent authorities: ANNEX III LIST OF WASTES SUBJECT TO THE GENERAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS LAID DOWN IN ARTICLE 18 (‘GREEN’ LISTED WASTE) AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(4)(a) Regardless of whether or not wastes are included on this list, they may not be subject to the general information requirements laid down in Article 18 if they are contaminated by other materials to an extent which: Part I: Wastes listed in Annex IX of the Basel Convention ( 1 ) . For the purposes of this Regulation: Part II: Metal-bearing wastes arising from melting, smelting and refining of metals Other wastes containing metals Glass waste in non-dispersible form Ceramic wastes in non-dispersible form Other wastes containing principally inorganic constituents, which may contain metals and organic materials Wastes arising from tanning and fellmongery operations and leather use ( 1 ) Annex IX to the Basel Convention is listed in this Regulation in Annex V, Part 1, List B. ( 2 ) ‘Non-dispersible’ does not include any wastes in the form of powder, sludge, dust or solid items containing encased hazardous waste liquids. ( 3 ) For the purpose of this Regulation, the terms ‘almost free from contamination and other types of waste’ and where relevant ‘almost exclusively consisting of’ shall be understood to mean that in a consignment of plastic waste or mixtures of plastic waste, classified under entry EU3011, the content of contamination, other types of wastes or non-halogenated polymers, cured resins or condensation products, or fluorinated polymers, other than the one non-halogenated polymer, cured resin or condensation product, or fluorinated polymer that makes up the bulk of the plastic waste shall not exceed a total maximum of 6 % of the weight of the consignment. ( 4 ) In relation to ‘almost free from contamination and other types of wastes’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 5 ) In relation to ‘almost exclusively’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 6 ) In relation to ‘almost exclusively’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 7 ) Post-consumer wastes are excluded. ( 8 ) The term ‘properly emptied’ is understood as presuming full compliance with international rules and guidelines on ship recycling. ANNEX IIIA MIXTURES OF WASTES LISTED IN ANNEX III PROVIDED THAT THE COMPOSITION OF THOSE MIXTURES DOES NOT IMPAIR THEIR ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND MANAGEMENT AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(4)(b) ( 1 ) For the purpose of this Regulation, the terms ‘almost free from contamination and other types of waste’ and where relevant ‘almost exclusively consisting of’ shall be understood to mean that in a consignment of mixtures of plastic waste, specified in point 4 of Annex IIIA, the content of contamination, other types of wastes or non-halogenated polymers, cured resins or condensation products, or fluorinated polymers, other than the one non-halogenated polymer, cured resin or condensation product, or fluorinated polymer that makes up the bulk of the plastic waste shall not exceed a total maximum of 6 % of the weight of the consignment. ANNEX IIIB ADDITIONAL GREEN LISTED WASTE AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(4)(a) ANNEX IV LIST OF WASTES SUBJECT TO THE PROCEDURE OF PRIOR WRITTEN NOTIFICATION AND CONSENT (‘AMBER’ LISTED WASTE) ( 1 ) AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(2)(a) Part I Wastes listed in Annexes II and VIII to the Basel Convention ( 2 ) . For the purposes of this Regulation: Part II: Metal-bearing wastes Wastes containing principally inorganic constituents, which may contain metals and organic materials Wastes containing principally organic constituents, which may contain metals and inorganic materials Wastes which may contain either inorganic or organic constituents Wastes containing principally inorganic constituents, which may contain metals and organic materials ( 1 ) This list originates from the OECD Decision, Appendix 4. ( 2 ) Annex VIII to the Basel Convention is listed in this Regulation in Annex V, Part 1, List A. Annex II to the Basel Convention is listed in Annex V, Part 2, List A. ( 3 ) This listing includes wastes in the form of ash, residue, slag, dross, skimming, scaling, dust, powder, sludge and cake, unless a material is expressly listed elsewhere. ANNEX V WASTE LISTS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ARTICLE 39 Introductory notes Part 1 ( 1 ) List A (Annex VIII to the Basel Convention) List B (Annex IX to the Basel Convention) Part 2 List A (Annex II to the Basel Convention) List B (Waste from Appendix 4, Part II of the OECD Decision) ( 31 ) Metal-bearing wastes Wastes containing principally inorganic constituents, which may contain metals and organic materials Wastes containing principally organic constituents, which may contain metals and inorganic materials Wastes which may contain either inorganic or organic constituents Wastes containing principally inorganic constituents, which may contain metals and organic materials ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Note that mirror entry on list B (B1160) does not specify exceptions. ( 3 ) This entry does not include scrap assemblies from electric power generation. ( 4 ) PCBs are at a concentration level of 50 mg/kg or more. ( 5 ) The 50 mg/kg level is considered to be an internationally practical level for all wastes. However, many individual countries have established lower regulatory levels (e.g. 20 mg/kg) for specific wastes. ( 6 ) ‘Out-dated’ means unused within the period recommended by the manufacturer. ( 7 ) This entry does not include wood treated with wood-preserving chemicals. ( 8 ) ‘Out-dated’ means unused within the period recommended by the manufacturer. ( 9 ) Note that even where low level contamination with Annex I materials initially exists, subsequent processes, including recycling processes, may result in separated fractions containing significantly enhanced concentrations of those Annex I materials. ( 10 ) The status of zinc ash is currently under review and there is a recommendation with United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (Unctad) that zinc ashes should not be dangerous goods. ( 11 ) This entry does not include scrap from electrical power generation. ( 12 ) Re-use can include repair, refurbishment or upgrading, but not major reassembly. ( 13 ) In some countries, these materials destined for direct re-use are not considered wastes. ( 14 ) The concentration level of Benzo[a]pyrene should not be 50 mg/kg or more. ( 15 ) For the purpose of this Regulation the terms ‘almost free from contamination and other types of waste’ and where relevant ‘almost exclusively consisting of’ shall be understood to mean that in a consignment of plastic waste or mixtures of plastic waste, classified under entry B3011, the content of contamination, other types of wastes or non-halogenated polymers, cured resins or condensation products, or fluorinated polymers, other than the one non-halogenated polymer, cured resin or condensation product, or fluorinated polymer that makes up the bulk of the plastic waste shall not exceed a total maximum of 2 % of the weight of the consignment. ( 16 ) Recycling/reclamation of organic substances that are not used as solvents (R3 in Annex IV, Section B) or, if needed, temporary storage limited to one instance, provided that it is followed by operation R3 and evidenced by contractual or relevant official documentation. ( 17 ) In relation to ‘almost free from contamination and other types of wastes’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 18 ) In relation to ‘almost exclusively’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 19 ) In relation to ‘almost exclusively’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 20 ) Post-consumer wastes are excluded. ( 21 ) Recycling/reclamation of organic substances that are not used as solvents (R3 in Annex IV, Section B), with prior sorting and, if needed, temporary storage limited to one instance, provided that it is followed by operation R3 and evidenced by contractual or relevant official documentation. ( 22 ) In relation to ‘almost free from’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 23 ) Unless appropriately classified under a single entry in Annex III. ( 24 ) Recycling/reclamation of organic substances that are not used as solvents (R3 in Annex IV, Section B) or, if needed, temporary storage limited to one instance, provided that it is followed by operation R3 and evidenced by contractual or relevant official documentation. ( 25 ) In relation to ‘almost free from contamination and other types of wastes’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 26 ) In relation to ‘almost exclusively’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 27 ) In relation to ‘almost exclusively’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 28 ) Post-consumer wastes are excluded. ( 29 ) Recycling/reclamation of organic substances that are not used as solvents (R3 in Annex IV, Section B), with prior sorting and, if needed, temporary storage limited to one instance, provided that it is followed by operation R3 and evidenced by contractual or relevant official documentation. ( 30 ) In relation to ‘almost free from contamination and other types of wastes’, international and national specifications may offer a point of reference. ( 31 ) The wastes numbered AB130, AC250, AC260 and AC270 have been deleted since they have been considered, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 18 of Directive 2006/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2006 on waste ( OJ L 114, 27.4.2006, p. 9 , as repealed by Directive 2008/98/EC), to be non-hazardous and therefore not subject to the export prohibition in Article 39 of this Regulation. The waste numbered AC300 has been deleted since the waste in question is covered by entry A3210 in List A of Part 1. ( 32 ) This listing includes wastes in the form of ash, residue, slag, dross, skimming, scaling, dust, powder, sludge and cake, unless a material is expressly listed elsewhere. ANNEX VI FORM FOR PRE-CONSENTED FACILITIES (ARTICLE 14) ANNEX VII INFORMATION ACCOMPANYING SHIPMENTS OF WASTE AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(4) AND (5) ANNEX VIII REQUEST FOR INCLUSION IN THE LIST OF COUNTRIES TO WHICH EXPORTS ARE AUTHORISED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 42(2) ANNEX IX POINTS OF REFERENCE FOR THE ASSESSMENT PERFORMED BY THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 43(1) Part 1 Union legislation designed to ensure the environmentally sound management of waste Part 2 International guidance on environmentally sound management of waste ( 1 ) Relevant for the treatment of residual waste that is generated during a recovery operation. ( 2 ) Adopted by the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, June 2022. ( 3 ) Adopted by the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, June 2022. ( 4 ) Adopted by the seventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, October 2004. ( 5 ) Adopted by the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, December 2002. ( 6 ) Adopted by the sixth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, December 2002. ( 7 ) Adopted by the sixteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2023. ( 8 ) Adopted by the eighth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, December 2006 ( 9 ) Adopted by the twelfth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2015. ( 10 ) Adopted by the sixteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2023. ( 11 ) Adopted by the thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2017. ( 12 ) Adopted by the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, June 2022. ( 13 ) Adopted by the thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2017. ( 14 ) Adopted by the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2019. ( 15 ) Adopted by the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2019. ( 16 ) Adopted by the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2019. ( 17 ) Adopted by the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2019. ( 18 ) Adopted by the sixteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2023. ( 19 ) Adopted by the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, October 2011. ( 20 ) Adopted by the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, June 2022. ( 21 ) Adopted by the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, October 2011. ( 22 ) Adopted by the thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2017. ( 23 ) Adopted by the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, October 2011. ( 24 ) Adopted by the eleventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, October 2013. ( 25 ) Adopted by the thirteenth and fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, May 2017 and May 2019. ( 26 ) Adopted by the Environment Policy Committee of the OECD in February 2003 (document ENV/EPOC/WGWPR(2001)3/FINAL). ANNEX X REQUIREMENTS FOR AUDITORS AND CRITERIA FOR FACILITIES RECEIVING WASTE EXPORTED FROM THE UNION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 46 Part A Detailed requirements for third parties conducting audits Part B Criteria designed to demonstrate that a facility manages waste exported from the Union in an environmentally sound manner ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ANNEX XI ADDITIONAL QUESTIONNAIRE FOR MEMBER STATES REPORTING OBLIGATION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 73(2) ANNEX XII ANNEX XIII Correlation table ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)