Regulation No 59 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UN/ECE) — Uniform provisions concerning the approval of replacement silencing systems 1. SCOPE This Regulation contains provisions relating to the approval of silencing systems or components thereof to be fitted to one or more given types of motor vehicles in categories M 1 and N 1 ( 1 ) as replacement parts. 2. DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this Regulation, 3. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 4. MARKINGS 5. APPROVAL 6. SPECIFICATIONS 6.1. General specifications 6.2. Specifications regarding noise levels 6.3. Measurement of the vehicle performances 6.3.4. Test method 6.3.4.1. Test method with engine The measurements shall be conducted on the engine referred to in paragraph 3.3.4. above coupled to a dynamometer. With the throttle completely open, the bench shall be adjusted so as to obtain the engine speed(s) corresponding to the rated maximum power of the engine. For the measurement of back pressure, the distance at which the pressure tap shall be placed from the exhaust manifold is indicated in annex 4 to this Regulation. 6.3.4.2 Test method with vehicle The measurements shall be carried out on the vehicle referred to in paragraph 3.3.3. above. The test shall be conducted: With the throttle completely open, the engine must be loaded so as to obtain the engine speed corresponding to the rated maximum power of the engine (engine speed S). For the measurement of back pressure, the distance at which the pressure tap shall be placed from the exhaust manifold is indicated in annex 4 to this Regulation. 6.4. Additional specifications regarding silencing systems or components filled with fibrous materials Absorbing fibrous materials may be used in silencing systems or components only when it is established by appropriate means of design and manufacturing, that the efficiency of the system in traffic conditions is sufficient. to comply with the existing regulations. Such a silencing system is deemed to be effective in traffic conditions if the exhaust gas is not in contact with the fibrous materials or if, the silencing system being emptied of its absorbing materials and tested on vehicle in conformity with the procedures described in Regulation No 51, Annex 3, paragraphs, 3.1 and 3.2., the acoustic pressure levels comply with the provisions laid down in paragraph 6.2. above. If that condition is not fulfilled, the complete silencing system shall be submitted to conventional conditioning using one of the three installations and procedures described below. When the procedure described in paragraph 6.2.1.2. above is employed, the applicant for approval may ask for the emptying or the conditioning of the original silencing system. 6.4.1. Continuous road operation for 10 000 km 6.4.2. Conditioning on a test bench 6.4.3. Conditioning by pulsation The exhaust system or components of said system is/are fitted to the vehicle referred to in paragraph 3.3.3. above or the engine referred to in paragraph 3.3.4. In the former page, the vehicle must be mounted on a roller dynamometer, and, in the second case, the engine must be mounted on a dynamometer. The test apparatus described below is fitted at the outlet of the silencing system. 6.4.3.1. Test apparatus The test apparatus, a detailed diagram of which is shown in Annex 3 to this Regulation must be fitted at the outlet of the exhaust system. Any other apparatus providing equivalent results is acceptable. 6.4.3.2. Test procedure 7. EXTENSION OF APPROVAL The silencing system manufacturer or his duly accredited representative may ask the administrative department which has granted the approval of the silencing system for one or several types of vehicles, for an extension of the approval to other types of vehicles. The procedure is that described in paragraph 3. above. Notice of the extension of approval (or refusal of extension) shall be communicated to the Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation in accordance with the procedure specified in paragraph 5.3. above. 8. MODIFICATION OF THE TYPE OF SILENCING SYSTEM 9. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 10. PENALTIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 11. PRODUCTION DEFINITELY DISCONTINUED If the holder of the approval completely ceases to manufacture a type of replacement silencing system or components of the said system in accordance with this Regulation, he shall so inform the authority which granted the approval. Upon receiving the relevant communication, that authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the approval form bearing at the end, in large letters, the signed and dated annotation: ‘PRODUCTION DISCONTINUED’. 12. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING APPROVAL TESTS, AND OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS The Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the technical services responsible for conducting approval tests and of the administrative departments which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or refusal or withdrawal of approval, issued in other countries, are to be sent. ( 1 ) Category M: Power-driven vehicles having at least four wheels or having three wheels when the maximum weight exceeds 1 metric ton, and used for the carriage of passengers. (articulated vehicles comprising two non-separable but articulated units shall be considered as single vehicles.) Category M 1 : Vehicles used for the carriage of passengers and comprising not more than eight seats in addition to the driver's seat. Category N: Power-driven vehicles having at least four wheels or having three wheels when the maximum weight exceeds 1 metric ton and used for the carriage of goods. Category N 1 : Vehicles used for the carriage of goods and having a maximum weight not exceeding 3,5 metric tons. In conformity with ‘Classification of vehicles’ in Regulation No 13 (E/ECE/324 — E/ECE/TRANS/505/Rev.1/Add.12/Rev.2, paragraph 5.2.). ( 2 ) 1 for the Federal Republic of Germany, 2 for France, 3 for Italy, 4 for the Netherlands, 5 for Sweden; 6 for Belgium, 7 for Hungary, 8 for Czechoslovakia, 9 for Spain, 10 for Yugoslavia, 11 for the United Kingdom, 12 for Austria, 13 for Luxembourg, 14 for Switzerland, 15 for the German Democratic Republic, 16 for Norway, 17 for Finland, 18 for Denmark, 19 for Romania, 20 for Poland and 21 for Portugal. Subsequent numbers shall be assigned to other countries in the chronological order in which they ratify or accede to the Agreement concerning the Adoption of Uniform Conditions of Approval and Reciprocal Recognition of Approval for Motor Vehicle Equipment and Parts, and the numbers thus assigned shall be communicated by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the Contracting Parties to the Agreement. ANNEX 1 (Maximum format: A 4 (210 × 297 mm)) Communication concerning the approval (or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval or production definitely discontinued) of a type of replacement silencing system or components of the said system pursuant to Regulation No 59. Approval No: Trade name or mark of the silencing system: Type of the silencing system: Manufacturer's name and address: If applicable, name and address of manufacturer's representative: Brief description of the silencing system (with/without ( 1 ) fibrous material, etc.): Trade name or mark of the vehicle type for which the silencing system is intended: Vehicle type, starting from serial number: Kind of engine: positive-ignition, compression ignition: Cycles: two-stroke or four-stroke: Cylinder capacity: Engine power (kW ECE): Number of gears: Gears used: Final drive ratio(s): Maximum power: Load conditions of vehicles during test: Vehicle in motion: ………… dbA at steady speed before acceleration of ………… km/h Vehicle stationary: ………… dbA with engine running at ………… r.p.m. Value of the back pressure: Technical service responsible for conducting approval tests: Date of report issued by that service: Number of report issued by that service: Approval granted/refused ( 1 ) : Position of approval mark on the vehicle: Place: Signature: ( 1 ) Strike out whatever does not apply. ANNEX 2 ARRANGEMENT OF TEE APPROVAL MARK (see paragraph 5.4. of this Regulation) The above approval mark affixed to a component of silencing system shows that the replacement silencing system type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E 4) pursuant to Regulation No 59 under approval number 002439. The first two digits of the approval number indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of Regulation No 59 in its original form. ANNEX 3 TEST APPARATUS optional optional ANNEX 4 MEASURING POINTS — BACK PRESSURE Examples of possible measuring points for loss-of-pressure tests. The exact measuring point shall be specified in the test report. It shall be in an area where gas flow is regular. Fig. 1 single pipe max. 450 mm 150 mm min. Fig. 2 ( 1 ) min. 100 mm partly twin pipe max. 450 mm 150 mm min. Fig. 3 150 mm min. twin pipe max. 450 mm two measuring points one reading ( 1 ) If not possible, refer to figure 3. ANNEX 5 CHECKS ON CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 1. GENERAL These requirements are consistent with tests to be held to check conformity of production, according to paragraphs 9.3.5 and 9.4.3. of this Regulation. 2. TESTING PROCEDURES The methods of testing, measuring instruments and interpretation of results shall be those described in paragraph 6 above. The exhaust system or component under test shall be subjected to the test as described in paragraphs 6.2., 6.3. and 6.4. above. 3. SAMPLING An exhaust system or component has to be chosen. If after the test of paragraph 4.1. the sample is not considered to conform to the requirements of this Regulation two more samples have to be tested. 4. EVALUATION OF THE RESULTS