COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2023/2806 of 15 December 2023 concerning a site information format for Natura 2000 sites (notified under document C(2023)8623) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora ( 1 ) , and in particular to the second paragraph of Article 4(1) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The format for the transmission of information on the Natura 2000 network, called the ‘Natura 2000 Standard Data Form’ together with its explanatory notes, is set out in the Annex. Article 2 Commission Implementing Decision 2011/484/EU is repealed. Article 3 This Decision shall apply from 1 February 2025. Article 4 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 15 December 2023. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 . ( 2 ) Council Directive 79/409/EEC of 2 April 1979 on the conservation of wild birds ( OJ L 103, 25.4.1979, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild birds ( OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7 ). ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Decision of 11 July 2011 concerning a site information format for Natura 2000 sites ( OJ L 198, 30.7.2011, p. 39 ). NATURA 2000 STANDARD DATA FORM For Special Protection Areas (SPA), proposed Sites of Community Importance (pSCI), Sites of Community Importance (SCI) and for Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) according to Directive 2009/147/EC on the conservation of wild birds and Council Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild flora and fauna The Standard Data Form has six main sections as shown below. Each of these sections has several fields which must be filled according to the instructions given in the explanatory notes. The explanatory notes provide the necessary guidance for filling in the fields and they make reference to code-lists and other necessary material such as technical guidance and data transfer formats for spatial and tabular data, which is provided in the online ‘Natura 2000 reference portal’. Main sections of the Standard Data Form DATA FIELDS OF THE NATURA 2000 STANDARD DATA FORM NATURA 2000 STANDARD DATA FORM EXPLANATORY NOTES TABLE OF CONTENTS List of abbreviations: INTRODUCTION Natura 2000 is the ecological network for the conservation of wild animal and plant species and natural habitats of Community importance within the Union. It consists of the sites classified under the Birds Directive first adopted in 1979 (Directive 2009/147/EC) and the Habitats Directive adopted in 1992 (Directive 92/43/EEC). Central to the success of Natura 2000 is the level of information on habitats and species of Community interest. Hence data and information are needed in a structured and comparable format. The legal basis for providing the data on Natura 2000 is outlined in Article 4 paragraph 1 of the Habitats Directive which defines that ‘ information shall include a map of the site, its name, location, extent and the data resulting from application of the criteria specified in Annex III (Stage 1) provided in a format established by the Commission in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 21 ’. Under Article 4 paragraph 3 of the Birds Directive Member States are also required to ‘send the Commission all relevant information so that it may take appropriate initiatives with a view to the coordination necessary to ensure that the areas provided for in paragraph 1 and 2 (of Article 4) form a coherent whole which meets the protection requirements of these species in the geographical sea and land area where this Directive applies’ . This document provides information about the different data fields of the Natura 2000 Standard Data Form (SDF) and how they should be completed as well as on the geographical information needed. The purpose and use of the Natura 2000 Standard Data Form The main objectives of the SDF, the resulting database and geospatial products (e.g. Natura 2000 viewer) are: The SDFs, being the documentation of the Natura 2000 network on Union level, are considered an important information source for all these purposes. This documentation should therefore be kept up to date in order to fulfil its various purposes well. Thus, regular updating by Member States based on the best information available is recommended every 6 years at least. For example, results of monitoring under Article 11, management planning, impact assessments, etc. could be the source of new information which should be reflected in updated SDFs. Even if a detailed monitoring of each site is not explicitly required by the Habitats and the Birds Directives, it is important that the condition of habitats and species in the sites is known, in order to ensure that the substantive obligations (e.g. the non-deterioration of habitats) of the directives are fulfilled as well as to monitor progress towards the conservation objectives of the sites. Member States are best placed to design monitoring schemes that are efficient and effective for these purposes, while fully considering other sources of information (e.g. citizen science, remote sensing, etc.). The revised Standard Data Form The first ‘Standard Data Form’ (SDF) was adopted in 1997 (Decision 97/266/EC) with the primary purpose of building up Natura 2000 and assessing the sufficiency of national networks. In 2011 the SDF was revised and modernised for the first time considering the improved availability of digital spatial data, progress made in data management technology and making necessary improvements to the structure of ecological information. In 2020 Member States and the Commission agreed on the need to further improve and streamline the dataflow under both directives and within this frame to undertake a second revision of the SDF. The technical work on the SDF revision was done with a view to improving the availability and quality of data, filling important gaps (e.g. information on conservation objectives, measures and management effectiveness) and making the SDF more coherent with the reporting under Art.17 of the Habitats Directive and Art.12 of the Birds Directive. For example, the degree of conservation for both species and habitats has been linked now to the concepts of ‘condition of the habitat’ and ‘quality of the habitat occupied by the species’ of species, which are used for the Articles 12 and 17 reporting. These improvements are aimed at assessing the role and contribution of the Natura 2000 network to achieve Favourable Conservation Status for habitats and species. The Natura 2000 reference portal Supporting documentation to facilitate a consistent use of the SDF across the EU, including in relation to electronic data-transmission and data-handling, is available to Member States online in the so-called "Natura 2000 reference portal” maintained by the European Environment Agency. This documentation includes elements such as code-lists and other necessary reference documents and material: e.g. data-models, data-transfer formats for spatial and tabular data as well as technical guidelines outlining the technical and administrative procedures on how to submit data to the Commission. Some elements included in the reference portal may be subject to changes over time due to technical, scientific (e.g. taxonomic) and other developments. For those elements that are maintained by DG Environment and/or the EEA (see Annex) any change ( 1 ) should find the prior approval of the Habitats Committee. A link to the reference portal can be found on the website of the Commission, DG Environment. The core elements of this portal are listed in the Appendix. Natura 2000 Standard Data Form and its database Each Natura 2000 site proposed, designated or classified must have a completed Standard Data Form as well as a digital geospatial representation of its borders. All sites of a Member State together form the national SDF database. All fields of the SDFs are obligatory unless specifically mentioned otherwise. To be complete, the national SDF database needs to include a geospatial description of each Natura 2000 sites, for which technical guidance is available in the Natura 2000 reference portal. A Member State can propose an update of the information held by its Natura 2000 database by uploading an updated database on EEA’s Reportnet system (see instructions in the Natura 2000 reference portal). Such an updated database needs to be accompanied by a note that explains (and under certain circumstances justifies) the changes that were made. Once the database is uploaded, a first series of quality checks will be carried out to test the conformity of the database: failing a test will result in the rejection of the database. A description of the rules applied for the quality checks is available in the Natura 2000 reference portal as part of the technical description of the SDF fields. Before assembling the EU Natura 2000 database, the services of the European Commission will check the compliance of the proposed modifications with the Birds and Habitats directives. In free text fields provide the language tag. The language tag is a standardized code that is used to identify human languages in the Internet. Technical details such as the list of language codes to be used are provided in the Natura 2000 reference portal. 1 SITE IDENTIFICATION 1.1 Site type The site type indicates whether the site is a Special Protection Area (SPA) classified under the Birds Directive or a (proposed) Site of Community Interest ((p)SCI)/ Special Area of Conservation (SAC) under the Habitats Directive or both. One option must be chosen among the following: In cases where SCI and SPA overlap but are not identical the sites are treated as separate objects. Figure 1 Possible relationships between sites 1.2 Site code Each site must have a stable unique code attached, which consists of one string with nine characters and is composed like following: The following rules apply: 1.3 Site name For countries using a Latin alphabet, site names are entered in their local language. The Latin alphabet has to be used (UTF 8/16); no upper-case text should be used (e.g. ‘Gave de Pau’ not ‘GAVE DE PAU’). For Member States using a non-Latin alphabet (Greek or Cyrillic), the site name must nevertheless be written in Latin alphabet in field 1.3. Example: Site name in Latin to be entered in field 1.3: “Ikaria - Fournoi Kai Paraktia Zoni”. 1.3.1 Site Name non-Latin alphabet (optional) In addition to the site name provided in 1.3 the name can be provided using other than Latin alphabet such as Greek or Cyrillic alphabet. Example: Site name in Greek to be entered in field 1.3.1: “Ικαρία – Φούρνοι και παράκτια ζώνη” 1.4 Respondent Respondent means the official contact information of the organisation (e.g. the competent administrative authority) that compiled the information in the SDF. The respondent should be contacted in case of technical questions or if errors are spotted. No personal information should be provided in line with the General Data Protection Regulation. At least one of the following field combinations must be provided: 1.4.1 Name of the organisation The official name of the organisation that compiled the information in the SDF. 1.4.2 Contact point in the organisation (optional) Contact point means a further specification of the part of the organisation responsible for the compilation of data in the respective SDF such as for example a department for nature conservation or a specific functional role such as ‘Natura 2000 coordination unit’. 1.4.3 Postal address The postal address of the organisation should be given in a free text field following the standard for postal addresses that is used in the Member State. 1.4.4 Functional mailbox email address Only functional email addresses should be used in line with the General Data Protection Regulation. 1.4.5 Website with contact information The website should contain the official contact information of the organisation. In order to avoid issues with changing links provide the link only to the main entry page of the organisation, from where it is possible to navigate to the contact information. 1.5 Site classification/proposal/designation dates The fields for the dates of the classification of SPAs and the proposal and designation of SCIs/SACs (as applicable) must be filled in together with the reference for the national SPA and SAC acts in the respective fields of 1.5. Where a site has been classified/designated and subsequently enlarged, the year of the initial listing should be kept. Further explanations, e.g. for classification or designation dates of sites composed of originally separate SPAs and/or SCIs can be provided optionally in field 1.5.6. 1.5.1 Date site first classified as SPA Provide the date on which the site was first classified as SPA. 1.5.2 SPA classification act Provide a reference to the national SPA classification act. It is preferred to have the reference in form of a stable digital identifier (URI = URL or DOI). If this is not available, the reference can also be provided as free text. 1.5.3 Date site first proposed as SCI Provide the date on which the site was first proposed as SCI. That means the date on which the first proposal for the SCI has been officially communicated to the European Commission. 1.5.4 Date site designated as SAC The date on which the site was designated as SAC must be provided. 1.5.5 SAC designation act A reference to the national SAC designation act must be provided. It is preferred to have the reference in form of a stable digital identifier (URI = URL or DOI). If this is not available the reference can also be provided as free text. 1.5.6 Explanations (optional) Additional explanations to the fields in 1.5 can be given in this optional free text field, e.g. for classification or designation dates of sites that are composed of originally separate SPAs and/or SCIs. 2 SITE AREA AND LOCATION 2.1 Site area The area of Natura 2000 sites must be provided in the field 2.1.1; area is also part of the spatial dataset, that contains the digital boundary of the site. In principle, the area reported in the field 2.1.1 should be the same as in the area computed from the spatial dataset. However, due to various reasons (caves missing a complete representation, national designation acts based on inaccurate data, uncertainties linked to changes in the spatial reference systems, etc.) they can differ and this should be explained in the fields 2.1.2 and 2.1.3. 2.1.1 Area The area of a site must be provided. Enter the most accurate total surface area available in hectares; decimal places can be used. Also, for linear features such as cliffs the area must be filled in, which can be based on estimation. 2.1.2 Reason for area difference with spatial dataset (if any) In case that the area in field 2.1.1 differs from the area in the spatial dataset provide the reason by using the relevant category from the respective code list: Further explanations should be provided in field 2.1.3. If the category ‘other’ is used further explanations must be provided. 2.1.3 Reason for area difference - explanations In addition to field 2.1.2 the area difference can be further explained by using free text. Note that explanations must be given if the category ‘Other’ is used in field 2.1.2. 2.2 Administrative region (optional) Eurostat has developed a standard hierarchical coding system for the regions of the Union to reference statistical data. This coding system must be applied to all regional coding applications in the Commission (see Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council (1)). A full description can also be found at the homepage of Eurostat. 2.2.1 Administrative region code The NUTS-codes level 2 should be entered for each site. At least one code should be provided. However, several codes can be used for sites which are located in more than one administrative region. Where a site is not covered by a NUTS region, enter the NUTS code for ‘extra region’ (e.g. an extra region in Belgium at level 2 would be coded as: ‘BEZZ’). The latest version of the NUTS classification should be used (see link in the Natura 2000 reference portal). 2.2.2 Administrative region name The administrative region name that corresponds to the NUTS-code level 2 used in field 2.2.1. The administrative region name must be provided when the administrative region code is filled in, otherwise the field 2.2.2 must be left blank. 2.3 Biogeographical and marine regions 2.3.1 Region code With reference to the most recent map of the biogeographical and marine regions (see Natura 2000 reference portal) it must be specified in which of these biogeographical and marine region(s) the site is located. 2.3.2 Percentage In case that a site is located across two or more regions, the percentage coverage in each of the regions must be entered. The values should sum up to 100%. Minor rounding errors when summing up the values can be neglected. The percentage should be calculated using the same map as used to specify the region code (field 2.3.1). 3 ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION Depending on the site type the section 3 must contain: 3.1 Habitat types of Annex I of Council Directive 92/43/EEC present on the site 3.1.a Essential information (habitat type) This section must be filled in for all Annex I habitat types present on the site and should also be filled in for those habitat types for which re-establishment on the site is planned. 3.1.1 Habitat type code The habitat code, which is the four-character code of the habitat types of Annex I to Directive 92/43/EEC, must be provided. The code list for these habitat types is available in the Natura 2000 reference portal. 3.1.2 Priority form If the priority forms of the habitat types 6210, 7130 or 9430 are present in the site (depending on their character these habitat types can be both — priority form or not), indicate the presence of the priority form in field 3.1.2. Where both priority and non-priority forms occur in a site, entries must be made separately for each of them. 3.1.3 Non-presence In cases where an Annex I habitat type that was present as significant when the site was proposed as SCI or was later identified as significant is no longer present in the site, this should be indicated in the field ‘non-presence’. In this case it would be expected that the conservation objective for this habitat is its re-establishment at the site. There may be cases where a habitat fluctuates naturally (e.g. habitat 3170, Mediterranean temporary ponds). In such cases ‘non-presence’ shall only be reported if changes have occurred that are going beyond such natural fluctuations. Furthermore, in cases where an Annex I habitat type is not present in a site (and was not present when the site was designated) but its re-establishment is planned, it should be indicated in the field ‘non-presence’. For habitats that are no longer present in the site, only the following fields need to be filled: 3.1.1 (Habitat code), 3.1.2 (Priority form), 3.1.6 (Method used), 3.1.7 (Period of last data collection), 3.1.13 (Conservation objectives), 3.1.16 (Update date). The field 3.1.4 (Cover) must be 0 (zero). The other fields of the section 3.1 should be left blank. An Annex I habitat type that was present as significant when the site was proposed as SCI or was later identified as significant but is considered as lost and cannot be restored can be removed from the list based on the reasons set out in the Nadeg document ‘ Finalised note on removal of habitats and species from the subject of protection in Natura 2000 sites – conditions & justifications (Doc Nadeg 21-12-05-04) ’ available in the Reference portal. 3.1.4 Cover The surface cover of the habitat in the site in hectares [ha] must be provided unless the site is a cave and an estimated surface area is not available (field 3.1.5); if non-presence is indicated (field 3.1.3) the cover must be zero (0); decimal values are allowed. There are situations where Annex I habitats can physically overlap (e.g. sand banks occurring within an estuary). In this specific case enter the area of each of the habitats (e.g. enter the area of the estuary and the size of the sand banks). If this is not considered possible subtract the area of the smaller habitat from the area of the larger habitat. 3.1.5 Caves For caves (habitat codes 8310 and 8330) the number of caves can be entered if the estimated surface area is not available. 3.1.6 Method used for cover By choosing one of the following categories the method used for dedicating the cover must be indicated: Only one category can be chosen; where data have been compiled from a variety of sources, choose the category for the most important source of data. 3.1.7 Period of last data collection Provide the start date and the end date of the period of the last data collection for the habitat in the site. The format for the dates is year and month (YYYY-MM). In case that the date of the last data collection is older than 2022, but the month and year is not known, the option ‘survey older than 2022’ can be chosen. In this case the month and year should be left blank. 3.1.b Site assessment (habitat type) 3.1.8 Significance An Annex I habitat present in the site can be indicated as non-significant when the habitat area in the site is 1) of little conservation value, because it is small, very degraded, or fragmentary and where the fulfilment of the ecological functions of the habitat type is very limited and the structural components as well as its characteristic/typical species composition are severely reduced and 2) does not offer relevant restoration possibilities. Such conditions exist already since the site was proposed as SCI and are not due to inappropriate site management or anthropogenic pressures that have acted since then. Non-significant habitats should be indicated in this field (3.1.8). Note that for significant occurrences of habitats all fields of the section 3.1.b must be filled in whereas for non- significant habitats only the fields 3.1.8 (Significance) and 3.1.16 (Update date) of section 3.1.b need to be filled in. 3.1.9 Representativity Representativity is the criterion A(a) of Annex III: degree of representativity of the habitat on the site. Criterion A(a) of Annex III should be linked to the interpretation manual of Annex I habitat types since this manual provides a definition, an indication of characteristic species and other relevant elements. The degree of representativity gives a measure of ‘how typical’ a habitat type is. If the quantitative field data for the comparison do not exist or if measurement of the criterion is not feasible, the ‘best expert judgment’ may be used to rank the habitat type. The following ranking system should be used: 3.1.10 Relative surface Relative surface is the criterion A(b) of Annex III: Area of the site covered by the natural habitat type (see field 3.1.4, ‘Cover’) in relation to the total area covered by that natural habitat type within the national territory. The total area covered by the habitat type within the national territory should correspond to the total surface area as reported under Article 17 of the Habitats Directive (i.e. the sum for all biogeographic regions). However, in case of improved knowledge or availability of more accurate data than used for the Article 17 reporting, the percentage should be calculated based on best information available for the total area. Relative surface must be expressed as a classified percentage ‘p’ using one of the following categories: 3.1.11 Relative surface explanations (optional) This field can be used to provide more precise information on the relative surface such as the concrete surface which is underlying the classified surface in field 3.1.10 if available or other relevant explanation. 3.1.12 Degree of conservation Degree of conservation is the criterion A(c) of Annex III. It should be linked to the condition of the habitat as defined for the Article 17 reporting (Habitats Directive), namely the parameter ‘structure & functions (including typical species)’ ( 2 ) . This field has three parts: 3.1.12.1 Degree of conservation – categorised The degree of conservation must be expressed using the following ranking system: 3.1.12.2 Degree of conservation – area In addition to the A, B, C categories, the area in good, not good or unknown condition should be provided in hectares. 3.1.12.3 Degree of conservation – method used 3.1.13 Conservation objectives The function of conservation objectives is to specify, which area and condition habitat types in a site shall maintain or achieve so that the site can contribute to the overall goal of favourable conservation status of these habitat types (see Article 2(2) of the Habitats Directive) at national biogeographical and European biogeographical level. Based on the desired conditions spelled out in the conservation objectives, conservation measures shall be established. The ‘prevent deterioration’ or the ‘maintenance of the habitat’s surface area and its good condition’ in the site are the minimum conservation objectives (to be further translated in terms of the specific characteristics/attributes that define the condition of the habitat). Furthermore, the conservation objectives can target the enlargement of the area of the habitat or the improvement of the condition of the habitat as well as the re-establishment of the habitat in the site (i.e. of a habitat not present in the site). The conservation objectives for the habitat in the site must be indicated by choosing one or several of the following categories, whereby prevent-deterioration or maintenance should always be the minimum objectives, unless explanations and justifications for other, exceptional situations can be provided (e.g. that relate to the restoration needs of another Annex I habitat in the site). In such cases where ‘Other’ is indicated, field 3.1.14 has to be filled. 3.1.14 Conservation objectives - explanations Further explanations and details on the conservation objectives indicated in field 3.1.13 can be provided in this free text field. If the option ’Other’ is indicated, explanations have to be provided. Please be aware that only very exceptional circumstances, like for example the restoration needs of other Annex I habitats are acceptable justifications for not including the maintenance of a habitat that is present on the site as a minimum objective. For all other options the field is optional. 3.1.15 Global Global assessment (criterion A(d) of Annex III) of the value of the site for conservation of the natural habitat type concerned. This criterion refers to the global assessment of the value of the site for the conservation of the habitat type concerned. This criterion should be used to assess the previous criteria in an integrated way and taking into consideration the different weights they may have for the habitat under consideration. Other aspects may be considered regarding the assessment of the most relevant elements in order to globally assess their positive or negative influence on the conservation of the habitat type. The ‘most relevant’ elements may vary from habitat type to habitat type; they may include the human activities, both in the site or in its neighbouring areas, that are likely to influence the conservation status of the habitat type, the ownership of the land, the existing legal status of the site, the ecological relations between the different habitat types and species, etc. The ‘best expert judgment’ may be used to assess this global value and the ranking system used to express it should be as follows: 3.1.16 Update date The date (year and month, YYYY-MM) on which the information given in section 3.1.b (site assessment) has been last updated must be provided for non-present, significant and non-significant occurrences of habitats. The updates meant here refer to changes in the content of the section and not to minor corrections such as corrections of typos or formatting. 3.2 Species referred to in Article 4 of Directive 2009/147/EC and species listed in Annex II to Directive 92/43/EEC present on the site 3.2.a Essential information (species) According to the site type section 3.2.a must be filled in for all relevant species present in the site (see also introductory paragraphs at the beginning of section 3) and should be filled for species whose re-establishment at the site is planned. 3.2.1 Species group Provide the group the species belongs to (i.e. Amphibians, Birds, Fish, Invertebrates, Lichens, Mammals, Plants including bryophytes, Reptiles) by using the code for species groups available in the Natura 2000 reference portal. 3.2.2 Species code The species that should be listed in section 3.2 depends on the site type as explained in the introductory paragraphs at the beginning of section 3 (ecological information). The species code-list available in the Natura 2000 reference portal has to be used. 3.2.3 Scientific name Insert the scientific species name corresponding to the code used in field 3.2.2 according to the species name list available in the Natura 2000 reference portal. Only the scientific name that corresponds to the code in the species list can be used by the European Commission. Anything else will be considered an error. 3.2.4 Sensitivity of species data Indicate in this field whether the public availability of the information given for a certain species could be detrimental to its conservation, for example because it is subject to illegal collecting and the public availability of the information held by the SDF (including the geospatial description of its borders) would genuinely increase that threat. If this is the case enter ‘yes’ in this field. If a species is marked as sensitive, the presence of the species on the site will not be disclosed to the public by the Commission on its own motion (for instance, by means of including this information in a publicly available database, viewer or website). If the information on the presence of this species in a certain site is already available to the public, e.g. through online information, a marking of the species as sensitive is not justified. 3.2.5 Non-presence Please indicate where a species that was present as significant when the site was proposed as SCI or classified as SPA or was later identified as significant is no longer present in the site. In this case it would be expected that the conservation objective for this species is its re-establishment at the site. Note: Species may be considered as no longer present in the site if they have not been observed in the site for a certain time-period. That time period will vary between species: absence for a few years for an easy-to-observe and under normal circumstances regularly present species probably indicates disappearance whereas for species difficult to observe such as certain insects, absence of observations for many years does not necessarily indicate absence if the habitat of the species has not changed. Furthermore, in cases where a species is not present in a site (and was not present when the site was designated) but its re-establishment is planned, it should be indicated in the field ‘non-presence’. For species that are no longer present in the site, following fields need to be filled: 3.2.1 to 3.2.5, 3.2.9 (method used), 3.2.10 (period of last data collection) and 3.2.16 (conservation objectives). The field 3.2.7.1 population size minimum and maximum need both to be 0 (zero). The other fields of the section 3.2 should be left blank. A species that was present as significant on the site when the site was first propose as SCI or first classified as SPA or was later identified as significant but is considered lost and cannot be restored cannot be removed from the list unless this has been justified according to the Nadeg document ‘ Finalised note on removal of habitats and species from the subject of protection in Natura 2000 sites – conditions & justifications (Doc Nadeg 21-12-05-04) ’. 3.2.6 Population type Species populations in the site must be categorised as follows: Where a non-permanent population is present on a site in more than one season (e.g. breeding, wintering) entries should be made separately for these ‘population types’. As a number of fauna species (in particular many bird species) are migratory, the site might be important for different phases of the life cycle of the species. In case that it is not possible to enter data for different seasons, enter data for the most important one (either reproducing, wintering or concentration). 3.2.7 Population size and unit 3.2.7.1 Population size Known population size data must be provided. If the population size is known (i.e. one exact value) fill in both sub-fields (minimum and maximum) with the same value. Where it is more appropriate to give a population range, fill in the estimated values for the lower boundary (minimum) and the upper boundary (maximum) of the range. Where a population range is not known but information exists only on either minimum or maximum population size, estimate the missing value. Note that the minimum and maximum values should refer to an average over several years rather than extreme values. If non-presence is indicated in field 3.2.5, minimum and maximum should both be “0”. Where even a rough estimation of the population size cannot be made due to objective difficulties in detecting the species, use the category ‘Insufficient or no data available’ in the field ‘Method used for population size’. In this case the values for population size can be left empty but the field for abundance categories must be used instead (see field 3.2.8). The abundance categories may however also be indicated in addition to the population size. The character of the population in the site can be further described in the text field ‘Quality and Importance’ (4.2) outlining the nature of the population (e.g. dense, dispersed or isolated). 3.2.7.2 Population unit The unit of the corresponding population size values in field 3.2.7.1 must be provided. Recommended units are individuals or pairs wherever possible, otherwise use the most precise units available following the standardised list of population units and codes as developed for the reporting under Article 12 (Birds Directive) and Article 17 (Habitats Directive) (see Natura 2000 reference portal). 3.2.8 Abundance category The abundance category must be provided if the method used for population size is set to ‘Insufficient or no data available’ and no population size estimation can be provided due to objective difficulties in detecting the species in 3.2.7. The field can however also be used in addition to population size. See also the explanation above for ‘size’. The following abundance categories can be used: 3.2.9 Method used for population size Indicate the method used for determining the population size: See also the explanation on population size and abundance categories regarding the use of the category “Insufficient or no data available”. 3.2.10 Period of last data collection The start date and the end date of the period of the last data collection for the species in the site must be provided. The format for the dates is year and month (YYYY-MM). In case that the date of the last data collection is older than 2022, but the month and year is not known, the option ‘survey older than 2022’ can be indicated. In this case the month and year can be left blank. 3.2.b Site assessment (species) 3.2.11 Significance Non-significant species occurrences in the site should be indicated in this field. Where a species is rarely observed on a site, for example only a vagrant, this is not considered to be a significant population. Note that for significant occurrences of species all fields of the section 3.2.b must be filled in whereas for non-significant occurrences of species only the fields 3.2.11 (Significance) and 3.2.20 (Update date) of section 3.2.b have to be filled in. 3.2.12 Species meeting ornithological criteria for SPA classification Indicate if the bird species met the ornithological criteria used to justify SPA classification (at the time of site classification or at a later point in time). 3.2.13 Population Population is the criterion B(a) of Annex III: Size and density of the population of the species present on the site in relation to the populations present within national territory. Population must be expressed as a classified percentage ‘p’ using one of the following categories: 3.2.14 Population - explanations (optional) This field can be used to provide more precise information on the population percentage such as the concrete national population size underpinning the classified percentage in field 3.2.13 if available or other relevant explanation. 3.2.15 Degree of conservation This field has three parts: Degree of conservation is the criterion B(b) of Annex III. The degree of conservation should be linked to the quality of the habitat occupied by the species as e.g. currently assessed in the reporting under Article 17 (Habitats Directive). The quality depends on the most appropriate habitat features relating to population dynamics such as physical and biological requirements of the species (including for example prey availability) at all stages of its life cycle. The structure of the habitat and relevant abiotic features should be assessed. 3.2.15.1 Degree of conservation - categorised The degree of conservation should be expressed using the following ranking system: 3.2.15.2 Degree of conservation – occupied area (optional) In addition to the A, B, C categories, the area of the habitat occupied with sufficient, non-sufficient or unknown habitat quality should be provided in percent of the total habitat area at the site. 3.2.15.3 Degree of conservation – occupied percentage classes 3.2.16 Conservation objectives The function of conservation objectives is to specify which extent and quality of the habitat of the species and the population size in a site shall be maintained or achieved so that the site can contribute to the overall goal of favourable conservation status of these species (see Article 2(2) of the Habitats Directive) at national, biogeographical or European level. Based on the desired conditions spelled out in the conservation objectives, conservation measures shall be established. The ‘prevent deterioration’ or the maintenance of the species (in terms of population size) and its habitat in the site (in terms of extent and good quality) are the minimum conservation objective (to be further translated in terms of the specific attributes). The conservation objectives for the species in the site must be indicated by choosing one or several of the following categories, whereby ‘prevent deterioration’ or ‘maintenance’ should always be the minimum objective unless justifications for other, exceptional situations can be provided (e.g. relating to the restoration needs of another species or an Annex I habitat). In case ‘Other’ is indicated below an explanation and justification has to be provide in field 3.2.17: 3.2.17 Conservation objectives - explanations Further explanations and details on the conservation objectives indicated in field 3.2.16 can be provided here using the free text field. In case ’Other’ is indicated in field 3.2.16, an explanation has to be provided. Please be aware that only very exceptional circumstances, like for example the restoration needs of another species or of an Annex I habitat type, are acceptable justifications for not including maintenance of a species that is present on the site as a minimum objective. For all other options the field is optional. 3.2.18 Isolation Degree of isolation (criterion B(c) of Annex III) of the population present on the site in relation to the natural range of the species. This criterion may be interpreted as an approximate measure of the contribution of a given population to the genetic diversity of the species on the one hand and of the fragility of this specific population when too isolated on the other hand. Consequently, the term ‘isolation’ should be considered in a wider context, applying equally to strict endemics, to sub-species/varieties/races as well as sub-populations of a meta-population. In this context the following grading shall be used: 3.2.19 Global Global assessment (criterion B(d) of Annex III) of the value of the site for conservation of the species concerned. This criterion refers to the global assessment of the value of the site for the conservation of the species concerned. It may be used to sum up the previous criteria and also to assess other features of the site thought to be relevant for a given species. These features may vary from one species to another and might include human activities on the site or in nearby areas which are capable of influencing the conservation status of the species, land management, the statutory protection of the site, ecological relations between the different types of habitats and species, etc. A ‘best expert judgment’ may be used for this global evaluation. The following ranking system shall be used: 3.2.20 Update date The date on which the information in section 3.2.b (site assessment) has been last updated must be provided. The format for the date is year and month (YYYY-MM). The updates meant here refer to changes in the content and not to minor corrections such as corrections of typos or formatting. 3.3 Other important species of flora and fauna (optional) Other important species of flora and fauna that are relevant for conservation and management of the site may be listed in section 3.3 taking into account the following rules per site type: 3.3.1 Species group If the species belongs to one of the species groups on the code-list available on the Natura 2000 reference portal (i.e. Amphibians, Birds, Fish, Fungi, Invertebrates, Lichens, Mammals, Plants including bryophytes and algae, Reptiles) use the respective code from this list; otherwise leave the field empty (blank). 3.3.2 Species code For birds and for Annex II, IV and V species of the Habitats Directive, the code as provided in the Natura 2000 reference portal must be used. For other species the field 3.3.2 should be left blank. 3.3.3 Scientific name Provide the scientific name of the species. For birds and for Annex II, IV and V species use the species name as provided in the code lists available in the Natura 2000 reference portal. 3.3.4 Sensitivity of species data Indicate in this field whether the public availability of the information given for a certain species could be detrimental to its conservation, for example because it is subject to illegal collecting and the public availability of the information held by the SDF (including the geospatial description of its borders) would genuinely increase that threat. If a species is marked as sensitive, the presence of the species on the site will not be disclosed to the public by the Commission on its own motion (for instance, by means of making information publicly available online via a database, viewer or website). If the information on the presence of this species in a certain site is already available to the public, e.g. in the form of online information, a marking of the species as sensitive is not justified. 3.3.5 Non-presence Species are considered as no longer present in the site e.g. if they have not been observed in the site for a long time. 3.3.6 Population size and unit 3.3.6.1 Population size Provide known population data. If the population size is known (i.e. one exact value) fill in both sub-fields (minimum and maximum) with the same value. Where it is more appropriate to give a population range, fill in the estimated values for the lower boundary (minimum) and the upper boundary (maximum) of the range. Where a population range is not known but information exists only on either minimum or maximum population size, estimate the missing value. Note that the minimum and maximum values should refer to an average over several years rather than extreme values. 3.3.6.2 Population unit Units should be pairs or individuals wherever possible, otherwise please follow the standard list of population units and codes as developed for reporting under Article 17 (Habitats Directive) (see Natura 2000 reference portal) in the case of birds or species listed in Annex II, IV or V of the Habitats Directive. 3.3.7 Abundance category Where quantitative data do not exist indicate one of the following categories: The following abundance categories can be used: 3.3.8 Motivation The motivation for listing each species must be provided by means of the following categories: Multiple entries of categories are possible. Further details on the motivations for listing individual species, especially regarding ‘other reasons’ can be given in section 4.2 which is the free text field for describing the quality and importance of the site. 4 SITE DESCRIPTION 4.1 Site characteristics Free text. This field should provide an overall ‘picture’ of the site. Site characteristics might start with a description of the site’s division into broad habitat classes or ecosystems and the main geological, geomorphological and landscape features of importance in the site. Where relevant indicate the dominant vegetation types. Information on small linear and mosaic-type wooded areas (e.g. hedges, boscage, tree lines) should also be provided where relevant. In addition to the free text provide the language tag. 4.2 Quality and importance of the site Free text. Enter an overall description of the quality and importance of the site for habitats and species, in view of the conservation aims of the nature directives. For internationally important wetlands that regularly hold more than 20 000 waterfowl this fact should be entered here. Where a species is listed in Section 3.3 with the motivation “Other reasons” its inclusion can be explained here. In addition to the free text provide the language tag. 4.3 Pressures on the site The purpose of this group of fields is to document information on the most important pressures and threats on the site. Please also consider pressures on the site from the surrounding of the site. The information should reflect the most recent situation. 4.3.1 Pressure code The pressures list used in the SDF is the same as used for the reporting under Article 17 of the Habitats Directive and Article 12 of the Birds Directive. The link to this list can be found on the Natura 2000 reference portal. 4.3.2 Rank The relative importance of a pressure must be ranked in three categories: The data entries for the highest rank are limited to a maximum of five. The minimum obligatory number of data entries is one pressure. Indicate specifically if there are no pressures to be reported. Within a category (H or M or L), there is no ranking. Data entries for pressures with medium or low importance can be listed up to a limit of 20 entries. However, it is recommended to focus on the most relevant pressures for the site. 4.3.3 Location inside/outside Indicate in this field whether the pressure & threat is located within or outside the Natura 2000 site or both. 4.3.4 Pressure further detailed Free text. In addition to the pressure code provided in 4.3.1 more detailed and specific information shall be provided in this field. This might include 4.3.5 Update date The date year and month (YYYY-MM) on which the information in section 4.3 (pressures on the site) has been last updated must be provided. Updates refer to changes in the content and not to minor corrections such as corrections of typos or formatting. 4.4 Documentation Free text. If available, for each site reference is made to relevant publications and/or scientific data concerning the site. Information should be made available according to standard convention for scientific 4.4.1 Link(s) For links to online resources consider that in general URIs often change and therefore avoid entering unstable URIs. 4.4.2 Update date Provide the month and year the field 4.4 has last been updated. 5 SITE MANAGEMENT 5.1 Body responsible for the site management Provide the official contact information of the organisation that is responsible for the site management. No personal information should be provided in line with the General Data Protection Regulation. One of the following combinations must be provided: 5.1.1 Name of the organisation The official name of the organisation that is responsible for the site management. 5.1.2 Contact point in the organisation (optional) Contact point means a further specification of the part of the organisation such as a department for nature conservation or a specific functional role such as ‘Natura2000 coordination unit’. 5.1.3 Postal address The postal address of the organisation should be given in a free text field following the standard that is used in the Member State. 5.1.4 Functional mailbox email address Only functional email addresses should be used in line with the General Data Protection Regulation. 5.1.5 Website with contact information The website should contain the official contact information of the organisation. In order to avoid issues with changing links provide the link only to the main entry page of the organisation, from where it is possible to navigate to the contact information. 5.2 Management plans Indicate whether or not a specific and actual management plan exists for the site or whether one is in preparation. While it is acknowledged that management plans are not a requirement under the Directive, this information is of special interest in order to understand the instruments Member States use to manage their network and also to find more specific information if need be. 5.2.1 Existence of management plan(s) Using one of the response categories, the following question must be answered: Does a management plan exist for the site? 5.2.2 Reference and validity of the management plan(s) If there is an actual management plan, give its name and a link to relevant online resources (e.g. link to the webpage of a national information system, link to a PDF, Digital Object Identifier - DOI). Do not use dynamically generated URIs and prefer URIs that are considered as stable. If the resource is not identified with a permanent URL, provide a link to search page or reference pages from which it could be retrieved with the information provided in the SDF. Please also provide the management plan validity (start year and month and the duration in number or years and months or report the duration as “undefined”). In case that several actual management plans do exist for the site, provide the name, URI and validity for each of them. 5.2.3 Further explanations In case that a management plan does not exist and is also not in preparation provide further explanation. 5.3 Conservation measures Provide link(s) to information about detailed measures having regard to the conservation objectives pursued (field 5.3.1) and respond to the questions about the status of the measures (field 5.3.2). 5.3.1 Detailed information on measures Detailed information on measures can be either included in the management plans, kept in separate documents or further explained in the free text field. Choose one of the options below: 5.3.2 Status of conservation measures Please choose one answer among the options listed for the questions below: Are the necessary measures (one-off measures and/or recurrent measures) established (i.e. identified and set up on a firm and - where relevant – long-term basis)? For fully or partly established measures answer the question below. Are the established measures (one-off measures and/or recurrent measures) implemented? 5.4 Management effectiveness The following two questions on the management effectiveness must be answered: 6 GEOSPATIAL REPRESENTATION OF THE SITE Instead of providing the map of the site, the Member States are asked to provide the geospatial representation of the site borders, that will be used by the Commission services and the EEA to build the map of the European Natura 2000 network. In order to comply with the INSPIRE Directive (2007/2/EC), a unique INSPIRE identifier consisting of a namespace and a local identifier needs to be created for the site. The current version of the definitions of the INSPIRE identifier (namespace, local id and version id) applies. 6.1 INSPIRE identifier The INSPIRE identifier should be stable (same conditions as the site code) and is usually used to clearly identify the object in its specific domain. The three components of the INSPIRE identifier (6.1.1-3) are defined by the provider of INSPIRE implementation in the countries. Coordination at the national level is required. 6.1.1 Namespace The namespace must uniquely identify the data source of the spatial object. It needs to be unique within all of the national INSPIRE infrastructure. 6.1.2 Local identifier The local identifier is assigned by the data provider. The local identifier must be unique within the namespace: that means no other spatial object carries the same unique identifier. 6.1.3 Version identifier (optional) The identifier of the particular version of the spatial object. If the specification of a spatial object type with an external object identifier includes life-cycle information, the version identifier is used to distinguish between the different versions of a spatial object. Within the set of all versions of a spatial object, the version identifier is unique. ( 1 ) With the exception of minor corrections in the webpage like misspellings and adaptations to latest technical standards. ( 2 ) Reporting under Article 17 of the Habitats Directive - Explanatory Notes and Guidelines (latest version) ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1241 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on the conservation of fisheries resources and the protection of marine ecosystems through technical measures, amending Council Regulations (EC) No 1967/2006, (EC) No 1224/2009 and Regulations (EU) No 1380/2013, (EU) 2016/1139, (EU) 2018/973, (EU) 2019/472 and (EU) 2019/1022 of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Council Regulations (EC) No 894/97, (EC) No 850/98, (EC) No 2549/2000, (EC) No 254/2002, (EC) No 812/2004 and (EC) No 2187/2005 ( 4 ) Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien species Appendix Table of contents of the Natura 2000 reference portal 1. Code-lists for the fields of the Standard Data Form 2. Documents (latest versions) ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)