COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2015/1095 of 5 May 2015 implementing Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ecodesign requirements for professional refrigerated storage cabinets, blast cabinets, condensing units and process chillers (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products ( 1 ) and in particular Article 15(1) thereof, After consulting the Consultation Forum referred to in Article 18 of Directive 2009/125/EC, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation establishes ecodesign requirements for the placing on the market of professional refrigerated storage cabinets and blast cabinets. This Regulation shall apply to electric mains-operated blast cabinets, and electric mains-operated professional refrigerated storage cabinets including those sold for the refrigeration of foodstuffs and animal feed. However, it shall not apply to the following products: 2. This Regulation also establishes ecodesign requirements for the placing on the market of condensing units operating at low or medium temperature or both. However, it shall not apply to the following products: 3. This Regulation also establishes ecodesign requirements for the placing on the market of process chillers intended to operate at low or medium temperature. However, it shall not apply to the following products: Article 2 Definitions 1. The following definitions shall apply: Article 3 Ecodesign requirements and timetable 1. The ecodesign requirements for professional refrigerated storage cabinets and blast cabinets are set out in Annex II. 2. The ecodesign requirements for condensing units are set out in Annex V. 3. The ecodesign requirements for process chillers are set out in Annex VII. 4. Ecodesign requirements shall apply in accordance with the following timetable: 5. Compliance with ecodesign requirements for professional refrigerated storage cabinets shall be measured and calculated in accordance with the methods set out in Annexes III and IV. 6. Compliance with ecodesign requirements for condensing units shall be measured and calculated in accordance with the methods set out in Annex VI. 7. Compliance with ecodesign requirements for process chillers shall be measured and calculated in accordance with the methods set out in Annex VIII. Article 4 Conformity assessment 1. The conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 8(2) of Directive 2009/125/EC shall be the internal design control set out in its Annex IV or the management system set out in its Annex V. 2. For the purposes of conformity assessment pursuant to Article 8 of Directive 2009/125/EC, the technical documentation shall contain the information set out in point 2 of Annex II, point 2(b) of Annex V and point 2(b) of Annex VII to this Regulation. Article 5 Verification procedure for market surveillance purposes The authorities of the Member States shall apply the verification procedure set out in Annex IX, Annex X and Annex XI when performing the market surveillance checks referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive 2009/125/EC to ensure compliance with the requirements set out in Annex II, Annex V and Annex VII to this Regulation. Article 6 Indicative benchmarks The indicative benchmarks for best-performing professional refrigerated storage cabinets, condensing units and process chillers available on the market at the time of entry into force of this Regulation are set out in Annex XII. Article 7 Review The Commission shall review this Regulation in the light of technological progress and present the results of that review to the Consultation Forum no later than five years from the date of entry into force of this Regulation. The review shall include the following: Article 8 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 5 May 2015. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10 . ( 2 ) COM(2008) 660 final. ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on certain fluorinated greenhouse gases ( OJ L 161, 14.6.2006, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/1094 of 5 May 2015 supplementing Directive 2010/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the energy labelling of professional refrigerated storage cabinets (see page 2 of this Official Journal). ( 5 ) Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services ( OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37 ). ANNEX I Definitions applicable for Annexes II to XII For the purposes of Annexes II to XII the following definitions shall apply: Definitions related to professional refrigerated storage cabinets and blast cabinets Definitions related to condensing units Definitions related to process chillers Common definitions: ( 1 ) IPCC Fourth Assessment Climate Change 2007, Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ANNEX II Ecodesign requirements for professional refrigerated storage cabinets and blast cabinets 1. REQUIREMENTS FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY 2. REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCT INFORMATION ( 1 ) Directive 2010/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 2010 on the indication by labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products ( OJ L 153, 18.6.2010, p. 1 ). ANNEX III Method for calculating the energy efficiency index for professional refrigerated storage cabinets For the calculation of the energy efficiency index (EEI) of a professional refrigerated storage cabinet model, the annual energy consumption of the cabinet is compared to its standard annual energy consumption. The EEI is calculated as: EEI = (AEC/SAEC) × 100 Where: AEC = E24h × af × 365 AEC = annual energy consumption of the cabinet in kWh/year E24h = energy consumption of the cabinet over 24 hours af = adjustment factor to be applied only for light-duty cabinets, according to Annex IV, point 2(b) SAEC = M × Vn + N SAEC = standard annual energy consumption of the cabinet in kWh/year Vn = net volume of the appliance, which is the sum of net volumes of all compartments of the cabinet, expressed in litres. M and N are given in the Table 2. Table 2 M and N coefficient values ANNEX IV Measurements and calculations for professional refrigerated storage cabinets ANNEX V Ecodesign requirements for condensing units 1. REQUIREMENTS FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY 2. REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCT INFORMATION From 1 July 2016, the following product information on condensing units shall be provided: Tables 4 and 5 below provide an indicative layout for the requested information Table 4 Information requirements for condensing units with a rated cooling capacity lower than 5kW and 2kW for medium and low operating temperatures respectively Table 5 Information requirements for condensing units with a rated cooling capacity higher than 5kW and 2kW for medium and low operating temperatures respectively ( *1 ) For condensing units intended to operate at only one evaporating temperature, one of the two columns related to ‘Value’ can be deleted. ( *2 ) For condensing units intended to operate at only one evaporating temperature, one of the two columns related to ‘Value’ can be deleted. ANNEX VI Measurements and calculations for condensing units Table 6 Variations of outdoor temperatures across the year under average climate conditions in Europe for condensing units ANNEX VII Ecodesign requirements for process chillers 1. REQUIREMENTS FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY 2. REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCT INFORMATION From 1 July 2016, the following product information on process chillers shall be provided: Table 7 Information requirements for process chillers ( *1 ) If Cc is not determined by measurement then the default degradation coefficient shall be Cc = 0,9. Where the default Cc value is chosen, then results from cycling tests shall not be required. Otherwise, the cooling cycling test value shall be required. ( *2 ) For staged capacity units, two values divided by a slash (‘/’) shall be declared in each box in the section referring to ‘cooling capacity’ and ‘EER’. For process chillers intended to operate at only one operating temperature, one of the two columns related to ‘Value’ can be deleted. ANNEX VIII Measurements and calculations for process chillers ANNEX IX Verification procedure for market surveillance purposes for professional refrigerated storage cabinets When performing the market surveillance checks referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive 2009/125/EC, the authorities of Member States shall apply the following verification procedure for the requirements set out in Annex II: Member State authorities shall use the measurement and calculation methods set out in Annexes III and IV. The verification tolerances set out in this Annex relate only to the verification of the measured parameters by Member State authorities and shall not be used by the supplier as an allowed tolerance to establish the values in the technical documentation. The values and classes on the label or in the product fiche shall not be more favourable for the supplier than the values reported in the technical documentation. ANNEX X Verification procedure for market surveillance purposes for condensing units When performing the market surveillance checks referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive 2009/125/EC, the authorities of Member States shall apply the following verification procedure for the requirements set out in Annex V: Member State authorities shall use the measurement and calculation methods set out in Annex VI. The verification tolerances set out in this Annex relate only to the verification of the measured parameters by Member State authorities and shall not be used by the supplier as an allowed tolerance to establish the values in the technical documentation. ANNEX XI Verification procedure for market surveillance purposes for process chillers When performing the market surveillance checks referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive 2009/125/EC, the authorities of the Member States shall apply the following verification procedure for the requirements set out in Annex VII: Member State authorities shall use the measurement and calculation methods set out in Annex VIII. The verification tolerances set out in this Annex relate only to the verification of the measured parameters by Member State authorities and shall not be used by the supplier as an allowed tolerance to establish the values in the technical documentation. ANNEX XII Indicative benchmarks referred to in Article 6