COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2025/285 of 12 February 2025 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1758 as regards administrative changes to the Union authorisation of the biocidal product family ‘SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 50(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 The Annex to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1758 is replaced by the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 12 February 2025. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 , ELI: . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1758 of 11 September 2023 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 224, 12.9.2023, p. 34 , ELI: ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/2013 of 18 April 2013 on changes of biocidal products authorised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 109, 19.4.2013, p.4 , ELI: ). ( 4 ) ECHA Opinion on the administrative change of the Union authorisation of the biocidal product family: SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS of 14 November 2023, Opinion No UAD-C-1691638-29-00/F, . ( 5 ) ECHA Opinion on the administrative change of the Union authorisation of the biocidal product family: SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS of 15 February 2024, Opinion No UAD-C-1712946-30-00/F, . ( 6 ) ECHA Opinion on the administrative change of the Union authorisation of the biocidal product family: SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS of 6 March 2024, Opinion No UAD-C-1717922-28-00/F, . SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS FOR A BIOCIDAL PRODUCT FAMILY SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS Product type(s) PT02: Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals PT04: Food and feed area PT03: Veterinary hygiene Authorisation number EU-0028967-0000 R4BP asset number EU-0028967-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL - META SPC(S) 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional, medical and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and food industry areas 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water for each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures For professional use only: For non-professional use only: 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional, medical and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and food industry areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water on the label of each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures For professional use only: For non-professional use only: 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.5. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.6. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.7. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.8. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.9. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.10. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.11. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.12. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in institutional, and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water on the label of each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: EN 374 - Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms EN 16321 - Eye and face protection for occupational use EN 14605 - Protective clothing against liquid chemicals - Performance requirements for clothing with liquid-tight (Type 3) or spray-tight (Type 4) connections, including items providing protection to parts of the body only (Types PB [3] and PB [4]) 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water on the label of each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: EN 374 - Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms EN 16321 - Eye and face protection for occupational use EN 14605 - Protective clothing against liquid chemicals - Performance requirements for clothing with liquid-tight (Type 3) or spray-tight (Type 4) connections, including items providing protection to parts of the body only (Types PB [3] and PB [4]) 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in institutional, medical, and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial (food industry) areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfectants used to disinfect the materials and surfaces associated with the housing of animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in veterinary area) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions - Clean carefully the surfaces before application of the product. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: EN 374 - Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms EN 16321 - Eye and face protection for occupational use EN 14605 - Protective clothing against liquid chemicals - Performance requirements for clothing with liquid-tight (Type 3) or spray-tight (Type 4) connections, including items providing protection to parts of the body only (Types PB [3] and PB [4]) 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 6 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 6 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 6 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 6 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 6 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 6 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in medical area) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 6 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: EN 374 - Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms EN 16321 - Eye and face protection for occupational use EN 14605 - Protective clothing against liquid chemicals - Performance requirements for clothing with liquid-tight (Type 3) or spray-tight (Type 4) connections, including items providing protection to parts of the body only (Types PB [3] and PB [4]) 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 6 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 7 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 7 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 7 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 7 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 7 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 7 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Apply the product by fully wetting all surface for 5 minutes (apply approx. 18 sprays/m 2 or 20 ml/m 2 or fully cover the object to be disinfected). 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial (food industry) areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfectants used to disinfect the materials and surfaces associated with the housing of animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in veterinary area) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 7 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: EN 374 - Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms EN 16321 - Eye and face protection for occupational use EN 14605 - Protective clothing against liquid chemicals - Performance requirements for clothing with liquid-tight (Type 3) or spray-tight (Type 4) connections, including items providing protection to parts of the body only (Types PB [3] and PB [4]) 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 7 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 8 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 8 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 8 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 8 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 8 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 8 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 8 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 8 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.5. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.6. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.7. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.8. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 9 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 9 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 9 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 9 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 9 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 9 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 2 Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 9 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 9 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)