COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2025/192 of 9 September 2024 on procedures for the accreditation of verifiers pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2023 on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 14(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I ACCREDITATION OF VERIFIERS Article 1 Accreditation of verifiers 1. Where no specific provisions on the accreditation of verifiers are laid down in this Regulation or in Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply. 2. With respect to the minimum requirements for accreditation and the requirements for accreditation bodies, the harmonised standard pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 on general requirements for accreditation bodies that accredit conformity assessment bodies ( 6 ) shall apply. Article 2 Scope of accreditation The scope of accreditation of verifiers shall cover the activities related to the assessment of monitoring plans, verification of FuelEU reports and partial FuelEU reports, verification of conformity with greenhouse gas (GHG) intensity requirements by calculating the GHG intensity of the energy used on board, the compliance balance, non-compliant port calls and issuance of the FuelEU document of compliance, as provided for in Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. Article 3 Objectives of the accreditation process During the accreditation process and annual surveillance of accredited verifiers in accordance with Articles 6 to 11, national accreditation bodies shall assess whether the verifier and its personnel undertaking verification activities: Article 4 Requests for accreditation 1. Requests for accreditation shall contain the information required on the basis of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 2. In addition, prior to the start of the assessment referred to in Article 5, the verifier applying for accreditation (‘the applicant’) shall make available to the national accreditation body information on the following aspects: Article 5 Assessment 1. For the purposes of the assessment referred to in Article 3, the assessment team appointed in accordance with Article 12 shall at least: 2. The assessment team shall carry out the activities outlined in paragraph 1 in compliance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 3. The assessment team shall report its findings and any non-conformities to the applicant and request a response, in accordance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 4. The applicant shall take corrective action to address any non-conformities reported pursuant to paragraph 3 and indicate in its response what action it has taken or plans to take within a time set by the national accreditation body to resolve them. 5. The national accreditation body shall review the response that the applicant makes pursuant to paragraph 4. 6. Where the national accreditation body finds the applicant’s response or the action taken to be insufficient or ineffective, it shall ask the applicant to submit further information or take further action. 7. The national accreditation body may also request evidence, or carry out a follow-up assessment, to assess the actual implementation of the corrective action. Article 6 Decision on accreditation and accreditation certificate 1. When preparing and taking the decision on whether to grant, extend or renew the accreditation of an applicant, the national accreditation body shall take into account the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 2. Where the national accreditation body has decided to grant or renew an applicant’s accreditation, it shall issue an accreditation certificate to that effect. The certificate shall be granted for all verification activities pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 3. The accreditation certificate shall contain at least the information required on the basis of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 4. The accreditation certificate shall be valid for a period not exceeding 5 years after the date on which the national accreditation body has issued that certificate. Article 7 Annual surveillance 1. The national accreditation body shall carry out annual surveillance of each verifier to which it has issued an accreditation certificate. That surveillance shall comprise at least: 2. The national accreditation body shall carry out the first surveillance of a verifier in accordance with paragraph 1 within 12 months of the date on which its accreditation certificate was issued. 3. Surveillance planning shall allow the national accreditation body to assess representative samples of the verifier’s activities within the scope of the accreditation certificate and the staff involved in the verification activities, in accordance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 4. On the basis of the surveillance results, the national accreditation body shall decide whether to confirm the continuation of accreditation. 5. Where a verifier carries out verification for a company under the responsibility of the administering State other than the Member State of the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier, the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier may ask the national accreditation body of the administering State to carry out surveillance activities on its behalf and under its responsibility. Article 8 Reassessment 1. The verifier shall apply for renewal of accreditation in order that the national accreditation body can reassess the verifier and determine whether the certificate may be extended before the expiry date. 2. Before the expiry of an accreditation certificate that it has issued, the national accreditation body shall reassess the verifier in question to determine whether the certificate may be extended. 3. Reassessment planning shall ensure that the national accreditation body assesses a representative sample of the verifier’s activities covered by the certificate. 4. In planning and carrying out the reassessment, the national accreditation body shall satisfy the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). Article 9 Extraordinary assessment 1. The national accreditation body may conduct an extraordinary assessment of the verifier at any time to ensure that it continues to meet the requirements of this Regulation. 2. In order to enable the national accreditation body to assess the need for an extraordinary assessment, the verifier shall inform the body immediately of any significant changes relevant to its accreditation concerning any aspect of its status or operation. 3. Significant changes shall include changes mentioned in the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). Article 10 Administrative measures 1. The national accreditation body may suspend or withdraw the accreditation of a verifier where the verifier does not meet the requirements of this Regulation. 2. The national accreditation body shall suspend or withdraw the accreditation of a verifier where the verifier requests so. 3. The national accreditation body shall establish, document, implement and maintain a procedure for the suspension and withdrawal of the accreditation in line with the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 4. The national accreditation body shall suspend a verifier’s accreditation where the verifier has: 5. The national accreditation body shall withdraw a verifier’s accreditation where: 6. Decisions by a national accreditation body to suspend or withdraw an accreditation in accordance with paragraphs 1, 4 and 5 shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the procedures established by Member States pursuant to Article 5(5) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. 7. Decisions by a national accreditation body to suspend or withdraw accreditation shall take effect after the verifier has been notified of them. The national accreditation body shall consider the impact on activities carried out prior to those decisions in light of the nature of the non-compliance. 8. The national accreditation body shall terminate the suspension of an accreditation certificate where it has received satisfactory information and concludes that the verifier meets the requirements of this Regulation. CHAPTER II REQUIREMENTS FOR NATIONAL ACCREDITATION BODIES Article 11 Requirements for national accreditation bodies 1. Where no specific provisions on the requirements for national accreditation bodies are laid down in this Regulation or in Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply. 2. For the purposes of this Regulation, national accreditation bodies appointed pursuant to Article 4(1) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall carry out their duties in accordance with the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). Article 12 Assessment team 1. The national accreditation body shall appoint an assessment team for each assessment carried out under the requirements of the harmonised standard referred to in Article 1(2). 2. An assessment team shall consist of a lead assessor responsible for carrying out an assessment in accordance with this Regulation and, where necessary, a suitable number of assessors or technical experts with relevant knowledge and experience for the specific scope of accreditation. 3. An assessment team shall include at least one person with the following skills: Article 13 Competence requirements for assessors 1. Assessors shall have the competence to carry out the activities under Articles 5 to 10. To that end, the assessor shall: 2. In addition to the competence requirements set out in paragraph 1, lead assessors shall demonstrate competence to lead an assessment team and be responsible for carrying out an assessment in accordance with this Regulation. 3. In addition to the competence requirements set out in paragraph 1, internal reviewers and persons who take decisions on the granting, extending or renewing of an accreditation shall have sufficient knowledge and experience to evaluate the accreditation. Article 14 Technical experts 1. The national accreditation body may include technical experts in the assessment team to provide detailed knowledge and expertise on a specific subject matter needed to support the lead assessor or assessor. 2. A technical expert shall have the competence required to support the lead assessor and assessor effectively on the subject matter for which knowledge and expertise of such an expert is requested. In addition, the technical expert shall: 3. Technical experts shall undertake specified tasks under the direction and full responsibility of the lead assessor in question. Article 15 Complaints Where the national accreditation body has received a complaint about the verifier from the competent authority of the administering State, the shipping company, the flag State responsible for ships flying the flag of a Member State or other interested parties, the national accreditation body shall, within a reasonable time but no later than 3 months from the date of its receipt: Article 16 Peer evaluation 1. Where national accreditation bodies are subject to regular peer evaluation in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall implement appropriate peer evaluation criteria and an effective and independent peer evaluation process in order to assess whether: 2. The criteria shall include competence requirements for peer evaluators and peer evaluation teams that are specific to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. 3. The body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall publish the outcome of the peer evaluation of a national accreditation body referred to in paragraph 1 and communicate it to the Commission, the national authorities responsible for the national accreditation bodies in the Member States and the competent authority of the administering State or the focal point referred to in Article 19. 4. Notwithstanding Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, where a national accreditation body has successfully undergone a peer evaluation organised by the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 prior to the entry into force of this Regulation, the national accreditation body shall be exempted from undergoing a new peer evaluation following the entry into force of this Regulation if it can demonstrate conformity with this Regulation. 5. To that end, the national accreditation body concerned shall submit a request with the necessary documentation to the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. 6. The body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall decide whether the conditions for granting an exemption have been met. 7. The exemption shall apply for a period not exceeding 3 years from the date of notification of the decision to the national accreditation body. Article 17 Mutual recognition of verifiers Notwithstanding Article 11(2) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, where a national accreditation body has not undergone the complete peer evaluation process, Member States shall accept the accreditation certificates of verifiers accredited by that national accreditation body provided that the body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 has started a peer evaluation for that national accreditation body and has not identified any non-compliance of the national accreditation body with this Regulation. Article 18 Monitoring of services delivered 1. Where a Member State has established, in the course of an inspection carried out in accordance with Article 31(4) of Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 7 ) , that a verifier is not complying with this Regulation, the competent authority of the administering State or national accreditation body of that Member State shall inform the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier. 2. The national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier shall treat the communication of this information as a complaint within the meaning of Article 15 and shall take appropriate action and respond to the competent authority of the administering State or the national accreditation body in accordance with the second subparagraph of Article 22(3). CHAPTER III INFORMATION EXCHANGE Article 19 Information exchange and focal points 1. Member States shall establish an effective exchange of appropriate information and effective cooperation between their national accreditation body and the competent authority of the administering State. 2. Where more than one authority is designated pursuant to Article 27 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 in a Member State, that Member State shall authorise one of those authorities to be the focal point for the exchange of information, for coordinating the cooperation referred to in paragraph 1, and for the activities referred to in this Chapter. Article 20 Accreditation work programme and management report 1. By 31 December of each year, the national accreditation body shall make available an accreditation work programme to the competent authority of the administering State with the list of verifiers accredited by that national accreditation body. The accreditation work programme shall contain the following information in relation to each verifier: 2. Where changes occur in the information referred to in the first subparagraph, the national accreditation body shall submit to the competent authority of the administering State an updated work programme by 31 January of each year. 3. Following the submission of the accreditation work programme in accordance with paragraph 1, the competent authority of the administering State shall provide the national accreditation body with all relevant information, including any applicable national legislation and guidelines. 4. By 1 June of each year, the national accreditation body shall make available a management report to the competent authority of the administering State. The management report shall contain the following information in relation to each verifier that has been accredited by that national accreditation body: Article 21 Information exchange on administrative measures If the national accreditation body has imposed administrative measures on the verifier pursuant to Article 10 or if a suspension of the accreditation has been terminated or a decision on appeal has reversed the decision of a national accreditation body to impose administrative measures referred to in Article 10, the national accreditation body shall inform the competent authority of the administering State and the national accreditation body of each Member State about this. Article 22 Information exchange by the competent authority of the administering State 1. Whenever non-conformities or deficiencies are identified the competent authority of the administering State responsible for companies for which the verifier is carrying out verification shall communicate at least the following on an annual basis to the national accreditation body that has accredited that verifier: 2. Where the information referred to in paragraph 1 provides evidence that the competent authority has identified issues in the reported data that did not fulfil the requirements under Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, Directive 2003/87/EC and the Implementing Regulation on the FuelEU verification activities, the national accreditation body shall consider the communication of that information as a complaint by the competent authority of the administering State about that verifier within the meaning of Article 15. 3. The national accreditation body shall take appropriate action to address such issues and respond to the competent authority of the administering State within a reasonable time, but no later than 3 months from the date of receipt. The national accreditation body shall inform the competent authority of the administering State in its response of the action taken by it and, where relevant, the administrative measures imposed on the verifier. Article 23 Information exchange on surveillance 1. Where the national accreditation body of the Member State responsible for a company for which the verifier carries out verification has been requested to carry out surveillance activities pursuant to Article 7(5), it shall report its findings to the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier, unless otherwise agreed between both national accreditation bodies. 2. The national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier shall take the findings referred to in paragraph 1 into account when assessing whether the verifier meets the requirements of this Regulation. 3. Where the findings referred to in paragraph 1 show evidence that the verifier is not complying with this Regulation, the national accreditation body that has accredited the verifier shall take appropriate action pursuant to this Regulation and shall inform the national accreditation body that has carried out surveillance activities of: Article 24 Information exchange with a Member State where the verifier is established Where a verifier has been granted accreditation by a national accreditation body in a Member State other than the Member State in which the verifier is established, the accreditation work programme and the management report referred to in Article 20 shall also be provided to the competent authority of the Member State in which the verifier is established. Article 25 Databases of accredited verifiers 1. National accreditation bodies shall set up and manage a database that shall be publicly available and contain the following information: 2. Any change in the status of verifiers shall be communicated to the Commission by using a relevant standardised template. 3. The body recognised under Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall facilitate and harmonise access to the national databases to enable efficient and cost-effective communication between national accreditation bodies, verifiers, shipping companies and competent authorities of the administering State. The body may merge those databases into a single and centralised database. Article 26 Notification by verifiers 1. For the purposes of enabling the national accreditation body to draft the accreditation work programme and the management report referred to in Article 20, a verifier shall send the following information to the national accreditation body that has accredited it by 15 November of each year: 2. Where changes occur in the information referred to in paragraph 1, the verifier shall notify those changes to the accreditation body within a time frame agreed with that national accreditation body. Article 27 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 9 September 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 234, 22.9.2023, p. 48 , ELI: . ( 2 ) Directive 2009/16/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on port State control ( OJ L 131, 28.5.2009, p. 57 , ELI: ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2027 of 26 July 2024 on verification activities pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( OJ L, 2024/2027, 29.7.2024, ELI: ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 ( OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30 , ELI: ). ( 5 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2917 of 20 October 2023 on the verification activities, accreditation of verifiers and approval of monitoring plans by administering authorities pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas emissions from maritime transport, and repealing Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/2072 ( OJ L, 2023/2917, 29.12.2023, ELI: ). ( 6 ) ISO/IEC 17029:2019 on Conformity assessment – General principles and requirements for validation and verification bodies, referred to in Annex II to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2020/1835 of 3 December 2020 on the harmonised standards for accreditation and conformity assessment ( OJ L 408, 4.12.2020, p. 6 ). ( 7 ) Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on services in the internal market ( OJ L 376, 27.12.2006, p. 36 , ELI: ). ( 8 ) Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC ( OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 , ELI: ). ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)