COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/1193 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014 THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 28(1), point (a), and points (c) to (h) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes measures for the purpose of eradicating Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 , emend. Safni et al. 2014, the cause of the potato brown rot, and prevent its spread within the Union territory. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Annual surveys 1. The competent authorities shall carry out annual surveys for the presence of the specified pest on the specified plants in their territory, in surface water used for irrigation of the specified plants, and in liquid waste, in accordance with the following requirements: 2. The number, origin and timing of the collection of samples shall be based on sound scientific and statistical principles and the biology of the specified pest, taking into account the particular potato and tomato production systems of the Member States concerned. 3. Member States shall report to the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, the results of the annual surveys carried out during the preceding calendar year. They shall report the results of those surveys in accordance with the template set out in Annex II. Article 4 Measures in case of suspicion of the presence of the specified pest 1. The competent authority shall ensure that samples taken for the purpose of the surveys are subject to the detection tests referred to in point 2.1 of Annex I. 2. Pending the results of the detection tests, the competent authority shall: 3. Pending the results of the detection tests, the competent authority shall ensure that all of the following elements are retained and appropriately conserved: 4. Where the suspicion of the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in accordance with point 1.1 of Annex I, the competent authority shall ensure that the tests referred to in Annex I are carried out on the samples taken for the purpose of the surveys to confirm or refute the presence of the specified pest. Article 5 Measures in case of confirmation of the presence of the specified pest 1. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in accordance with point 1.2 of Annex I, paragraphs 2 to 6 shall apply. 2. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed on specified plants, the competent authority shall, without delay, take all the following measures: 3. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed on crops of solanaceaous host plants other than the specified plants, and where production of the specified plants is identified at risk, the competent authority shall take the following measures: The infested zone shall contain the following: The competent authority shall designate: 4. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in surface water, in liquid waste discharges from industrial processing or from packaging premises handling specified plants, or on associated wild solanaceous host plants, and where production of the specified plants is identified at risk through irrigation, spraying or flooding with surface water, the competent authority shall take the following measures: The infested zone shall contain the following: The competent authority shall designate: 5. Where a Member State has submitted an outbreak notification in EUROPHYT, the neighbouring Member States which are referred to in the notification shall determine the extent of probable infection and establish a demarcated area in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 4. In case of outbreak in surface water, a notification shall not be required for infected surface water contained in areas that are already demarcated. 6. The competent authorities shall ensure that all of the following elements are retained and properly conserved: Article 6 Measures for eradicating the specified pest 1. Specified plants designated as infected by the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i), shall not be planted. The competent authority shall ensure that the infected specified plants are destroyed or are otherwise disposed of in another way, in accordance with point 1 of Annex V provided that it is established that there is no identifiable risk for of the specified pest spreading. Where specified plants have been planted before they are designated as infected, the planted material shall be immediately destroyed or disposed of in another way in accordance with point 1 of Annex V. The production site(s) where the infected specified plants have been planted shall be designated as infected. A demarcated area shall be established in accordance with Article 5(2), point (b). 2. Specified plants designated as probably infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(ii), and specified plants for which a risk has been identified pursuant to Article 5(4) shall not be planted and shall, under the control of their competent authorities, be put to appropriate use or disposal as specified in point 2 of Annex V, provided that it is established that there is no identifiable risk for spreading of the specified pest. Where specified plants have been planted before they are designated as probably infected, the planted material shall be immediately destroyed or the measures as specified in point 2 of Annex VI, shall apply. The production site(s) where the probably infected specified plants have been planted shall be designated as probably infected. A demarcated area shall be established in accordance with Article 5(2), point (b). 3. Any machinery, vehicle, vessel, store, or units thereof, and any other objects including packaging material, designated as infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i) or probably infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(ii), and Article 5(4) third subparagraph, point (b), shall either be destroyed or cleaned and disinfected using methods as specified in point 3 of Annex V. 4. In addition to the measures provided for in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 the measures specified in point 4 of Annex V shall be applied in the demarcated areas. Article 7 Specific testing measures for tubers for planting 1. Where the presence of the specified pest has been confirmed in a production site of tubers for planting, the competent authority shall ensure that the tests referred to in Annex I are carried out on the clonally related lines of the infected lots of tubers or, where the absence of clonally related lines is established, on the tubers or lots of tubers which have been in direct or indirect contact with the infected lots of tubers. 2. Where the presence of the specified pest has been confirmed in production sites of tubers for planting in a certification scheme, the tests referred to in Annex I shall be carried out either on each plant of the initial clonal selection or on representative samples of the basic seed potatoes. Article 8 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 July 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4 . ( 2 ) Council Directive 98/57/EC of 20 July 1998 on the control of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al. ( OJ L 235, 21.8.1998, p. 1 ). ANNEX I Scheme for the tests to be performed pursuant to Articles 3, 4, 5, and 7 1. GENERAL PRINCIPLES ON THE PRESENCE OF THE SPECIFIED PEST 2. TESTS 2.1. Detection tests The detection tests shall be such as to consistently detect at least 10 4 cells/ml resuspended pellet acquired from asymptomatic samples. The second detection test shall be based on different biological principles or different nucleotide regions than the first detection test. The detection tests are the following: 2.2. Identification tests The identification tests are the following: 3. FLOW CHARTS OF PROCEDURES Flow chart No 1: Diagnostic procedure for the presence of the specified pest in samples of the specified plant. Flow chart No 2: Diagnostic procedure for the specified pest in water samples. 4. SAMPLE PREPARATION 4.1. Samples from asymptomatic tubers The standard sample shall contain 200 tubers per test. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process the heel end cores to obtain the extract for detection of the specified pest is described in international diagnostic standards. 4.2. Samples from asymptomatic specified plants Detection of latent infections shall be carried out on composite samples of stem segments or leaf petioles. The procedure may be applied for up to 200 stem parts or 200 leaf petioles from different plants in one sample. The appropriate laboratory procedure to disinfect and process the stem or leaf petiole segments to obtain the extract for the detection of the specified pest is described in international diagnostic standards. 4.3. Samples from symptomatic material of the specified plants Sections of tissue shall be aseptically removed from the vascular ring in a potato tuber or from the vascular strands in stems of specified plants showing wilting symptoms. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process these tissues to obtain the extract for the detection of the specified pest is described in full detail in international diagnostic standards. 4.4. Samples of surface or recirculation water (including potato processing or sewage effluents) The principal test for the detection of the specified pest in samples of surface water, water from recirculation systems and effluent samples (potato processing industry) is selective isolation. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process water samples is described in international diagnostic standards. ( 1 ) Pastrik, K.H., Elphinstone, J.G., Pukall, R. (2002) Sequence analysis and detection of Ralstonia solanacearum by multiplex PCR amplification of 16S-23S ribosomal intergenic spacer region with internal positive control. European Journal of Plant Pathology 108, 831–842. ( 2 ) Weller, S.A, Elphinstone, J.G., Smith, N., Boonham, N., Stead, D.E. (2000). Detection of Ralstonia solanacearum strains with a quantitative, multiplex, real-time, fluorogenic PCR (TaqMan) assay. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, 2853–2858. ( 3 ) Vreeburg, R.A.M., Bergsma-Vlami, M., Bollema, R.M., de Haan, E.G., Kooman-Gersmann, M., Smits-Mastebroek, L., Tameling, W.I.L., Tjou-Tam-Sin, N.N.A., van de Vossenberg B.T.L.H, Janse, J.D. (2016). Performance of real-time PCR and immunofluorescence for the detection of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus and Ralstonia solanacearum in potato tubers in routine testing. Bulletin OEPP/EPPO Bulletin 46, 112–121. ( 4 ) Vreeburg, R., Zendman, A., Pol A., Verheij, E., Nas, M., Kooman-Gersmann, M. (2018). Validation of four real-time TaqMan PCRs for the detection of Ralstonia solanacearum and/or Ralstonia pseudosolanacearum and/or Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers using a statistical regression approach. EPPO Bulletin 48, 86–96. ( 5 ) Massart, S., Nagy, C., Jijakli, M.H. (2014). Development of the simultaneous detection of Ralstonia solanacearum race 3 and Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers by a multiplex real-time PCR assay. European Journal of Plant Pathology 138, 29–37. ( 6 ) Lenarčič, R., Morisset, D., Pirc, M., Llop, P., Ravnikar, M., Dreo, T. (2014). Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of specific endoglucanase gene sequence for detection of the bacterial wilt pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum . PLoS ONE 9(4), e96027. ( 7 ) Opina, N., Tavner, F., Holloway, G., Wang, J.F., Li, T.H., Maghirang, R., Fegan, M., Hayward, A.C., Viji Krishnapillai, A., Wai-Foong Hong, Holloway, B.W, Timmis, J.N. (1997). A novel method for development of species and strainspecific DNA probes and PCR primers for identifying Burkholderia solanacearum (formerly Pseudomonas solanacearum ). Asia-Pacific Journal of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology 5, 19–30. ( 8 ) Fegan, M., Prior, P. (2005). How complex is the ‘ Ralstonia solanacearum species complex’. In Bacterial Wilt Disease and the Ralstonia solanacearum Species Complex (eds Allen C, Hayward AC & Prior P), pp. 449–461. American Phytopathological Society, St Paul, MN (US). ( 9 ) Wicker, E., Grassart, L., Coranson-Beaudu, R., Mian, D., Guilbaud, C., Fegan, M., Prior, P. (2007). Ralstonia solanacearum strains from Martinique French West Indies) exhibiting a new pathogenic potential. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73, 6790–6801. ( 10 ) van de Bilt, J.L.J., Wolsink, M.H.L., Gorkink-Smits, P.P.M.A., Landman, N.M., Bergsma-Vlami, M. (2018). Application of Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometry for rapid and accurate identification of Ralstonia solanacearum and Ralstonia pseudosolanacearum . European Journal of Plant Pathology , ANNEX II Survey template referred to in Article 3(3) Template for presenting brown rot survey results for the potato and tomato harvests of the preceding calendar year. This table shall only be used for the survey results for the potatoes and tomatoes harvested in your country. ( 1 ) Shall be understood as macroscopic examination of tubers or crops. ( 2 ) Symptoms were found, a sample was taken and the laboratory testing confirmed the presence of the specified pest. ANNEX III Investigation referred to in Article 5(2), point (a), Article 5(3), first subparagraph, point (a) and in Article 5(4) first subparagraph, point (a) The investigation referred to in Article 5(2), point (a), in Article 5(3), first subparagraph, point (a), and in Article 5(4), first subparagraph, point (a), shall concern the following elements, where relevant: ANNEX IV Elements for the designation of items as probably infected by the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (b)(ii) and Article 5(4) second subparagraph, point (b) and for the determination of the possible spread of the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (c) and Article 5(4), first subparagraph, point (b) ANNEX V Eradication measures as referred to in Article 6 ( 1 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072 of 28 November 2019 establishing uniform conditions for the implementation of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and the Council, as regards protective measures against pests of plants, and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) No 690/2008 and amending Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2019 ( OJ L 319, 10.12.2019, p. 1 ). ANNEX VI Requirements for officially approved waste disposal as referred to in point (1) of Annex V The officially approved waste disposal methods referred to in point 1 of Annex V shall comply with the following requirements: