COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2025/1290 of 2 July 2025 laying down rules for the application of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the requirements necessary for the interoperability between the central system for the electronic submission and exchange of information and documents related to shipments of waste and other systems or software, as well as other technical and organisational requirements necessary for the practical implementation of such electronic submission and exchange of information and documents (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 April 2024 on shipments of waste, amending Regulations (EU) No 1257/2013 and (EU) 2020/1056 and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 27(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes the requirements necessary for the interoperability between the central system for the electronic submission and exchange of data, information and documents related to shipments of waste, as referred to in Article 27(3) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157, and other systems or software. It also lays down other technical and organisational requirements necessary for the practical implementation of such electronic submission and exchange of information and documents pursuant to that Regulation. Article 2 Definitions 1. The definitions set out in Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 shall apply. 2. For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Ownership and responsibilities for data, information and documents Each user shall own and be responsible for the data, information and documents this user inserts or produces in the systems. Competent authorities shall own and be responsible for the data, information and documents inserted or produced on their behalf by users authorised to perform competent authority’s role in the systems. In addition to the provisions of the first paragraph, national laws regulating liability of individuals acting on behalf of any natural or legal person, including competent authorities shall also apply. Article 4 Declaration on how to access the central system 1. By 3 February 2026, competent authorities shall declare to the Commission how they and users representing operators with a registered office in their Member State shall access the central system. For the purposes of such declaration, the competent authorities shall complete the form set out in Annex I to this Regulation. 2. After the date referred to in paragraph 1, a competent authority may change the declaration, in which case this authority shall submit to the Commission the revised declaration. The new rules on how to access the central system, indicated in the revised declaration shall start to apply 20 working days after the submission of the revised declaration, provided that the conditions set out in Articles 5 and 11 are met, unless the competent authority indicates, in the revised declaration, a specific date after 20 working days from the submission of the revised declaration. 3. A competent authority may indicate in the declaration referred to in paragraph 1 that this authority uses its local system only for the purpose of exchanging data, information and documents concerning the following: 4. Where, in its declaration, a competent authority includes the indication referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, local system operated by this authority shall not be required to comply with the following requirements of this Regulation: Article 5 User access obligations 1. Users who represent operators or competent authorities acting in the roles referred to in Article 10(1), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c) and points (e) to (g) shall only access the central system in the manner indicated in the declaration of the competent authority referred to in Article 4(1). 2. Users who represent operators acting only in the role referred to in Article 10(1), first subparagraph, point (d) shall access the central system through GUI or using an eFTI platform interconnected with the central system through an API. 3. Users who represent authorities involved in inspections acting in the role referred to in Article 10(1), first subparagraph, point (h) may access the central system in one of the following ways: 4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, users representing operators may access the central system through API using software that allows such a connection under the following conditions: 5. Where the competent authority declares that this authority accesses the central system through the API, users representing that authority may still access the central system through GUI for the purposes of the following activities: Article 6 User registration 1. Each user shall create a personal account in the system that this user uses to access the central system in accordance with Article 5 and Article 11(9). 2. Access to the data and information in the central system shall only be possible where a user represents operators or authorities. Each user may: 3. The central system shall differentiate between the following types of users: 4. Master users shall, when authorising a new user to represent an operator or an authority, determine whether the newly added user is a master user or a standard user. 5. Each operator shall have at least one master user and each authority shall have at least two master users to ensure service in cases of absence of one of the master users. Article 7 Registration of operators and sites in the central system 1. Where an operator or one of sites of the operator involved in the shipment of waste is not registered in the central system, the user representing them shall provide to the competent authority of the Member State in which the operator concerned has a registered office, the data regarding that operator that are set out in Annex II, Part E, point 2 and shall request for the operator or the site of the operator concerned to be registered in the central system. 2. The competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 shall, no later than five working days from the receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 1, verify the information received and take one of the following actions: 3. The competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 shall review the additional information received in accordance with paragraph 2, point (b), within three working days and shall take one of the following actions: 4. The competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 shall inform the operator, or the site of the operator, of the action taken pursuant to paragraph 3 no later than five working days from the receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 1 or no later than three working days after having received the additional information pursuant to paragraph 2, point (b). Where the competent authority refuses the registration of the operator, or the site of the operator, it shall inform the user requesting that registration about the reasons for the refusal. 5. Where the competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 authorises the first user to represent the operator or site concerned, such authorised user shall be a master user. 6. Where an operator based in a third country not connected to the central system is not registered in the central system, the Member State’s competent authority which in the context of a notification would act as competent authority of dispatch or destination, respectively, shall register the operator concerned based in the third country in the central system. The registration shall be performed at the request of the operator intending to act as a notifier or waste receiving facility, respectively, by recording in the central system the data of the operator referred to in Annex II Part E, point 2. 7. When registering operators in the central system, the competent authorities shall only verify whether the operator concerned exists and whether the user claiming to represent it is entitled to represent the operator concerned. When registering a site of an operator in the central system, the competent authority shall, in addition to the information indicated in the first subparagraph, verify whether the site is actually linked with the operator concerned. 8. Where a Member State has more than one competent authority, that Member State shall lay down rules on the division of competences between the competent authorities carrying out the registration of operators having a registered office in the territory of that Member State in the central system. 9. Where there is more than one competent authority in a Member State, the user representing an operator having a registered office in the territory of that Member State, shall indicate which of the competent authorities is competent for the registration of the operator in accordance with the applicable national rules referred to in paragraph 8. Article 8 Registration of authorities in the central system 1. Where an authority of a Member State is not registered in the central system, users representing that authority shall request the registration of that authority and provide the Commission with the relevant information of that authority and indicate whether that authority is a competent authority or an authority involved in inspections. 2. The Commission shall, no later than five working days from the receipt of such request, verify the information received pursuant to paragraph 1 and take one of the following actions: 3. The Commission shall review the additional information received in accordance with paragraph 2, point (b), within three working days and shall take one of the following actions: 4. The Commission shall inform the authority of the decision on registration no later than five working days from the receipt of the request referred to in paragraph 1 or no later than three working days from the receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 2, point (b). 5. Where the Commission has authorised the first user to represent the authority concerned, such authorised user shall be a master user. 6. Where a competent authority of a third country not connected to the central system is not registered in the central system, the Commission shall register that competent authority in the central system no later than five working days from the receipt of request to register such authority. The registration request shall be submitted by Member State’s competent authority which in the context of a notification would act as competent authority of dispatch, transit or destination, respectively. The competent authority of that Member State shall contact the Commission following a request of the operator that intends to export waste to such third country or to import from such third country and shall ensure the correctness of the information provided to the Commission. CHAPTER 2 REQUIREMENTS FOR INTEROPERABILITY BETWEEN THE CENTRAL SYSTEM AND LOCAL SYSTEMS OR SOFTWARE Article 9 Identification of operators and competent authorities in the systems 1. The systems and software shall identify operators on the basis of their main identification number. 2. Where the operator is registered for customs purposes pursuant to Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, the operator shall provide its EORI number as the main identification number under this Regulation. 3. Member States shall communicate, by 3 February 2026, to the Commission and to the operators what identification number shall be the main identification number for operators based in their Member State and not identified pursuant to paragraph 2. Member States shall also specify what registration numbers are required to be provided for purposes of registration in the systems or software. 4. The main identification number for operators based in third countries that are not required to register for customs purposes pursuant to Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, shall be another identification number, as provided by the legislation of the country, where this operator is based. 5. The systems and software shall allow for the identification of operators also on the basis of other identification numbers. 6. An operator may indicate in the systems or software whether it has one or more sites. Where an operator has one or more sites, the operator shall indicate whether and which of its sites is concerned by a given operation each time the operator acts in the systems or software. 7. The systems and software shall identify competent authorities based on their codes referred to in box 15 (b) of the form set out in Annex IA to Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. 8. The central system shall assign a specific code to the competent authority when the Commission authorises the first user to act on behalf of such authority. The code shall have the following characteristics: In cases referred to in Article 8(6), the specific code shall be assigned when the competent authority of the third country concerned is registered in the central system. Article 10 1. The systems shall allow operators and authorities to act in one or more of the following roles: Software shall allow operators to act in one or more of the roles referred to in points (b), (c), and (e) to (g) of the first subparagraph. 2. Operators shall act in the systems or software in one or more of the roles referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (b) to (g). 3. Competent authorities shall act in the systems in one or more of the roles referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a). Where relevant, competent authorities may also act in the systems in any of the roles referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (b) to (g). 4. Authorities involved in inspections shall act in the systems in the role referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h). 5. The roles referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a) shall be assigned as follows, depending on the declaration of the competent authority on how to access the central system, submitted in accordance with Article 4(1): 6. The role referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (h) shall be assigned through the central system by the Commission. Article 11 Interoperability testing process 1. The local systems shall be able to perform the operations set out in Annex II, in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 4 of this Article. 2. Where the competent authority indicates in the declaration referred to in Article 4(1) that the authority shall access the central system through an API with respect to the following actions, the local system operated by this authority shall be able to perform the following operations: 3. Where the competent authority indicates in the declaration referred to in Article 4(1) that the authority shall access the central system through an API, the following rules apply: 4. To facilitate the process of registration of users and authorising users to represent operators or their sites in the central system accessed through GUI, the local system of the competent authority responsible for such registration and authorisation may perform operations listed in Annex II Part G, where the competent authority indicates in the declaration referred to in Article 4(1) that: 5. Inspection systems shall be required to perform the operations set out in Part F of Annex II to this Regulation relevant to the data that such system is intended to obtain from the central system. Software shall be required to perform the operations set out in Annex II to this Regulation relevant to the scope of the functionalities it intends to offer. 6. The competent authority intending to access the central system through API shall perform tests confirming the ability of its local system to perform all the relevant operations referred to in Annex II or offer other functionalities implemented in the central system, where appropriate and relevant. 7. The tests referred to in paragraph 6 shall be completed at the latest 25 working days before the date from which the competent authority intends to access the central system through API. 8. The competent authority shall inform the Commission in writing whether the tests referred to in paragraph 6 were successfully completed or not. 9. Where the competent authority indicated in its declaration referred to in Article 4(1) that all users representing the operators referred to in Article 5(1) that have a registered office under the jurisdiction of that competent authority shall access the central system through local system, these users shall access the central system through GUI until that competent authority successfully completes the tests referred to in paragraph 6. 10. The competent authority referred to in paragraph 9 may further perform tests pursuant to paragraphs 7 and 8 to ensure the interoperability of the local system operated by this authority with the central system. 11. Where the tests referred to in paragraph 6 are successfully completed, the users referred to in paragraph 9 shall access the central system through API using the local system of the competent authority having jurisdiction over the operators represented by those users, in accordance with the competent authority’s declaration referred to in Article 4(1). That obligation shall apply after 25 working days from the date on which the competent authority provided the Commission with written confirmation of the successful completion of the tests. The competent authority may indicate in such confirmation a specific date falling after those 25 working days, in which case the users shall access the central system through API from that date. 12. Inspection systems and software may perform tests to confirm their ability to perform all the relevant operations referred to in paragraph 5 or other functionalities implemented in the central system, where appropriate and when relevant. Article 12 Protocol for exchange of data 1. Local systems shall use the protocol for exchange of data set out in Annex II for all relevant operations referred to in Article 11(1). 2. For the purposes of Article 5(4), the software shall use the protocol for exchange of data set out in Annex II for relevant operations. Article 13 Requirements for exchanging attached documents The systems and software shall allow for exchange of attached documents only in accordance with the following conditions: Article 14 Authentication of documents 1. All systems and software shall require their users to authenticate the following documents or elements: 2. The authentication referred to in paragraph 1 shall provide the following information: 3. All systems and software shall exchange the information referred to in paragraph 2 in accordance with Article 12. 4. All systems and software shall record and maintain audit logs containing the information set out in paragraph 2 and provide those logs upon request of the authorities. Article 15 Notification number, Annex VII document number, movement document number 1. Before a notifier submits a notification for shipments that start within the Union, the system or software the notifier is using shall allow for the generation of a notification number, in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article. 2. For the generation of a notification number referred to in paragraph 1, the system or software used by the notifier shall require the notifier to provide the following information: 3. A notification number for shipments where the country of dispatch is a Member State shall have the following characteristics: 4. Where waste is imported to the Union or transits through the Union from and to third countries, the systems or software shall perform the following functions: 5. Paragraph 3 of this Article shall apply to the attribution of numbers to Annex VII documents with the following modifications: 6. Regarding shipments of waste referred to in Article 4(1), (2) or (3) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 that start within the Union, the systems or software shall assign a movement document number upon submission of a movement document. The movement document number shall have the following characteristics: A movement document serial number shall be assigned by the systems or software when the movement document is submitted. It shall consist of 6 digits. Where relevant, that serial number shall be prefixed with one or more zeros. 7. Where waste is imported into the Union or transits through the Union from and to third countries, the systems shall perform the following functions: 8. Where waste is imported into the Union or transits through the Union from and to third countries, and where there are no national rules on the structure and assignment of movement document numbers in the country of dispatch and no such number was attributed to the movement document, the notifier shall introduce the movement document number in the system the notifier is using in accordance with the requirements referred to in paragraph 6. 9. A notification number, an Annex VII document number and a movement document number shall not be used again even where that submitted notification, Annex VII document or movement document was cancelled, withdrawn or otherwise ineffective. Article 16 Pre-consented facilities 1. The systems shall allow the competent authorities to submit the following information concerning pre-consented facilities, referred to in Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157: 2. The systems shall make the information referred to in paragraph 1 available for all the users. 3. The systems and software shall allow the notifiers, when submitting the notification, to indicate whether the shipment is destined to a pre-consented facility. Where the notifier indicates that the shipment is destined to a pre-consented facility, the systems shall apply the procedures set out in Article 14(12) and (14) to (16) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. The competent authority concerned may refuse to apply such procedures, in which case the systems shall allow the competent authorities to inform about such refusal. Article 17 Functionalities of the systems 1. The systems, and where relevant, software shall have all the functionalities referred to in this Article. 2. Where in the notification document or the Annex VII document the operator indicates the same entity for the ‘importer – consignee’ and the ‘facility’ to which waste is shipped, the systems shall not allow the execution of the following operations referred to in Annex II, Parts B and C: 3. The systems shall allow users performing the operations ‘submit new notification’, ‘update notification’, ‘submit movement document’, ‘update movement document’, ‘submit Annex VII document’ and ‘update Annex VII document’, where relevant, referred to in Annex II to this Regulation to insert multiple entries regarding the following: 4. The systems shall allow users performing operations ‘create operator’ and ‘update operator’ referred to in Annex II Part E to this Regulation to insert multiple entries regarding the following: 5. The systems shall require the provision of a separate facility reception confirmation for each movement document submitted. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply as appropriate to consignee reception confirmations and to facility completion certificates. 6. The systems shall ensure that data in movement documents corresponds to the respective data in the notification document in the following manner: Where new data that is not included in the notification document is to be added to the movement documents, the consignee reception confirmations, the facility reception confirmations or the facility completion certificates, the systems shall require that the notification document be first updated with such new data. 7. The systems shall not generate more movement documents than the total number of shipments indicated in box 4 of the corresponding notification document or in the conditions attached to the consent of any of the competent authorities concerned, if those conditions specify a smaller number than that indicated in the notification document. 8. Where a movement document is cancelled and the shipment covered by such movement document does not take place, such cancelled movement document shall not be counted in the systems towards the number of movement documents, referred to in paragraph 7, that can be generated following a notification. 9. Where the notifier indicates in the notification document that it intends to carry out an ‘individual shipment’, the systems shall only allow to indicate ‘1’ in box 4 of the notification document. Where the notifier indicates in the notification document that it intends to carry out ‘multiple shipments’, the systems shall only allow to indicate numbers greater than 1 in box 4 of the notification document. 10. The systems shall allow the notifier to indicate in the movement documents only the quantity of waste to be shipped that is equal or less than the value of the ‘total intended quantity of waste’ referred to in box 5 of the notification document or in conditions attached to the consent of any of the competent authorities concerned, if these conditions specify lower quantity than indicated in the notification document. 11. The systems shall only allow the competent authorities to perform the operation ‘update decision’ referred to in Annex II, Part A, in relation to decisions they submitted in accordance with Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 in the following manner: 12. The systems shall only allow users that represent the competent authority who submitted the request to perform the operations ‘update take-back request’ and ‘update take-back request – Annex VII document’, referred to in Annex II Parts B and C. 13. The systems shall consider, and duly mark, the notification as properly completed in accordance with Article 8(11) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 by the competent authority of transit, in the following cases: 14. Where the notifier requests a change in the consented notification in accordance with Article 17(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157, the systems and software shall presume that the consent for such a change was agreed by all the competent authorities, in accordance with Article 17(2) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157, only where all the competent authorities concerned indicated in the systems that they agree with the requested change. Where there is agreement pursuant to the first subparagraph, the competent authority of dispatch shall introduce in the systems the agreed change in the consented notification. In case of import of waste to the Union, the change shall be introduced in the systems by the competent authority of destination. Where waste transits through the Union, the change shall be introduced by the competent authority of transit of the first Member State through which that waste transits. CHAPTER 3 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION AND EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTS Article 18 Access requirements 1. Each operator shall have access to the information and documents they submitted or manage through the systems or software. 2. Each operator acting in the systems or software in the role of a waste producer, a notifier, a consignee or a facility receiving waste shall have access to the information and documents concerning shipments of waste referred to in in Article 4(1), (2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 in which they are involved. 3. Each operator acting in the systems or software in the role of a waste producer, a person who arranges the shipment, a consignee or a facility receiving waste shall have access to the information and documents concerning shipments of waste referred to in Article 4(4) or (5) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 in which they are involved. 4. Each operator acting in the central system or software in the role of carrier shall have access to the following documents and information: 5. Each authority acting in the systems in the role of a competent authority shall have access to the following: 6. Each authority acting in the role of authority involved in inspections shall have access to all data, information and documents concerning any shipment of waste, and may store such relevant data, information and documents for the purposes of enforcement, in particular criminal proceedings, in accordance with national rules regarding storage of such data, information and documents. 7. The systems and, where relevant, software shall display the following information: 8. The systems and software shall display the information referred to in paragraph 7 starting from the date on which a user authenticated a document submitted in the system, as referred to in Article 14(2), point (a). 9. The local systems and software shall display the information referred to in paragraph 7 in a clear and visible manner for all users involved in a given shipment, in such a way that the stage of the procedure can be clearly identified at any time. 10. The Commission may access information and documents exchanged in the central system in order to comply with its obligations pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 and to ensure the proper functioning of the central system. Article 19 Storage requirements 1. The systems and software shall store all the information and documents exchanged through the central system in accordance with Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. 2. Where the information or documents were updated after submission in the central system by any of the users, the provisions of paragraph 1 shall concern the storage of the following information and documents: Article 20 Reciprocal exchange of data and their synchronisation 1. The exchange of data between the central system and local systems or software shall be reciprocal. 2. Synchronisation of data introduced in a system shall be performed after every operation referred to in Annex II Parts A to E, and in any case at least every 12 hours. 3. The provisions of this Article do not apply to inspection systems and any software that interoperates with the central system only for the purposes of information and document retrieval. Article 21 Security The systems and software shall be designed and developed in such a way that they achieve an appropriate level of security, in particular cybersecurity, and that they perform consistently in those respects throughout their lifecycle. Article 22 Data governance The systems and software shall ensure that the data they collect is of high quality, including by application of data quality verification mechanisms and data accuracy monitoring tools. Article 23 Data confidentiality The systems and software shall be designed and developed in such a way that they ensure confidentiality of the data exchanged, including protection against unauthorized or unlawful access and against accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical measures. Article 24 Storage of personal data 1. The systems or software shall store personal data from information and documents exchanged in accordance with Article 27(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 for five years as follows: 2. Where the certificates referred to in paragraph 1 are not issued within one year following the deadlines referred to, respectively, in Article 15(4), Article 16(6) or Article 18(9) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157, the systems or software shall store personal data from information and documents exchanged in accordance with Article 27(1) of that Regulation for the following time periods: 3. Where not all the concerned competent authorities consented to the notification, the systems or software shall store personal data from information and documents exchanged in accordance with Article 27(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 for five years from the date on which a notification was submitted in the systems or software. 4. Data, information and documents containing personal data stored by the authorities involved in inspections for the purposes of enforcement, as referred to in Article 18(6), shall be stored no longer than necessary for that purpose in accordance with national laws. Article 25 General provision on data protection 1. Processing of personal data may take place in the systems and software for the purposes of achieving the objectives of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157, in particular to ensure the protection of the environment and human health related to shipments of waste. The systems and software shall enable the exchange of information, documents or data between competent authorities, authorities involved in inspections and operators and consequently the processing of personal data, to ensure the following activities: 2. Processing of personal data may take place in the systems or software only in respect of the following categories of data subjects: 3. Processing of personal data may take place in the systems or software only in respect of the following categories of personal data: 4. The competent authorities of the Member States, and where relevant, of the third countries, shall be regarded as the controllers within the meaning of Article 4(7) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 with respect to personal data exchanged through the central system in accordance with Article 27(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 and this Regulation. The competent authorities of the Member States, and where relevant, of the third countries, shall process such data for the purposes referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Controllers shall ensure the security, integrity, authenticity and confidentiality of the data processed for the purposes set out in Article 25(1) of this Regulation. 5. Notwithstanding paragraph 4, the Commission shall be regarded as controller within the meaning of Article 3(8) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 with respect to personal data exchanged through the central system in accordance with Article 27(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 and this Regulation. The Commission may process such data for the following purposes: CHAPTER 4 OTHER REQUIREMENTS Article 26 Other obligations of competent authorities 1. Competent authorities shall provide the Commission, no later than 3 June 2026, a list of facilities for which they issued pre-consents in accordance with Article 14(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 13 ) , indicating the following information: 2. Competent authorities shall without undue delay inform operators under their jurisdiction of the following elements: 3. Competent authorities shall provide the Commission with the e-mail addresses of contact points responsible for the functioning of the local system or, in cases where competent authorities access the central system through GUI, the e-mail addresses of contact points responsible for the electronic exchange of information and documents pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. 4. Competent authorities shall ensure that operators with a registered office in their Member State can address to them any question on the use of the systems or software, including through organising a helpdesk function and offering trainings on the use of the system. Article 27 Obligation of the Commission 1. The Commission shall publish on its website the following information concerning all the competent authorities: 2. The Commission shall provide support as follows to the following entities: CHAPTER 5 FINAL PROVISIONS Article 28 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 2 July 2025. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L, 2024/1157, 30.4.2024, ELI: . ( 2 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2024/2571 of 19 July 2024 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2024/1157 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing the information to be provided in the certificate confirming the completion of a subsequent interim or non-interim recovery operation or a subsequent interim or non-interim disposal operation ( OJ L, 2024/2571, 27.9.2024, ELI: ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1 , ELI: ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EU) 2024/903 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 March 2024 laying down measures for a high level of public sector interoperability across the Union (Interoperable Europe Act) ( OJ L, 2024/903, 22.3.2024, ELI: ). ( 5 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) ( OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1 , ELI: ). ( 6 ) Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA ( OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 89 , ELI: ). ( 7 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC ( OJ L 295, 21.11.2018, p. 39 , ELI: ). ( 8 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: A Competitiveness Compass for the EU, COM(2025) 30 final. ( 9 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 , ELI: ). ( 10 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2020 on electronic freight transport information ( OJ L 249, 31.7.2020, p. 33 , ELI: ). ( 11 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1 , ELI: ). ( 12 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/1942 of 5 July 2024 laying down common procedures and detailed rules for accessing and processing electronic freight transport information by competent authorities in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2020/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L, 2024/1942, 20.12.2024, ELI: ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste ( OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 , ELI: ). ANNEX I DECLARATION ON HOW TO ACCESS ANNEX II PROTOCOL FOR THE EXCHANGE OF DATA PART A PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE OF DATA RELATED TO THE NOTIFICATION REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 27(1) POINT (A), (I) TO (VIII), (X) AND (XV) AND ARTICLE 24(1) POINT (C), OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157 1. SUBMIT NEW NOTIFICATION This operation is used to submit a new notification. Input parameters: Output parameters: 2. SUBMIT REQUEST FOR INFORMATION This operation is used to submit a request for information and documentation in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. This operation can be used by any CA concerned. Input parameters: Output parameters: 3. UPDATE REQUEST FOR INFORMATION This operation is used to update a request for information and documentation in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. This operation can be used by any CA concerned in order to extend the time for reply. Input parameters: Output parameters: 4. SUBMIT REPLY TO REQUEST FOR INFORMATION This operation is used by the notifier to submit a reply to competent authority’s request for information and documentation. Input parameters: Output parameters: 5. SUBMIT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This operation is used by competent authority to submit an acknowledgement of receipt of a properly completed notification for waste imported into the EU, exported from the EU or transited through the EU. Input parameters: Output parameters: 6. DECLINE THE ‘PRE-CONSENTED FACILITY’ STATUS OF WASTE RECEIVING FACILITY FOR THE NOTIFICATION CONCERNED This operation is used by CAs to decline the ‘pre-consented facility’ status of waste receiving facility for a given notification in case the shipment does not fall into the scope of pre-consent. Input parameters: Output parameters: 7. DISREGARD TIMELINES (ARTICLE 14(16) OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157) This operation is used by CAs to inform the notifier and other CAs that they need more time to decide over a notification destined for pre-consented facility, as referred to in Article 14(16) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. Input parameters: Output parameters: 8. SUBMIT DECISION This operation is used to submit a decision concerning a notification, by referring to its number. Each competent authority is allowed to submit only one decision, that can be later updated. Input parameters: Output parameters: 9. UPDATE INFORMATION ON CONFIDENTIALITY OF WASTE RECEIVING FACILITY NAME This operation is used by CAs to indicate, that the name of the waste receiving facility shall not be published by the Commission in accordance with Article 21 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157, as it is confidential in accordance with Union or national law. Input parameters: Output parameters: 10. UPDATE NOTIFICATION This operation is used to update the notification Input parameters: Output parameters: 11. UPDATE DECISION This operation is used to update the decision based on its ID. The update may take one of the following forms: changing of the decision type or changing the conditions of the consent. Input parameters: Output parameters: 12. SUBMIT REQUEST FOR CHANGE AFTER CONSENT (ARTICLE 17 OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157) This operation is used by a notifier to submit a request for changes of the notification after it has been already consented to, in accordance with Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. Input parameters: Output parameters: 13. SUBMIT REPLY TO REQUEST FOR CHANGE AFTER CONSENT (ARTICLE 17 OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157) This operation is used by the CAs to submit a reply to notifier’s request to change after consent. Input parameters: Output parameters: 14. PROPERLY CARRIED OUT This operation is used by the CA of dispatch to inform that they are satisfied with the notification and consider it properly carried out. Input parameters: Output parameters: 15. PROPERLY COMPLETED This operation is used by the CA of destination and/or transit to inform that they are satisfied with the notification and consider it properly completed. Input parameters: Output parameters: 16. NOTIFICATION INVALID This operation is used by the CA to decide that the notification is not valid in accordance with Article 8(5) or (10) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. Input parameters: Output parameters: 17. NOTIFICATION REVALIDATED This operation is used by the CA to revalidate a notification. Input parameters: Output parameters: 18. CANCEL NOTIFICATION This operation is used to cancel the already submitted notification. Input parameters: Output parameters: 19. NOTIFICATION COMPLETED This operation is used by the CA to close a completed notification. Input parameters: Output parameters: PART B PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE OF DATA RELATED TO THE MOVEMENT DOCUMENT REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 27(1), POINT (A) (XI) AND (XIV), AND ARTICLE 24(1), POINT (C), OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157 1. SUBMIT MOVEMENT DOCUMENT This operation is used to submit a movement document based on the consented notification. Input parameters: Output parameters: 2. UPDATE MOVEMENT DOCUMENT This operation is used to update a movement document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 3. SUBMIT CARRIER TRANSFER CONFIRMATION This operation is used by carrier(s) to submit a confirmation of receipt of waste with respect to waste shipped based on a given movement document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 4. UPDATE CARRIER TRANSFER CONFIRMATION This operation is used to update an existing carrier transfer confirmation. Input parameters: Output parameters: 5. SUBMIT CONSIGNEE RECEPTION CONFIRMATION This operation is used to submit a consignee reception confirmation of shipped waste in case the consignee is not a waste treatment facility. Input parameters: Output parameters: 6. UPDATE CONSIGNEE RECEPTION CONFIRMATION This operation is used to update a consignee reception confirmation of shipped waste in case the consignee is not a waste treatment facility. Input parameters: Output parameters: 7. SUBMIT FACILITY RECEPTION CONFIRMATION This operation is used by waste treatment facility to submit a confirmation of receipt of shipped waste. Input parameters: Output parameters: 8. UPDATE FACILITY RECEPTION CONFIRMATION This operation is used by waste treatment facility to update confirmation of receipt of shipped waste. Input parameters: Output parameters: 9. SUBMIT FACILITY COMPLETION CERTIFICATE This operation is used by waste treatment facility to submit a certificate confirming completion of treatment of waste shipped thereto. Input parameters: Output parameters: 10. UPDATE FACILITY COMPLETION CERTIFICATE This operation is used by waste treatment facility to update a certificate confirming completion of treatment of waste shipped thereto. Input parameters: Output parameters: 11. SUBMIT TAKE-BACK REQUEST This operation is used to submit a take-back request by CA. Input parameters: Output parameters: 12. UPDATE TAKE-BACK REQUEST This operation is used to update an already submitted take-back request. Input parameters: Output parameters: 13. CANCEL MOVEMENT DOCUMENT This operation is used to cancel the already submitted movement document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 14. SUBMIT FACILITY COMPLETION CERTIFICATE UNDER ARTICLE 15(5) OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157 This operation is used by the subsequent interim or non-interim facility located in the country of destination to submit a certificate confirming completion of treatment of waste shipped thereto according to Article 15(5) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. The column ‘box of Annex I’ refers to box of Annex I of the Delegated Regulation (EU) 2024/2571. Input parameters: Output parameters: 15. UPDATE FACILITY COMPLETION CERTIFICATE UNDER ARTICLE 15(5) OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157 This operation is used by the subsequent interim or non-interim facility located in the country of destination to update the already submitted certificate confirming completion of treatment of waste shipped thereto according to Article 15(5) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1157. The column ‘box of Annex I’ refers to box of Annex I of the Delegated Regulation (EU) 2024/2571. Input parameters: Output parameters: PART C PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE OF DATA RELATED TO INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTATION REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 27(1), POINTS (B) AND (C), OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157 1. SUBMIT ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to submit an Annex VII document. Once submitted, Annex VII document number is generated. Input parameters: Output parameters: 2. UPDATE ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to update Annex VII document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 3. SUBMIT CARRIER TRANSFER CONFIRMATION – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used by carrier(s) to submit a confirmation of receipt of waste with respect to waste shipped based on a given Annex VII document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 4. UPDATE CARRIER TRANSFER CONFIRMATION – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used by carrier(s) to update a confirmation of receipt of waste with respect to waste shipped based on a given Annex VII document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 5. SUBMIT CONSIGNEE RECEPTION CONFIRMATION – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to submit consignee reception confirmation concerning waste shipped based on Annex VII documents. Input parameters: Output parameters: 6. UPDATE CONSIGNEE RECEPTION CONFIRMATION – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to update consignee reception confirmation concerning waste shipped based on Annex VII documents. Input parameters: Output parameters: 7. SUBMIT FACILITY RECEPTION CONFIRMATION – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to submit facility reception confirmation concerning waste shipped based on Annex VII documents. Input parameters: Output parameters: 8. UPDATE FACILITY RECEPTION CONFIRMATION – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to update facility reception confirmation concerning waste shipped based on Annex VII documents. Input parameters: Output parameters: 9. SUBMIT FACILITY COMPLETION CERTIFICATE – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to submit facility completion certificate concerning treatment of waste shipped based on Annex VII documents. Input parameters: Output parameters: 10. UPDATE FACILITY COMPLETION CERTIFICATE – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to update facility completion certificate concerning treatment of waste shipped based on Annex VII documents. Input parameters: Output parameters: 11. SUBMIT TAKE-BACK REQUEST – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to submit a take-back request concerning waste to be shipped based on Annex VII document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 12. UPDATE TAKE-BACK REQUEST – ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used by competent authority to update the submitted take-back request concerning waste to be shipped based on Annex VII document. Input parameters: Output parameters: 13. CANCEL ANNEX VII DOCUMENT This operation is used to cancel the already submitted Annex VII document. Input parameters: Output parameters: PART D PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE OF DATA RELATED TO DECISIONS TO ISSUE PRE-CONSENTS TO SPECIFIC RECOVERY FACILITIES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 27(1), POINT (A)(IX), OF REGULATION (EU) 2024/1157 1. SUBMIT INFORMATION ON NEW PRE-CONSENTED FACILITY This operation is used to submit information on a new pre-consented facility. Input parameters: Output parameters: 2. UPDATE INFORMATION ON PRE-CONSENTED FACILITY This operation is used to update information on pre-consented facility. Input parameters: Output parameters: PART E PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE OF DATA RELATED TO OTHER OPERATIONS 1. UPLOAD ATTACHMENT This operation is used to upload attachments to a given file in the system. Input parameters: Output parameters: 2. CREATE OPERATOR This operation is used to create a new operator in the system. Input parameters: Output parameters: 3. UPDATE OPERATOR This operation is used to update a new operator in the system. Input parameters: Output parameters: PART F PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE OF DATA RELATED TO OTHER SYNCHRONISATION OPERATIONS Operations listed in this Part are used by users accessing the central system via the API in order to retrieve the data that was inserted in the central system by users accessing it via the GUI or API. 1. GET ALL ACTIONS This operation allows to retrieve the list of actions IDs in which a given actor is involved. In result of its performance, a list of notifications, movement documents and Annex VII documents will be displayed. Input parameters: Output parameters: 2. GET ALL NOTIFICATIONS This operation allows to retrieve a list of notifications submitted in a given period of time. Input parameters: Output parameters: 3. GET NOTIFICATION BY ID Description: This operation allows to retrieve the content of a notification searched based on its number. Input parameters: Output parameters: 4. GET ALL MOVEMENT DOCUMENTS BY NOTIFICATION NUMBER The operation allows to retrieve a list of movement documents related to a specific notification based on its number. Input parameters: Output parameters: 5. GET MOVEMENT DOCUMENT BY ID Description: This operation allows to retrieve the content of a movement document searched based on its number. Input parameters: Output parameters: 6. GET ATTACHMENT DETAILS BY ID This operation allows to retrieve details and content of an attachment searched based on its ID. Input parameters: Output parameters: 7. GET ALL ANNEX VII DOCUMENTS This operation allows to retrieve a list of all the Annex VII documents submitted in a given period of time. Input parameters: Output parameters: 8. GET ANNEX VII DOCUMENT BY ID This operation allows to retrieve the content of an Annex VII document searched based on its number. Input parameters: Output parameters: 9. GET ALL INFORMATION ON PRE-CONSENTED FACILITIES This operation allows to retrieve information on pre-consented facilities. If none of input parameters is provided the entire list will be retrieved. Input parameters: Output parameters: 10. GET ACTION DETAILS BY ACTION ID This operation allows to retrieve the details of an action searched based on its ID. Input parameters: Output parameters: 11. GET OPERATOR DETAILS This operation allows to retrieve the details of an operator based on its Operator ID. Input parameters: Output parameters: 12. GET INFORMATION ON CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE WASTE RECEIVING FACILITY NAME This operation allows to retrieve the details of whether confidentiality of the waste receiving facility name or not. Input parameters: Output parameters: 13. GET ALL OPERATORS This operation allows to retrieve the list of operator IDs that meet the provided input parameters. Input parameters: Output parameters: PART G PROTOCOL FOR EXCHANGE OF DATA RELATED TO OPERATIONS CONCERNING USER MANAGEMENT, REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 11(4) OF THIS REGULATION 1. GET AUTHORISATION REQUESTS This operation is used by CAs to retrieve the pending requests of users that asked for authorisation to represent an operator in the central system. Input parameters: no input parameters are needed. The CA performing this operation will retrieve all the requests of users that that asked for authorisation to represent an operator, for which the CA is selected as the registering CA. Output parameters: 2. APPROVE AUTHORISATION REQUESTS This operation is used by CAs to approve the pending requests of users that asked for authorisation to represent an operator in the central system. Input parameters: Output parameters: ANNEX III OPERATIONS TO BE PERFORMED BY THE SYSTEMS, REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 11 ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)