Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2022 (2021/C 514 I/01) Over the past 2 years, our Union has faced the far-reaching effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with ever more apparent disastrous consequences of climate change and disruptive world events. We have shown that by acting together, rapidly and decisively, we can overcome such defining challenges. With the help of the 2021-2027 long-term EU budget, of NextGenerationEU, and the Recovery and Resilience Facility at its heart, Europe’s economy is forecast to rebound faster than initially expected. These historic instruments provide us with the unique chance to emerge stronger from the crisis caused by the pandemic, make our economies and societies fairer, greener, more digital, and create opportunities and jobs for a Europe our citizens want to live in. That strategic vision for a reinvigorated and more resilient Union, enshrined in our three institutions’ first ever Joint Conclusions on policy objectives and priorities for 2020-2024 ( 1 ) , will continue to guide us. Improving the EU’s resilience, including in health and cybersecurity, will be key to making this transformation a tangible reality. To better defend its interests and values and help shape the new global environment, we will need to strengthen Europe’s capacity to act autonomously and its global influence. For the sake of Europe’s future, we must protect and defend our fundamental values and the rule of law within our Union and its Member States. The transformation of our continent can only happen with the consent of our citizens. We have provided avenues to make their voices heard through the Conference on the Future of Europe. We remain committed to follow up on the outcome of the Conference. Delivery and implementation will become an even more important focus as we approach the mid-term of the institutional cycle. This will ultimately help translate our vision for Europe into benefits for citizens’ daily lives. This Joint Declaration for 2022, building on our commitments and achievements of 2021, is testimony to our shared resolve to deliver on the policy objectives and priorities of the Joint Conclusions. With this Joint Declaration, we put the spotlight on core legislative proposals ( 2 ) to which the three institutions will dedicate their best efforts to ensure that as much progress as possible can be made before the end of 2022. This concerns both the initiatives that are currently in the hands of the co-legislators, and those that the European Commission will put forward by autumn of 2022. The three institutions agree to give the utmost priority in 2022 to the following key policy objectives: In addition, we recall our commitment: The three institutions commit to work on these shared 2022 priorities guided by the principles of mutual trust, respect and a collaborative spirit. We will also ensure proper implementation and enforcement of existing legislation. We will work with determination to deliver for our citizens a greener, fairer, stronger, more digital and more resilient Europe: a Union which does not leave anyone behind, and which stands up assertively for its core values both abroad and at home. We, as Presidents of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission, will closely monitor the timely and effective implementation of this Joint Declaration. Съставено в Брюксел на шестнадесети декември две хиляди двадесет и първа година. Hecho en Bruselas, el dieciseis de diciembre de dos mil veintiuno. V Bruselu dne šestnáctého prosince dva tisíce dvacet jedna. Udfærdiget i Bruxelles den sekstende december to tusind og enogtyve. Geschehen zu Brüssel am sechzehnten Dezember zweitausendeinundzwanzig. Kahe tuhande kahekümne esimese aasta detsembrikuu kuueteistkümnendal päeval Brüsselis. Έγινε στις Βρυξέλλες, στις δέκα έξι Δεκεμβρίου δύο χιλιάδες είκοσι ένα. Done at Brussels on the sixteenth day of December in the year two thousand and twenty one. Fait à Bruxelles, le seize décembre deux mille vingt et un. Arna dhéanamh sa Bhruiséil, an séú lá déag de mhí na Nollag sa bhliain dhá mhíle fiche agus a haon. Sastavljeno u Bruxellesu šesnaestog prosinca godine dvije tisuće dvadeset prve. Fatto a Bruxelles, addì sedici dicembre duemilaventuno. Briselē, divi tūkstoši divdesmit pirmā gada sešpadsmitajā decembrī. Priimta du tūkstančiai dvidešimt pirmų metų gruodžio šešioliktą dieną Briuselyje. Kelt Brüsszelben, a kétezer-huszonegyedik év december havának tzenhatodik napján. Magħmul fi Brussell, fis-sittax-il jum ta’ Diċembru fis-sena elfejn u wieħed u għoxrin. Gedaan te Brussel, zestien december tweeduizend eenentwintig. Sporządzono w Brukseli dnia szesnastego grudnia roku dwa tysiące dwudziestego pierwszego. Feito em Bruxelas, em dezasseis de dezembro de dois mil e vinte e um. Întocmit la Bruxelles la șaisprezece decembrie două mii douăzeci și unu. V Bruseli šestnásteho decembra dvetisícdvadsaťjeden. V Bruslju, šestnajstega decembra dva tisoč enaindvajset. Tehty Brysselissä kuudentenatoista päivänä joulukuuta vuonna kaksituhattakaksikymmentäyksi. Som skedde i Bryssel den sextonde december år tjugohundratjugoett. ( 1 ) OJ C 18 I, 18.1.2021, p. 5 . ( 2 ) Under the Ordinary Legislative Procedure.