COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2019/403 of 13 March 2019 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Deosan Activate BPF based on Iodine’ THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation is granted to Diversey Europe Operations B.V. for the biocidal product family ‘Deosan Activate BPF based on Iodine’ with authorisation number EU-0019228-0000. The Union authorisation is valid from 3 April 2019 until 31 March 2029. The Union authorisation is subject to compliance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 13 March 2019. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/2100 of 4 September 2017 setting out scientific criteria for the determination of endocrine-disrupting properties pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and Council ( OJ L 301, 17.11.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) ECHA opinion of 6 July 2018 on the Union authorisation of ‘Deosan Activate BPF based on Iodine’ (ECHA/BPC/207/2018). Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Deosan Activate BPF based on Iodine Product type 3 — Veterinary hygiene (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0019228-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0019228-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL — META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1 – Pre-milking disinfection, manual dipping (concentrate) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use For products containing 1,5 % iodine this can be: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. Apply directly to animal teats pre-milking via manual dipping method. 3 pre-milking applications, per animal, per day Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 2 – Pre-milking disinfection, manual foaming (concentrate) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. Apply directly to animal teats pre-milking via manual foaming application method. 3 pre-milking applications, per animal, per day Apply a maximum of 5 ml product/animal/application 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 3 – Pre-milking disinfection, manual spraying (concentrate) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. Apply directly to animal teats pre-milking via manual spraying application method. 3 pre-milking applications, per animal, per day Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4. Use description Table 4. Use # 4 – Post-milking disinfection, manual dipping (concentrate) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via manual dipping method. For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (5 applications in total) Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5. Use description Table 5. Use # 5 – Post-milking disinfection, manual foaming (concentrate) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via manual foaming method. For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day Apply a maximum of 5 ml product/animal/application 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.6. Use description Table 6. Use # 6 – Post-milking disinfection, manual spraying (concentrate) 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via manual spraying method. For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7. Use description Table 7. Use # 7 – Post-milking disinfection, automatic spraying (concentrate) 4.7.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via automatic spraying method. For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. 5 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Not to be combined with Iodine based pre-milking disinfection. Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.7.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8. Use description Table 8. Use # 8 – Post-milking disinfection, semi-automatic dipping (concentrate) 4.8.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via semi-automatic dipping method. For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.8.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.9. Use description Table 9. Use # 9 – Pre and post-milking disinfection, manual dipping (concentrate) 4.9.1. Use-specific instructions for use For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. Apply directly to animal teats pre and post milking via manual dipping method. 3 pre and 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (up to 5 applications in total) Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.9.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.9.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.9.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.9.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.10. Use description Table 10. Use # 10 – Pre and post-milking disinfection, manual foaming (concentrate) 4.10.1. Use-specific instructions for use For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. Apply directly to animal teats pre and post milking via manual foaming application method. 3 pre and 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (up to 5 applications in total) Apply a maximum of 5 ml product/animal/application 4.10.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.10.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.10.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.10.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.11. Use description Table 11. Use # 11 – Pre and post-milking disinfection, manual spraying (concentrate) 4.11.1. Use-specific instructions for use For products containing 1,5 % iodine: Dilute 1 part of product to 4 parts water to achieve 0,3 % in use iodine concentration. For products with another concentration this instruction should be adapted. Apply directly to animal teats pre and post milking via manual spraying application method. 3 pre and 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (up to 5 applications in total) Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.11.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) Wear suitable protective footwear (EN 13832) when applying the product. A protective coverall (at least type 6, EN 13034) shall be worn 4.11.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.11.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.11.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to temperature > 20 °C before use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures This product can be used for pre- and post-milking disinfection in combination (up to 5 applications in total per animal per day). However, it should not be used in combination with a different iodine-based product. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Inhalation: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Skin contact: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Eye contact: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Ingestion: No known effects or symptoms in normal use After inhalation: Supply fresh air; consult doctor in case of symptoms. After skin contact: Instantly wash with water and soap and rinse thoroughly. After eye contact: Rinse opened eye for several minutes under running water (at least 15 minutes). After swallowing: Rinse out mouth and then drink plenty of water. Instantly call for doctor. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand Stability and reactivity: Environmental precautions: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Empty containers must be tripled rinsed prior to disposal Paper towels used to dry animal teats and remove the product from them should be disposed of as normal/domestic waste. Do not discharge undiluted product to sewers. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store only in original, closed container Protect from frost Do not store at temperatures above 40 °C Shelf life 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 12. Use # 1 – Pre-milking disinfection, manual dipping (RTU liquid) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats pre-milking via manual dipping methods. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 pre-milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2. Use description Table 13. Use # 2 – Pre-milking disinfection, manual foaming (RTU liquid) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. Apply directly to animal teats pre-milking via manual foaming application method. 3 pre-milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 5 ml product/animal/application 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3. Use description Table 14. Use # 3 – Pre-milking disinfection, manual spraying (RTU liquid) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats pre-milking via manual spraying method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 pre-milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4. Use description Table 15. Use # 4 – Post-milking disinfection, manual dipping (RTU liquid) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via manual dipping method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5. Use description Table 16. Use # 5 – Post-milking disinfection, manual foaming (RTU liquid) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via manual foaming method.) Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 5 ml product/animal/application 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.6. Use description Table 17. Use # 6 – Post-milking disinfection, manual spraying (RTU liquid) 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via manual spraying method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7. Use description Table 18. Use # 7 – Post-milking disinfection, automatic spraying (not to be combined with a pre-milking disinfection (RTU liquid) 4.7.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via automatic spraying method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 5 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Not to be combined with iodine based pre-milking disinfection. Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.7.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.7.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8. Use description Table 19. Use # 8 – Post-milking disinfection, semi-automatic dipping (RTU liquid) 4.8.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via semi-automatic dipping method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.8.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.8.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.9. Use description Table 20. Use # 9 – Pre and post milking disinfection, manual dipping (RTU liquid) 4.9.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats pre-milking via manual dipping methods. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 pre and 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (up to 5 applications in total). Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.9.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) 4.9.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.9.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.9.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.10. Use description Table 21. Use # 10 – Pre and post milking disinfection, manual foaming (RTU liquid) 4.10.1. Use-specific instructions for use Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. Apply directly to animal teats pre and post milking via manual foaming application method. 3 pre and 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (up to 5 applications in total). Apply a maximum of 5 ml product/animal/application 4.10.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) 4.10.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.10.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.10.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.11. Use description Table 22. Use # 11 – Pre and post milking disinfection, manual spraying (RTU liquid) 4.11.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats pre and post milking via manual spraying method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 pre and 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (up to 5 applications in total). Apply a maximum of 15 ml product/animal/application 4.11.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information Wear suitable protective footwear (EN 13832) when applying the product. A protective coverall (at least type 6, EN 13034) shall be worn 4.11.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.11.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.11.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to temperature > 20 °C before use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures This product can be used for pre- and post-milking disinfection in combination (up to 5 applications in total per animal per day). However, it should not be used in combination with a different iodine-based product The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Inhalation: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Skin contact: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Eye contact: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Ingestion: No known effects or symptoms in normal use After inhalation: Supply fresh air; consult doctor in case of symptoms. After skin contact: Instantly wash with water and soap and rinse thoroughly. After eye contact: Rinse opened eye for several minutes under running water (at least 15 minutes). After swallowing: Rinse out mouth and then drink plenty of water. Instantly call for doctor. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand Stability and reactivity: Environmental precautions: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Empty containers must be tripled rinsed prior to disposal Paper towels used to dry animal teats and remove the product from them should be disposed of as normal/domestic waste. Do not discharge undiluted product to sewers. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store only in original, closed container Protect from frost Do not store at temperatures above 30 °C Shelf life 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 23. Use # 1 – Pre-milking disinfection, manual dipping (RTU gel) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats pre- milking via manual dipping application method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 pre milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2. Use description Table 24. Use # 2 – Post-milking disinfection, manual dipping (RTU gel) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via manual dipping method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 2-3 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3. Use description Table 25. Use # 3 – Post-milking disinfection, semi-automatic dipping (RTU gel) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats post milking via semi-automatic dipping method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day. Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4. Use description Table 26. Use # 4 – Pre and post-milking disinfection, manual dipping (RTU gel) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Applied directly to animal teats pre and post milking via manual dipping application method. Ready to use formulation containing 0,3 % w/w iodine. Do not dilute before use. 3 pre and 3 post milking applications, per animal, per day (up to 5 applications in total) Apply a maximum of 10 ml product/animal/application 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves when applying the product by dipping (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5 — General Directions for Use 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5 — General Directions for Use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5 — General Directions for Use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to temperature > 20 °C before use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures This product can be used for pre- and post-milking disinfection in combination (up to 5 applications in total per animal per day). However, it should not be used in combination with a different iodine-based product The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Inhalation: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Skin contact: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Eye contact: No known effects or symptoms in normal use. Ingestion: No known effects or symptoms in normal use After inhalation: Supply fresh air; consult doctor in case of symptoms. After skin contact: Instantly wash with water and soap and rinse thoroughly. After eye contact: Rinse opened eye for several minutes under running water (at least 15 minutes). After swallowing: Rinse out mouth and then drink plenty of water. Instantly call for doctor. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand Stability and reactivity: Environmental precautions: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Empty containers must be tripled rinsed prior to disposal Paper towels used to dry animal teats and remove the product from them should be disposed of as normal/domestic waste. Do not discharge undiluted product to sewers. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store only in original, closed container Protect from frost Do not store at temperatures above 30 °C Shelf life 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3.