COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION of 26 September 2014 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, for the production of pulp, paper and board (notified under document C(2014) 6750) (Text with EEA relevance) (2014/687/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The BAT conclusions for the production of pulp, paper and board are set out in the Annex to this Decision. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 26 September 2014. For the Commission Janez POTOČNIK Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 . ( 3 ) BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF PULP, PAPER AND BOARD These BAT conclusions concern the activities specified in Sections 6.1.(a) and 6.1.(b) of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU, i.e. the integrated and non-integrated production in industrial installations of: In particular, these BAT conclusions cover the following processes and activities: These BAT conclusions do not address the following activities: Other reference documents which are relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. EMISSION LEVELS ASSOCIATED WITH BAT Where emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) are given for the same averaging period in different units (e.g. as concentration and specific load values (that is per tonne of net production)), those different ways of expressing BAT-AELs are to be seen as equivalent alternatives. For integrated and multi-product pulp and paper mills, the BAT-AELs defined for the individual processes (pulping, papermaking) and/or products need to be combined according to a mixing rule based on their additive shares of discharge. AVERAGING PERIODS FOR EMISSIONS TO WATER Unless stated otherwise, the averaging periods associated with the BAT-AELs for emissions to water are defined as follows. REFERENCE CONDITIONS FOR EMISSIONS TO AIR The BAT-AELs for emissions to air refer to standard conditions: dry gas, temperature of 273,15 K, and pressure of 101,3 kPa. Where BAT-AELs are given as concentration values, the reference O 2 level ( % by volume) is indicated. Conversion to reference oxygen concentration The formula for calculating the emissions concentration at a reference oxygen level is shown below. where: AVERAGING PERIODS FOR EMISSIONS TO AIR Unless stated otherwise, the averaging periods associated with the BAT-AELs for emissions to air are defined as follows. DEFINITIONS For the purpose of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: ACRONYMS 1.1. GENERAL BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE PULP AND PAPER INDUSTRY The process specific BAT conclusions included in Sections 1.2 to 1.6 apply, in addition to the general BAT conclusions mentioned in this section. 1.1.1. Environmental management system Applicability The scope (e.g. level of details) and nature of the EMS (e.g. standardised or non-standardised) will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2. Materials management and good housekeeping 1.1.3. Water and waste water management The BAT-associated effluent flow from dry debarking is 0,5 – 2,5 m 3 /ADt. The BAT-associated waste water flow at the point of discharge after waste water treatment as yearly averages are: 1.1.4. Energy consumption and efficiency Description Technique (c): Simultaneous generation of heat and electrical and/or mechanical energy in a single process, referred to as a combined heat and power plant (CHP). CHP plants in the pulp and paper industry normally apply steam turbines and/or gas turbines. The economic viability (achievable savings and payback time) will depend mainly on the cost of electricity and fuels. 1.1.5. Emissions of odour With regard to the emissions of malodorous sulphur-containing gases from kraft and sulphite pulp mills, see the process-specific BAT given in Sections 1.2.2 and 1.3.2. 1.1.6. Monitoring of key process parameters and of emissions to water and air Description The assessment of diffuse total reduced sulphur emissions can be done by periodic measurement and assessment of diffuse emissions that are emitted from different sources (e.g. the fibre line, tanks, chip bins etc.) by direct measurements. 1.1.7. Waste management 1.1.8. Emissions to water Further information on waste water treatment in pulp and paper mills and process-specific BAT-AELs are given in Sections 1.2 to 1.6. Applicability Applicable if the nitrogen in the chemical additives is not bioavailable (i.e. it cannot serve as nutrient in biological treatment) or if the nutrient balance is in surplus. 1.1.9. Emissions of noise 1.1.10. Decommissioning 1.2. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR KRAFT PULPING PROCESS For integrated kraft pulp and paper mills, the process-specific BAT conclusions for papermaking given in Section 1.6 apply, in addition to the BAT conclusions in this section. 1.2.1. Waste water and emissions to water BAT-associated emission levels See Table 1 and Table 2. These BAT-associated emission levels are not applicable to dissolving kraft pulp mills. The reference waste water flow for kraft mills is set out in BAT 5. Table 1 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from a bleached kraft pulp mill Table 2 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from an unbleached kraft pulp mill The BOD concentration in the treated effluents is expected to be low (around 25 mg/l as a 24-hour composite sample). 1.2.2. Emissions to air 1.2.2.1. Reduction of emissions in strong and weak odorous gases Applicability Generally applicable for new plants and for major refurbishments of existing plants. The installation of necessary equipment may be difficult for existing plants due to layout and space restrictions. The applicability of incineration might be limited for safety reasons, and in this case wet scrubbers could be used. BAT-associated emission level of total reduced sulphur (TRS) in residual weak gases emitted is 0,05 – 0,2 kg S/ADt. 1.2.2.2. Reduction of emissions from a recovery boiler SO 2 and TRS emissions BAT-associated emission levels See Table 3. Table 3 BAT-associated emission levels for SO 2 and TRS emissions from a recovery boiler NO x emissions Applicability Technique (c)is applicable to new recovery boilers and in the case of a major refurbishment of recovery boilers, as this technique requires considerable changes to the air feed systems and the furnace. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 4. Table 4 BAT-associated emission levels for NO x emissions from a recovery boiler Dust emissions Description SeeSection 1.7.1.1. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 5. Table 5 BAT-associated emission levels for dust emissions from a recovery boiler 1.2.2.3. Reduction of emissions from a lime kiln SO 2 emissions BAT-associated emission levels See Table 6. Table 6 BAT-associated emission levels for SO 2 and sulphur emissions from a lime kiln TRS emissions BAT-associated emission levels See Table 7. Table 7 BAT-associated emission levels for TRS emissions from a lime kiln NO x emissions BAT-associated emission levels See Table 8. Table 8 BAT-associated emission levels for NO x emissions from a lime kiln Dust emissions Description See Section 1.7.1.1. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 9. Table 9 BAT-associated emission levels for dust emissions from a lime kiln 1.2.2.4. Reduction of emissions from a burner for strong odorous gases (dedicated TRS burner) BAT-associated emission levels See Table 10. Table 10 BAT-associated emission levels for SO 2 and TRS emissions from the incineration of strong gases in a dedicated TRS burner BAT-associated emission levels See Table 11. Table 11 BAT-associated emission levels for NO x emissions from the incineration of strong gases in a dedicated TRS burner 1.2.3. Waste generation Applicability Recirculation of dust may be limited due to non-process elements in the dust. 1.2.4. Energy consumption and efficiency 1.3. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE SULPHITE PULPING PROCESS For integrated sulphite pulp and paper mills, the process-specific BAT conclusions for papermaking given in Section 1.6 apply, in addition to the BAT in this section. 1.3.1. Waste water and emissions to water BAT-associated emission levels See Table 12 and Table 13. These BAT-associated emission levels are not applicable to dissolving pulp mills and to the manufacturing of speciality pulp for chemical applications. The reference waste water flow for sulphite mills is set out in BAT 5. Table 12 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from a pulp mill manufacturing bleached sulphite and magnefite paper grade pulp Table 13 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from a sulphite pulp mill manufacturing NSSC pulp The BOD concentration in the treated effluents is expected to be low (around 25 mg/l as a 24-hour composite sample). 1.3.2. Emissions to air BAT-associated emission levels See Table 14. Table 14 BAT-associated emission levels for NO x and NH 3 emissions from a recovery boiler BAT-associated emission levels See Table 15. Table 15 BAT-associated emission levels for dust and SO 2 emissions from a recovery boiler The BAT-associated environmental performance level is a duration of acid operation of around 240 hours per year for the scrubbers, and less than 24 hours per month for the last monosulphite scrubber. 1.3.3. Energy consumption and efficiency 1.4. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR MECHANICAL PULPING AND CHEMIMECHANICAL PULPING The BAT conclusions in this section apply to all integrated mechanical pulp, paper and board mills and to mechanical pulp mills, CTMP and CMP pulp mills. BAT 49, BAT 51, BAT 52c and BAT 53 also apply to papermaking in integrated mechanical pulp, paper and board mills, in addition to the BAT conclusions in this section. 1.4.1. Waste water and emissions to water BAT-associated emission levels See Table 16. These BAT-AELs also apply to mechanical pulp mills. The reference waste water flow for integrated mechanical, CTM and CTMP pulp mills are set out in BAT 5. Table 16 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from the integrated production of paper and board from mechanical pulps produced on site Table 17 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from a CTMP or CMP pulp mill The BOD concentration in the treated effluents is expected to be low (around 25 mg/l as a 24-hour composite sample). 1.4.2. Energy consumption and efficiency 1.5. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR PROCESSING PAPER FOR RECYCLING The BAT conclusions in this section apply to all integrated RCF mills and to RCF pulp mills. BAT 49, BAT 51, BAT 52c and BAT 53 also apply to papermaking in integrated RCF pulp, paper and board mills, in addition to the BAT conclusions in this section. 1.5.1. Materials management 1.5.2. Waste water and emissions to water Applicability Techniques (a) – (c) are applicable to RCF paper mills with advanced water circuit closure. For integrated RCF paper mills, the BAT-AELs include emissions from papermaking, since the white water circuits of the paper machine are closely connected with those of the stock preparation. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 18 and Table 19. The BAT-associated emission levels in Table 18 apply also to RCF without deinking pulp mills, and the BAT-associated emission levels in Table 19 apply also to RCF with deinking pulp mills. The reference waste water flow for RCF mills is set out in BAT 5. Table 18 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from the integrated production of paper and board from recycled fibres pulp, produced without deinking on site Table 19 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from the integrated production of paper and board from recycled fibres pulp produced with deinking on site The BOD concentration in the treated effluents is expected to be low (around 25 mg/l as a 24-hour composite sample). 1.5.3. Energy consumption and efficiency 1.6. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR PAPERMAKING AND RELATED PROCESSES The BAT conclusions in this section apply to all non-integrated paper mills and board mills and to the paper and board making part of integrated kraft, sulphite, CTMP and CMP mills. BAT 49, BAT 51, BAT 52c and BAT 53 apply to all integrated pulp and paper mills. For integrated kraft, sulphite, CTMP and CMP pulp and paper mills, the process-specific BAT for pulping also apply, in addition to the BAT conclusions in this section. 1.6.1. Waste water and emissions to water BAT-associated emission levels See Table 20 and Table 21. The BAT-AELs in Table 20 and Table 21 also apply to the paper and board making process of integrated kraft, sulphite, CTMP and CMP pulp and paper mills. The reference waste water flow for non-integrated paper and board mills is set out in BAT 5. Table 20 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from a non-integrated paper and board mill (excluding speciality paper) The BOD concentration in the treated effluents is expected to be low (around 25 mg/l as a 24-hour composite sample). Table 21 BAT-associated emission levels for the direct waste water discharge to receiving waters from a non-integrated speciality paper mill 1.6.2. Emissions to air 1.6.3. Waste generation 1.6.4. Energy consumption and efficiency 1.7. DESCRIPTION OF TECHNIQUES 1.7.1. Description of techniques for the prevention and control of emissions to air 1.7.1.1. Dust 1.7.1.2. NO x 1.7.1.3. SO 2 /TRS emissions prevention and control 1.7.2. Description of techniques to reduce fresh water use/waste water flow and the pollution load in waste water 1.7.2.1. Process integrated techniques 1.7.2.2. Waste water treatment 1.7.3. Description of techniques for waste generation prevention and waste management ( 1 ) In special cases, there may be a need to apply a different sampling procedure (e.g. grab sampling) ( 2 ) There is a trend to replace COD by TOC for economic and environmental reasons. If TOC is already measured as a key process parameter, there is no need to measure COD; however, a correlation between the two parameters should be established for the specific emission source and waste water treatment step. ( 3 ) Rapid test methods can also be used. The results of rapid tests should be checked regularly (e.g. monthly) against EN standards or, if EN standards are not available, against ISO, national or other international standards which ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. ( 4 ) For mills operating less than seven days a week, the monitoring frequency for COD and TSS may be reduced to cover the days the mill is in operation or to extend the sampling period to 48 or 72 hours. ( 5 ) Applicable where EDTA or DTPA (chelating agents) are used in the process. ( 6 ) Not applicable to plants that provide evidence that no AOX is generated or added via chemical additives and raw materials. ( 7 ) Not applicable to plants where the biological load of waste water after the primary treatment is very low, e.g. some paper mills producing speciality paper. ( 8 ) The BAT-AEL ranges refer to market pulp production and the pulp production part of integrated mills (emissions from papermaking are not included). ( 9 ) A compact biological waste water treatment plant can result in slightly higher emission levels. ( 10 ) The upper end of the range refers to mills using eucalyptus from regions with higher levels of phosphorus (e.g. Iberian eucalyptus). ( 11 ) Applicable for mills using chlorine containing bleaching chemicals. ( 12 ) For mills producing pulp with high strength, stiffness and high purity properties (e.g. for liquid packaging board and LWC), emissions level of AOX up to 0,25 kg/ADt may occur. ( 13 ) The BAT-AEL ranges refer to market pulp production and the pulp production part of integrated mills (emissions from papermaking are not included). ( 14 ) A compact biological waste water treatment plant can result in slightly higher emission levels. ( 15 ) The SO x emission levels of the lime kiln increase significantly when strong non-condensable gases (NCG) are fed to the kiln and no alkaline scrubber is used. ( 16 ) Applicable for the treatment of weak odorous gases. ( 17 ) Applicable for the treatment of strong odorous gases. ( 18 ) Increasing the DS content of the black liquor results in lower SO 2 emissions and higher NO x emissions. Due to this, a recovery boiler with low emission levels for SO 2 , may be on the higher end of the range for NO x and vice versa. ( 19 ) BAT-AELs do not cover periods during which the recovery boiler is run on a DS content much lower than the normal DS content due to shut down or maintenance of the black liquor concentration plant. ( 20 ) If a recovery boiler were to burn black liquor with a DS > 83 %, then SO 2 and gaseous S emission levels should be reconsidered on a case-by-case basis. ( 21 ) The range is applicable without the incineration of odorous strong gases. ( 22 ) Increasing the DS content of the black liquor results in lower SO 2 emissions and higher NO x emissions. Due to this, a recovery boiler with low emission levels for SO 2 , may be on the higher end of the range for NO x and vice versa. ( 23 ) The actual NO x emission level of a recovery boiler depends on the DS content and the nitrogen content of the black liquor, and the amount and combination of NCG and other nitrogen containing flows (e.g. dissolving tank vent gas, methanol separated from the condensate, biosludge) burnt. The higher the DS content, the nitrogen content in the black liquor, and the amount of NCG and other nitrogen containing flows burnt, the closer the emissions will be to the upper end of the BAT-AEL range. ( 24 ) If a recovery boiler were to burn black liquor with a DS > 83 %, then NO x emission levels should be reconsidered on a case-by-case basis. ( 25 ) For an existing recovery boiler equipped with an ESP approaching the end of its operational life, emission levels may increase over time up to 50 mg/Nm 3 (corresponding to 0,4 kg/ADt). ( 26 ) ‘strong gases’ includes methanol and turpentine ( 27 ) For lime kilns burning strong gases (including methanol and turpentine), the upper end of the AEL range may be up to 40 mg/Nm 3 . ( 28 ) When using liquid fuels originating from vegetable matter (e.g. turpentine, methanol, tall-oil), including those obtained as by-products of the pulping process, emission levels up to 350 mg/Nm 3 (corresponding to 0,35 kg NO x /ADt) may occur. ( 29 ) When using gaseous fuels originating from vegetable matter (e.g. non-condensable gases), including those obtained as by-products of the pulping process, emission levels up to 450 mg/Nm 3 (corresponding to 0,45 kg NO x /ADt) may occur. ( 30 ) For an existing lime kiln equipped with an ESP approaching the end of its operational life, emission levels may increase over time up to 50 mg/Nm 3 (corresponding to 0,05 kg/ADt). ( 31 ) This BAT-AEL is based on a gas flow in the range of 100-200 Nm 3 /ADt. ( 32 ) Where at existing plants a switch to staged incineration is not feasible, emissions levels up to 1 000 mg/Nm 3 (corresponding to 0,2 kg/ADt) may occur. ( 33 ) The BAT-AEL ranges refer to market pulp production and the pulp production part of integrated mills (emissions from papermaking are not included). ( 34 ) The BAT-AELs do not apply to natural greaseproof pulp mills). ( 35 ) The BAT-AEL for COD and total phosphorus do not apply to eucalyptus based market pulp ( 36 ) Sulphite market pulp mills may apply a gentle ClO 2 bleaching stage in order to meet product requirements, thus resulting in AOX emissions. ( 37 ) Not applicable to TCF mills ( 38 ) The BAT-AEL ranges refer to market pulp production and the pulp production part of integrated mills (emissions from papermaking are not included). ( 39 ) Due to process-specific higher emissions, the BAT-AEL for total nitrogen does not apply to ammonium-based NSSC pulping. ( 40 ) For ammonium-based mills, higher emission levels of NO x may occur: up to 580 mg/Nm 3 as daily average and up to 450 mg/Nm 3 as yearly average. ( 41 ) For recovery boilers operated in mills using more than 25 % of hardwood (potassium-rich) in raw materials, higher dust emissions up to 30 mg/Nm 3 may occur. ( 42 ) The BAT-AEL for dust does not apply for ammonium-based mills. ( 43 ) Due to process-specific higher emissions, the BAT-AEL for SO 2 does not apply for recovery boilers operated permanently under ‘acidic’ conditions, i.e. using sulphite liquor as wet-scrubber washing media as part of the sulphite recovery process. ( 44 ) For existing multistage venturi scrubbers, higher emissions of SO 2 up to 400 mg/Nm 3 as a daily average value and up to 350 mg/Nm 3 as a yearly average may occur. ( 45 ) Not applicable during ‘acid operation’, i.e. periods in which preventive flushing and cleaning of incrustation in the scrubbers takes place. During these periods emissions can be up to 300 – 500 mg SO 2 /Nm 3 (at 5 % O 2 ) for cleaning of one of the scrubbers and up to 1 200 mg SO 2 /Nm 3 (half-hourly mean values, at 5 % O 2 ) when cleaning the final washer. ( 46 ) In the case of highly bleached mechanical pulp (70-100 % of fibre in final paper), emission levels of up to 8 kg/t may occur. ( 47 ) When biodegradable or eliminable chelating agents cannot be used due to pulp quality requirements (e.g. high brightness), the emissions of total nitrogen might be higher than this BAT-AEL and should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. ( 48 ) When biodegradable or eliminable chelating agents cannot be used due to pulp quality requirements (e.g. high brightness), the emissions of total nitrogen might be higher than this BAT- AEL and should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. ( 49 ) For mills with completely closed water circuits, there are no emissions of COD. ( 50 ) For existing plants, levels up to 0,45 kg/t may occur, due to the continuous decline in the quality of paper for recycling and the difficulty of continuously upgrading the effluent plant. ( 51 ) For mills with a waste water flow between 5 and 10 m 3 /t, the upper end of the range is 0,008 kg/t. ( 52 ) For graphic paper mills, the upper end of the range refers to mills manufacturing paper that use starch for the coating process. ( 53 ) Mills having special characteristics, such as a high number of grade changes (e.g. of ≥ 5 per day as a yearly average) or producing very light-weight speciality papers (≤ 30 g/m 2 as yearly average) might have higher emissions than the upper end of the range. ( 54 ) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range refers to mills producing highly comminuted paper which requires intensive refining and to mills with frequent changes of paper grades (e.g. ≥ 1 – 2 changes/day as yearly average).