Corrigendum to Commission Decision 2014/256/EU of 2 May 2014 establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the EU Ecolabel for converted paper products ( Official Journal of the European Union L 135 of 8 May 2014 ) On page 45, in the Annex, Criterion 4: ‘ Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the test result of the recyclability for wet strength agents and removability for adhesives. The reference test methods are PTS method PTS-RH 021/97 (for wet strength agents), INGEDE Method 12 (for non-soluble adhesive removability), or equivalent test methods. The applicant shall provide a declaration that coated and laminated converted paper products are in compliance with point 3(c). Where a part of a converted paper product is easily removable (for instance a metal bar in a suspension file or a plastic cover or reusable exercise book cover), the recyclability test may be made without this component. The easiness of removal of the non-paper components shall be proven via a declaration of the paper collecting company, the recycling company or an equivalent organisation. Test methods shown by a competent and independent third party as giving equivalent results may also be used.’ ‘ Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the test result of the recyclability for wet strength agents and removability for adhesives. The reference test methods are PTS method PTS-RH 021/97 (for wet strength agents), INGEDE Method 12 (for non-soluble adhesive removability), or equivalent test methods. The applicant shall provide a declaration that coated and laminated converted paper products are in compliance with point 4(c). Where a part of a converted paper product is easily removable (for instance a metal bar in a suspension file or a plastic cover or reusable exercise book cover), the recyclability test may be made without this component. The easiness of removal of the non-paper components shall be proven via a declaration of the paper collecting company, the recycling company or an equivalent organisation. Test methods shown by a competent and independent third party as giving equivalent results may also be used.’