COMMISSION DIRECTIVE (EU) 2020/367 of 4 March 2020 amending Annex III to Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the establishment of assessment methods for harmful effects of environmental noise (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 12 thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 Annex III to Directive 2002/49/EC is replaced by the text in the Annex to this Directive. Article 2 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 31 December 2021 at the latest. They shall forthwith communicate to the Commission the text of those provisions. When Member States adopt those provisions, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. Member States shall determine how such reference is to be made. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 3 This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 4 This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 4 March 2020. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 189, 18.7.2002, p. 12 . ( 2 ) Environmental Noise Guidelines for the European Region, World Health Organisation 2018, ISBN 978 92 890 5356 3. ‘ANNEX III ASSESSMENT METHODS FOR HARMFUL EFFECTS (Referred to in Article 6(3)) 1. Set of harmful effects For the purposes of the assessment of harmful effects the following shall be considered: 2. Calculation of harmful effects The harmful effects shall be calculated by either of the following: 2.1. IHD For the calculation of the RR, with respect to the harmful effect of IHD and concerning the incidence rate ( i), the following dose-effect relations shall be used: for road noise. 2.2. HA For the calculation of the AR, with respect to the harmful effect of HA the following dose-effect relations shall be used: 2.3. HSD For the calculation of the AR, with respect to the harmful effect of HSD the following dose-effect relations shall be used: 3. Assessment of harmful effects 3.1. The exposure of the population shall be assessed independently for each noise source and harmful effect. Where the same people are simultaneously exposed to different noise sources, the harmful effects may -in general- not be cumulated. However, those effects may be compared to assess the relative importance of each noise. 3.2. Assessment for IHD 3.2.1. For IHD in the case of railway and aircraft noise , the population exposed above adequate L den levels is estimated as subject to an increased risk of IHD, while the exact number N of cases of IHD cannot be calculated. 3.2.2. For IHD in the case of road noise, the proportion of cases of the specific harmful effect in the population exposed to a RR that is calculated to be caused by environmental noise is derived, for the noise source x (road), harmful effect y (IHD) and for the incidence i by: Where: 3.2.3. For IHD in the case of road noise, the total number N of cases of IHD (people affected by the harmful effect y ; number of attributable cases) due to the source x is then: N x,y = PAF x,y,i * I y * P (Formula 11) for road. Where: 3.3. For HA and HSD in the case of road, railway and aircraft noise, the total number N of people affected by the harmful effect y (number of attributable cases) due to the source x , for each combination of noise source x (road, railway or aircraft source) and harmful effect y (HA, HSD), is then: Where: 4. Future revisions The dose-effect relations introduced by future revisions of this Annex will concern in particular: If necessary, specific dose-effect relations could be presented for: