COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/1195 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilbersky) Percival THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 28(1), points (a) to (h), thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation sets out measures for the purpose of eradicating Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilbersky) Percival, and preventing its spread within the Union territory. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 3 Surveys and laboratory tests of the specified pest 1. The competent authorities shall carry out annual, risk-based surveys for the presence of the specified pest, at least by visual inspection, of tubers in the production sites where specified plants are grown or stored. 2. In case of suspicion of the infection of specified plants by the specified pest, samples shall be taken and tested for the presence of the specified pest, using the methods set out in Annex I. 3. Member States shall report to the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, the results of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1, which were carried out in the preceding year. They shall report those results in accordance with the template set out in Annex II. Article 4 Designation of infested production sites and infected specified plants Article 5 Establishment of demarcated areas 1. Where the presence of the specified pest is officially confirmed, the competent authorities shall, without delay, demarcate an area in accordance with paragraph 2. They shall determine the pathotype using the methods laid down in point 5 of Annex I. 2. The demarcated area shall consist of: The delimitation of the buffer zone referred to in the first subparagraph, point (b), shall be based on sound scientific principles, the biology of the specified pest, the level of infestation, the distribution and frequency of cultivation of specified plants in the area concerned, the environmental and geographical conditions, as well as the specific risk of spread of resting spores. 3. The competent authorities shall carry out appropriate investigations to identify the origin of the infection. They shall trace the specified plants associated with the case of infection concerned, including those which were moved before the establishment of the demarcated area. 4. Within the demarcated area, the competent authorities shall raise awareness amongst professional operators concerning the threat of the specified pest, and the measures adopted to eradicate it and to prevent its spread outside of that area. They shall ensure that professional operators are aware of the delimitation of the demarcated area, the infested zone and the buffer zone, and of the provisions of this Regulation. Article 6 Eradication measures 1. Specified plants, which originate from an infested zone, shall be destroyed or processed under safe conditions to prevent any further spread of the specified pest. If it is no longer possible to determine the production site from which infected specified plants originate, the entire lot in which the infected specified plants have been found shall be destroyed or processed under conditions which prevent any further spread of the specified pest. 2. In an infested zone, all of the following measures shall apply: 3. Plants other than those referred to in paragraph 2, points (a) and (b) from which soil has not been removed may only be moved out of the demarcated area if the following two conditions are fulfilled: 4. The competent authorities shall ensure that: 5. Member States shall notify those measures to the Commission and the other Member States, immediately after they have been taken. Article 7 Potato varieties resistant to pathotypes of the specified pest 1. A potato variety shall be designated as resistant to a particular pathotype of the specified pest, where it reacts to a contamination by the pathogenic agent of that pathotype in such a way that no resting spores are produced. 2. Testing for resistance shall be carried out in accordance with the protocol set out in Annex III. The degree of resistance of potato varieties shall be quantified in accordance with the standard scoring notation set out in the table in Annex III. 3. Member States shall notify to the Commission and the other Member States, each year by 31 January, a list of all new varieties of potatoes which they have authorised for marketing in the preceding year, and which they have found, by carrying out the testing referred to in paragraph 2, to be resistant to the specified pest. They shall state the varieties together with the pathotypes to which they are resistant, as well as the method used to determine that resistance. Article 8 Notification of the confirmed presence of the specified pest on a resistant potato variety 1. Professional operators, and any other person that become aware of any symptoms of the specified pest, resulting from a breakdown or change in the effectiveness of a resistant potato variety, which relates to a suspected change in the pathotype of the specified pest or a new pathotype, shall notify the competent authorities thereof. 2. In all cases reported pursuant to paragraph 1, the competent authorities shall investigate the pathotype involved, and confirm, using the methods set out in Annexes I and III, whether the presence is due to a change in the pathotype of the specified pest or to a new pathotype. 3. The competent authorities shall immediately record the information obtained pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2. Member States shall notify to the Commission and the other Member States, each year by 31 January, the details of the confirmations made pursuant to paragraph 2 as regards the preceding year. Article 9 Revocation of the measures 1. The competent authorities may revoke the measures adopted pursuant to Article 6 concerning a demarcated area, where that demarcated area becomes free from the specified pest in accordance with the conditions set out in Annex IV. 2. Following the revocation of the measures pursuant to paragraph 1, the competent authorities shall inspect at harvest the first crop of specified plants, which are susceptible to the relevant pathotype of the specified pest. That first crop shall not be moved out of the demarcated area until that inspection is accomplished, unless the movement is carried out under the control of the competent authority. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, and after a minimum of 10 years since the last detection of the specified pest in specific parts of the infested zone, the competent authorities may partially revoke the measures applicable in the respective parts of the demarcated areas concerned, in accordance with point 2 of Annex IV. 4. By way of derogation from Article 6(2), point (a), where the conditions for a partial revocation of the measures provided for in Article 6 are fulfilled, specified plants not intended for planting may be grown provided that they are of a variety which is resistant to the pathotypes of the specified pest found on the infested site of production or to all pathotypes known to occur in the Member State concerned. Article 10 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 July 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4 . ( 2 ) Council Directive 69/464/EEC of 8 December 1969 on control of Potato Wart Disease ( OJ L 323, 24.12.1969, p. 1 ). ANNEX I Methods of testing for detection and identification of the specified pest referred to in Article 3(2) 1. Testing by means of spores For detection and identification, summer sporangia and resting spores are used, which are obtained from soil after sieving, or directly from the plant material. 2. Methods for detection For the extraction of spores of the specified pest from soil, one of the following methods shall be used: 3. Methods for identification After extraction, the spores of the specified pest shall be identified by one of the following methods: 4. Viability of resting spores Determination of viability of the resting spores may be achieved by microscopic examination or bioassay. Viability of sporangia may be determined by microscopic examination of sporangia mounted in lactophenol or in water (Przetakiewicz 2015) ( 8 ) . Sporangia with granular contents or with slightly rounded-off protoplasm may be considered viable. Those permanently plasmolysed or with no apparent content shall be considered dead. As an alternative, or in case of doubt, a bioassay, as described in point 3 of Annex IV, may be carried out. 5. Determination of pathotypes The determination of pathotypes shall require fresh warts. The inoculum for the test shall be produced by one of the following methods: For determination of all pathotypes known to be relevant for the Union (1(D1), 2(G1), 6(O1), 18(T1) and 38(Nevşehir), a differential infection test with various varieties of the specified plant shall be used as indicated in the table. The infection test shall be carried out following the protocol mentioned under point (d) (Glynne-Lemmerzahl method). Selective sensitivity of potato cultivars for the determination of S. endobioticum pathotypes ( 1 ) Pratt MA. 1976. A wet-sieving and flotation technique for the detection of resting sporangia of Synchytrium endobioticum in soil. Annals of Applied Biology 82: 21 – 29. ( 2 ) van Leeuwen GCM, Wander JGN, Lamers J, Meffert JP, van den Boogert PHJF, Baayen RP. 2005. Direct examination of soil for sporangia of Synchytrium endobioticum using chloroform, calcium chloride and zinc sulphate as extraction reagents. EPPO Bulletin 35: 25 – 31. ( 3 ) Wander JGN, van den Berg W, van den Boogert PHJF, Lamers JG, van Leeuwen GCM, Hendrickx G, Bonants P. 2007. A novel technique using the Hendrickx centrifuge for extracting winter sporangia of Synchytrium endobioticum from soil. European Journal of Plant Pathology 119: 165 – 174. ( 4 ) Lévesque CA, de Jong SN, Ward LJ & de Boer SH (2001) Molecular phylogeny and detection of Synchytrium endobioticum , the causal agent of potato wart. Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology 23: 200–201. ( 5 ) van den Boogert PHJF, van Gent-Pelzer MPE, Bonants PJM, de Boer SH, Wander JGN, Lévesque CA, van Leeuwen GCM, Baayen RP. 2005. Development of PCR-based detection methods for the quarantine phytopathogen Synchytrium endobioticum , causal agent of potato wart disease. European Journal of Plant Pathology 113: 47 – 57. ( 6 ) van Gent-Pelzer MPE, Krijger M, Bonants PJM. 2010. Improved real-time PCR assay for the detection of the quarantine potato pathogen, Synchytrium endobioticum , in zonal centrifuge extracts from soil and in plants. European Journal of Plant Pathology 126: 129 – 133. ( 7 ) Smith DS, Rocheleau H, Chapados JT, Abbott C, Ribero S, Redhead SA, Lévesque CA, De Boer SH. 2014. Phylogeny of the genus Synchytrium and the development of TaqMan PCR assay for sensitive detection of Synchytrium endobioticum in soil. Phytopathology 104: 422 – 432. ( 8 ) Przetakiewicz, J. 2015. The Viability of Winter Sporangia of Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilb.) Perc. From Poland. American Journal of Potato Research 92:704-708. ( 9 ) Spieckermann A, Kothoff P. 1924. Testing potatoes for wart resistance. Deutsche Landwirtschaftliche Presse 51: 114 – 115. ( 10 ) Potoček J, Krajíčková K, Klabzubová S, Krejcar Z, Hnízdil M, Novák F, Perlová V. 1991. Identification of new Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilb.) Perc. pathotypes in Czech Republic. Ochrana Rostlin 27: 191 – 205. ( 11 ) Glynne MD. 1925. Infection experiments with wart disease of potatoes. Synchytrium endobioticum . Annals of Applied Biology 12: 34 – 60. ( 12 ) Lemmerzahl J. 1930. A new simplified method for inoculation of potato cultivars to test for wart resistance. Züchter 2: 288 – 297. ( 13 ) Noble M, Glynne MD. 1970. Wart disease of potatoes. FAO Plant Protection Bulletin 18: 125 – 135. ANNEX II Survey template as referred to in Article 3 Template for presenting potato wart disease survey results from the potato harvest from the year, preceding the year of reporting. Please use this table only for the survey results for potatoes harvested in your country . ( 1 ) For countries with outbreaks, it could e.g. be relevant to indicate separately from the general surveys the amount of samples used to investigate or follow up outbreaks. ANNEX III Protocol for the assessment of the resistance of a variety referred to in Article 7(2) The protocol for the assessment of the resistance of a variety shall include the following steps. ANNEX IV Conditions for revocation of the measures as referred to in Article 9 1. Conditions for revocation of the measures 2. Partial revocation of the measures After a minimum of 10 years since the last detection of the specified pest in areas of the infested zone, the partial revocation of the measures provided for in Article 6 may be considered for these areas, where there is a gapless record of crops showing that the provisions of Article 6(2) and (3), have been complied with during the whole time and that the infested zone was not used as permanent grassland, and: The scheme to be used to obtain the soil for the testing shall include all of the following steps: Where these conditions are not met, the partial revocation of the measures may be considered again following a waiting period of minimum 2 years. In determining the length of that waiting period, Member States shall take into account the level of infection and/or the number of viable spores detected. 3. Bioassays for the purpose of revocation of the measures Several tubers of the specified plants shall be incubated in pots together with at least 5 l of soil under temperature, moisture and light conditions, which are favourable to potato growth. A cultivar which is highly susceptible to all pathotypes shall be used (such as Deodara, Evora, Morene, Tomensa, Maritiema, Arran Chief). The growing potato plants shall be cut back when reaching a height of about 60 cm. After approximately 100 days, the newly formed tubers shall be examined for warts. Negative controls of soil free from the specified pest and positive controls of infested soil must always be included in the test. The test is considered valid, if warts are produced in tubers of the positive control and no warts are produced in tubers of the negative control. Temperature and humidity conditions in the glasshouse shall be recorded. Warts produced in test samples shall be examined microscopically for the presence of summer sporangia and/or resting spores. The entire test shall be carried out under conditions preventing any further spread of the specified pest.