COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2025/223 of 6 February 2025 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1423 as regards minor changes to the Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Hydrogen Peroxide Family 1’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 50(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 The Annex to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1423 is replaced by the text set out in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 6 February 2025. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 ; ELI: . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1423 of 22 July 2022 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Hydrogen Peroxide Family 1’ ( OJ L 222, 26.8.2022, p. 1 ; ELI: ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2209 of 5 September 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1423 as regards administrative and minor changes to the Union authorisation for the biocidal product family Hydrogen Peroxide Family 1 ( OJ L, 2024/2209, 11.9.2024, ELI: ). ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/2013 of 18 April 2013 on changes of biocidal products authorised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 109, 19.4.2013, p.4 ; ELI: ). ( 5 ) Opinion of the Biocidal Products Committee (BPC) of 19 September 2024 on the minor change of the Union authorisation of the biocidal product family Hydrogen Peroxide Family 1, ECHA/BPC/445/2024, . SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS FOR A BIOCIDAL PRODUCT FAMILY Hydrogen Peroxide Family 1 Product type(s) PT02: Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals PT04: Food and feed area PT03: Veterinary hygiene PT01: Human hygiene Authorisation number EU-0024303-0000 R4BP asset number EU-0024303-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II. SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL - META SPC(S) 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 10 cm to 20 cm. Spray the product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment, or spray the product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The use of eye protection while handling the product is mandatory. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Apply to surfaces by mopping and let air dry. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The use of eye protection while handling the product is mandatory. Use of respiratory protective equipment (RPE) providing a protection factor of 10 is mandatory for professionals applying the product and for other professionals present in the treated area. An air purifying respirator with helmet/hood/mask (TH1/TM1), or a half/full mask with combination filter gas/P2 is at least required (filter type (code letter, colour) to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). For repeated application or re-entry into the room, the professional needs to follow the same risk mitigation measures as for the first application in the room. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Allow surface to air dry after using the product. Close container when not in use. Do not use wipes which have become dehydrated. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Avoid hand to eye transfer. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by mopping using impregnated RTU mop wipes 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions Allow surface to air dry after using the product. Close container when not in use. Do not use wipes which have become dehydrated. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Avoid hand to eye transfer. Use of respiratory protective equipment (RPE) providing a protection factor of 10 is mandatory for professionals applying the product and for other professionals present in the treated area. An air purifying respirator with helmet/hood/mask (TH1/TM1), or a half/full mask with combination filter gas/P2 is at least required (filter type (code letter, colour) to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). For repeated application or re-entry into the room, the professional needs to follow the same risk mitigation measures as for the first application in the room. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 1. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. Clean surface before applying the product. Product should be applied to a clean dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Do not rinse after use. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use-specific risk mitigation measures of meta SPC 1. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse immediately with plenty of water, including under the eyelids, for at least 15 minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Seek medical attention. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0-35°C Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of small and/or large surfaces in industry (e.g. dining areas, bathrooms) by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe and/or by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Spraying: For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the product onto the surface, wait for 5 minutes and then wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe or let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. Mopping: Remove excess water using a dry floor mop. Fill the bucket with ready-to use product and distribute across floor using flat mop. Wait 5 minutes, then wipe the surface with a clean, dry mop or let air dry. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For spraying of large surface areas the following applies: The area of the surface to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . For spraying of small surface areas the above specific risk mitigation measure does not apply. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of small surfaces (floors) in industry [(e.g. dining areas, bathrooms)] by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Fill the bucket with ready-to-use product and distribute across floor using flat mop, afterwards wipe the surface with a clean, dry mop or let air dry. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measuresNone 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfection of small food contact surfaces in food and beverage industry by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the product onto the surface, leave for the required contact time and then either remove excess liquid with dry wipe or let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surfaces until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Disinfection of food contact surfaces in food and beverage industry by spraying using fixed installed sprayer 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions Use outside food production time, once per week. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Application only after the working shift/overnight application. During spraying application, no person shall be present. To determine the appropriate re-entry time after application of the product, workplace release measurements using suitable measurement equipment shall be performed upon implementation of the fixed installed spraying, and at regular intervals thereafter (annual intervals recommended), and after any change in relevant boundary conditions. The national regulations for workplace measurements shall be followed. In case of unscheduled maintenance tasks during spraying application, use of respiratory protective equipment (RPE) providing a protection factor of 10 is mandatory. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 2. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. The product should be applied to a dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Do not rinse after use. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use-specific risk mitigation measures of meta SPC 2. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse with plenty of water. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature:0-35 °C Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of food contact surfaces in food and beverage industry by automated dipping or spraying in closed system 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Packaging disinfection in food, beverage and feed manufacturing (spraying or dipping application): Do not rinse after use. After sterilisation, blow-dry the packaging with hot sterile air. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Do not breathe vapours/spray. During operation, ensure adequate ventilation along the machines Local exhaust ventilation (LEV) and in the industrial halls (technical ventilation). During manual maintenance tasks, ensure adequate ventilation inside the machine (LEV) before opening the doors of the aseptic area. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of food contact surfaces in food and beverage industry by Clean-in-place (CIP) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Before disinfection, system should be washed. Disinfection of CIP tanks, CIP pumps, pipe work and internal system of the processing equipment for food, beverage and feed, including milking machine hygiene (MMH) (closed systems). Rinse with water after treatment. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until rinsed off with water. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 3. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instruction for use of meta SPC 3. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). The use of eye protection while handling the product is mandatory. The process of dilution shall be carried out using an automatic dosing system. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse immediately with plenty of water, including under the eyelids, for at least 15 minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Seek medical attention immediately. In case of skin contact: Wash off immediately with plenty of water for at least 15 minutes. Use a mild soap if available. Seek medical attention if irritation develops and persists. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Remove person to fresh air. Treat symptomatically. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0 - 35 °C Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Teat dips for pre-milking disinfection 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 4. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 4. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 4. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 4. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 4. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. The product should be applied pre-milking by use of a dipping or foam cup. The product must be brought to room temperature before use. Clean teat with a dry wipe, fill foam cup with product and press foam cup until foam is generated. Dip teat into the cup. Apply foam for 60 seconds on the teat. Wipe the product away with a clean towel. Do not rinse after use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Avoid splashes and spills. Avoid hand to eye transfer. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse immediately with plenty of water, including under the eyelids, for at least 15 minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Seek medical attention. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0-25°C Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 10 cm to 20 cm. Spray the product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment, or spray the product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Apply to surfaces by mopping. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfection of small and/or large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces, which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the product onto the surface, then wipe surface with a clean, dry wipe and leave to dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The area of the surfaces to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Disinfection of small and/or large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces, which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment, or spray product onto the surface, then wipe surface with a clean, dry wipe and leave to dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The area of the surface to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.5. Use description Table 5 Disinfection of small and/or large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by wiping using clean single-use cloth/wipe and bucket 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces, which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Pour product into a clean bucket and distribute across surface using single-use cloth/wipe and let air dry. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.6. Use description Table 6 Disinfection of small and/or large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by wiping using clean single-use cloth/wipe and bucket 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces, which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Pour product into a clean bucket and distribute across surface using single-use cloth/wipe and let air dry. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.7. Use description Table 7 Disinfection of large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by mopping using mop and bucket 4.7.1. Use-specific instructions Non routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Fill the bucket with ready to use product and distribute across floor using mop and let air dry. 4.7.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.7.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.7.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.7.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.8. Use description Table 8 Disinfection of large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by mopping using mop and bucket 4.8.1. Use-specific instructions Non routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Fill the bucket with ready to use product and distribute across floor using mop, wipe the surface with a clean, dry mop and let air dry. 4.8.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.8.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.8.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.8.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.9. Use description Table 9 Disinfection of small and/or large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by spraying the surface and then wiping with a clean cloth/wipe or spraying liquid onto a wipe and then wiping the surface, or by having the disinfectant in a bucket and wiping with a single-use clean cloth/wipe, and non-routine disinfection of larger surfaces by mopping using mop and bucket 4.9.1. Use-specific instructions The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). Spraying using trigger sprayer and wiping using a dry wipe: For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment, or spray the product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. Mopping using mop and bucket: Fill the bucket with ready to use product and distribute across floor using mop, wipe the surface with a clean, dry mop and let air dry. Wiping using cloth/wipe and bucket: Pour product into a clean bucket and distribute across surface using single-use cloth/wipe, wipe the surface with clean cloth/wipe and let air dry. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.9.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures For spraying: The area of the surfaces to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . 4.9.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.9.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.9.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.10. Use description Table 10 Disinfection of small non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.10.1. Use-specific instructions When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment, or spray the product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.10.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.10.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.10.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.10.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.11. Use description Table 11 Disinfection of small food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.11.1. Use-specific instructions When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment, or spray the product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.11.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. 4.11.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.11.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 4.11.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. The product should be applied to a dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Do not rinse after use. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse with plenty of water. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature:0-35 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 6 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 6 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 6 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 6 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 6 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 6 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of small surfaces in industry (e.g. dining areas, bathrooms) by spraying using trigger sprayer 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions of use of meta SPC 6. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of food contact surfaces in food and beverage industry by spraying using trigger sprayer 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 6. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 6 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. The product should be applied to a dry surface. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 10 cm to 20 cm. Spray the product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe or let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Wet surface completely using the product. Do not rinse after use. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures The use of eye protection while handling of the product is mandatory. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse immediately with plenty of water, including under the eyelids, for at least 15 minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Seek medical attention immediately. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Remove person to fresh air. Treat symptomatically. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Keep away from heat and sources of ignition. Keep in a cool, well-ventilated place. Keep away from oxidizing agents. Storage temperature: 0-30°C Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 6 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 7 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 7 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 7 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 7 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 7 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 7 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces, which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Clean surface before applying the product. Fill the bucket with diluted product and distribute across floor using flat mop, wipe the surface with clean, dry floor mop and let air dry. Do not rinse after use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of small and/or large non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe and/or by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Do not rinse after use. Spraying: When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 10 cm to 20 cm. Spray the diluted product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. Mopping: The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Clean surface before applying the product. Fill the bucket with diluted product and distribute across floor using flat mop, wipe the surface with clean, dry mop and let air dry. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Do not breathe vapours/spray. For spraying: The area of the surfaces to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfection of large non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Clean surface before applying the product. Fill the bucket with diluted product and distribute across floor using flat mop, wipe the surface with a clean, dry floor mop and let air dry. Do not rinse after use. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Disinfection of large non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using wall- mounted device 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions Apply product via wall-mounted device. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Rinse after application. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Do not breathe vapours/spray. Ensure technical ventilation with at least 15 air exchanges/hour. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.5. Use description Table 5 Disinfection of large food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using trigger sprayer 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 10 cm to 20 cm. Spray the diluted product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Do not rinse after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Do not breathe vapours/spray. Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surfaces until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. The area of the surfaces to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 7. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 7 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. The product should be applied to a dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. Dilution instruction (7,5%): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 75 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. Dilution instruction (10%): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 100 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. Dilution instruction (15%): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 150 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). The use of eye protection while handling the product is mandatory. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse immediately with plenty of water, including under the eyelids, for at least 15 minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Seek medical attention immediately. In case of skin contact: Wash off immediately with plenty of water for at least 15 minutes. Use a mild soap if available. Wash clothing before reuse. Thoroughly clean shoes before reuse. Seek medical attention immediately. If swallowed: Rinse mouth with water. Do NOT induce vomiting. Never give anything by mouth to an unconscious person. Seek medical attention immediately. If inhaled: Remove person to fresh air. Treat symptomatically. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0-25 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 7 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 8 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 8 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 8 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 8 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 8 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 8 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of surfaces in industry (e.g. dining areas, bathrooms) by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of small food contact surfaces in food and beverage industry by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfection of small non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces, which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 8. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 8 5.1. Instructions for use The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. The product should be applied to a dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Allow surface to air dry after using the product. Do not rinse after use. Close container when not in use. Do not use wipes which have become dehydrated. Dispose of the container when empty. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. Used wipes must be disposed of in closed container. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse with plenty of water. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0-35 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 8 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 9 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 9 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 9 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 9 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 9 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 9 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of small non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by wiping using clean single-use cloth/wipe and bucket 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis, to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Pour diluted product into a clean bucket and distribute across surface using a single-use cloth/wipe, wipe the surface with a clean cloth/wipe and let air dry. Do not rinse after use. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of large non-food contact surfaces in healthcare applications by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. Non-routine disinfection: Disinfection in specific risk situations (unless differently regulated by national public health authorities). The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Fill the bucket with diluted product and distribute across floor using flat mop, wipe the surface with a clean, dry mop and let air dry. Do not rinse after use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfection of small and/or large non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe or by wiping using single-use cloth and bucket, and/or floors by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Do not rinse after use. Spraying: For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the diluted product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment, or spray the diluted product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe or let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. Wiping: Pour diluted product into a clean bucket and distribute across surface using single-use cloth/wipe, wipe the surface with a clean cloth/wipe and let air dry. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. Mopping: Fill the bucket with diluted product and distribute across floor using flat mop, wipe the surface with a clean, dry mop and let air dry. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Do not breathe vapours/spray. For spraying: The area of the surface to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Disinfection of large non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by mopping using flat mop and bucket 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions Fill the bucket with diluted product and distribute across floor using flat mop, wipe the surface with a clean, dry mop and let air dry. Do not rinse after use. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Ensure technical ventilation with at least 15 air exchanges/hour. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.5. Use description Table 5 Disinfection of large non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using wall- mounted device 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Apply product via wall-mounted device. Rinse after application. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Do not breathe vapours/spray. Ensure technical ventilation with at least 15 air exchanges/hour. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.6. Use description Table 6 Disinfection of large food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by spraying using trigger sprayer and dry wipe 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions For optimum results, hold the bottle upright and spray from a distance of 30 cm. Spray the diluted product onto a dry wipe and wipe small surfaces such as worktops and equipment or spray the diluted product onto the surface, wipe the surface with a clean, dry wipe and let air dry. Always close the nozzle after use. Do not rinse after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Do not breathe vapours/spray. Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. The area of the surface to be disinfected (in m 2 ) must not be larger than 1/10 of the room volume (in m 3 ) e.g. in a room of 120 m 3 volume, the maximum surface to be disinfected is 12 m 2 . 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.7. Use description Table 7 Disinfection of large food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by wiping using single-use cloth and bucket 4.7.1. Use-specific instructions Pour diluted product into a clean bucket and distribute across surface using single-use cloth/wipe, wipe the surface with a clean cloth/wipe and let air dry. Do not rinse after use. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 4.7.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. 4.7.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.7.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 4.7.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 9. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 9 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. The product should be applied to a dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. Dilution instruction (1,5 %): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 15 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. Dilution instruction (2%): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 20 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. Dilution instruction (3%): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 30 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. Dilution instruction (4%): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 40 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. Dilution instruction (5%): to produce 1 L of diluted surface disinfectant, add 50 ml of the concentrated product to approximately 500 ml of distilled water or water of equal quality (e.g. demineralised), mix and fill up to 1 L with distilled water or water of equal quality. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). The use of eye protection while handling the product is mandatory. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse immediately with plenty of water, including under the eyelids, for at least 15 minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Seek medical attention immediately. In case of skin contact: Wash off immediately with plenty of water for at least 15 minutes. Use a mild soap if available. Wash contaminated clothing before reuse. Thoroughly clean shoes before reuse. Seek medical attention immediately. If swallowed: Rinse mouth with water. Do NOT induce vomiting. Never give anything by mouth to an unconscious person. Seek medical attention immediately. If inhaled: Remove person to fresh air. Treat symptomatically. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0-25 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 9 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 10 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 10 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 10 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 10 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 10 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 10 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Hygienic hand wash 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 10. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 10. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 10. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 10. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 10. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 10 5.1. Instructions for use Apply approximately 3 ml of product to wet hands and rub for 60 seconds. Rinse thoroughly with running tap water for about 30 seconds. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Avoid splashes and spills. Avoid hand to eye transfer. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse with water. In case of skin contact: Rinse with water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0-25°C Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 10 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 11 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 11 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 11 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 11 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 11 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 11 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of life sciences cleanrooms by mopping using impregnated RTU mop wipes 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Disinfection of small non-food contact surfaces in health care applications by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Routine disinfection: Disinfection of surfaces, which might be contaminated with pathogens during medical or nursing processes, on a regular basis to reduce the risk of transmission of such organisms via surfaces. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.4. Use description Table 4 Disinfection of small non-food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.5. Use description Table 5 Disinfection of small food contact surfaces in institutional/commercial buildings by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 11. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 11 5.1. Instructions for use The product is intended for one-step cleaning and disinfection. Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. When used under clean conditions: clean surface before applying the product. Apply product to a dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Allow surface to air dry. Do not rinse after use. Close container when not in use. Do not use wipes which have become dehydrated. Dispose of the container when empty. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse with plenty of water. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Storage temperature: 0-35 °C. Protect from frost. Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 11 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 12 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 12 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 12 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 12 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 12 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 12 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of surfaces in industry (e.g. dining areas, bathrooms) by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of food contact surfaces in food and beverage industry by wiping using impregnated RTU wipes 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Keep food, feed or beverages away from treated surface until dried. Do not use directly on or near food, feed or drinks. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 12. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 12 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions. The product should be applied to a dry surface. Wet surface completely using the product. Allow surface to air dry after using the product. Do not rinse after use. Close container when not in use. Do not use wipes which have become dehydrated. Dispose of the container when empty. Do not use on surfaces sensitive to oxidative agents such as marble, copper or brass. Used wipes must be disposed of in closed container. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Avoid hand to eye transfer. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment FIRST AID MEASURES In case of eye contact: Rinse immediately with plenty of water, including under the eyelids, for at least 15 minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Seek medical attention immediately. In case of skin contact: Rinse with plenty of water. If swallowed: Rinse mouth. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. If inhaled: Remove person to fresh air. Treat symptomatically. Seek medical attention if symptoms occur. ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY MEASURES Do not allow contact with soil, surface or ground water. Consider the provision of containment around storage vessels 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Product: Where possible, recycling is preferred to disposal or incineration. If recycling is not practicable, dispose of in compliance with national regulations. Dispose of waste in an approved waste disposal facility. Contaminated packaging: Dispose of container in accordance with national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in suitable, labelled containers. Keep away from heat and sources of ignition. Keep in a cool, well-ventilated place. Keep away from oxidizing agents. Storage temperature: 0-30°C. Shelf life: 12 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains hydrogen peroxide (CAS No.: 7722-84-1), for which a European reference value of 1,25 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 12 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)