Avis juridique important 88/431/Euratom: Commission Opinion of 7 July 1988 concerning the Niederaichbach nuclear power station (Federal Republic of Germany) (Only the German text is authentic) Official Journal L 208 , 02/08/1988 P. 0038 - 0038 COMMISSION OPINION of 7 July 1988 concerning the Niederaichbach nuclear power station (Federal Republic of Germany) (Only the German text is authentic) (88/431/Euratom) The general data concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the dismantling of Niederaichbach nuclear power station were provided by the German Government to the Commission, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, by letter received 18 June 1986, as complemented by information received on 6 February 1987 and 11 December 1987. On the basis of the data thus obtained and having consulted the group of experts, the Commission drew up the following opinion: 1. The distance from the installation to the closest point on the territory of another Member State, Italy, is approximately 170 km; Austria is 60 km distant. 2. In normal conditions, the liquid and gaseous effluent discharges are not liable to give rise to significant exposure of the population of other Member States from the point of view of health. 3. Solid radioactive waste is to be stored temporarily in the station turbine hall prior to transport to the Konrad disposal facility. Recyclable radioactive material is to be sent for melting at a furnace in the Karlsruhe nuclear research centre (KfK). 4. In the case of an unplanned discharge of radioactive effluents which could be occasioned by an accident of the magnitude considered in the general data, doses liable to be received in other Member States will not be significant from the point of view of health. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the dismantling of Niederaichbach nuclear power station is not liable, either in normal conditions or in the case of an accident of the magnitude considered, to result in the radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. This opinion is addressed to the Federal Republic of Germany. Done at Brussels, 7 July 1988. For the Commission Stanley CLINTON DAVIS Member of the Commission