COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION of 11 February 2013 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions for the tanning of hides and skins (notified under document C(2013) 618) (Text with EEA relevance) (2013/84/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The BAT conclusions for the tanning of hides and skins are set out in the Annex to this Decision. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 February 2013. For the Commission Janez POTOČNIK Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 . ( 3 ) BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE TANNING OF HIDES AND SKINS These BAT conclusions concern the following activities specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU, namely: Unless stated otherwise the BAT conclusions presented can be applied to all installations subject to these BAT conclusions. Other reference documents which are relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: 1.1. General BAT conclusions for the tanning of hides and skins 1.1.1. Environmental management systems 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance of a tannery, BAT is to implement and adhere to an environmental management system (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Applicability The scope (e.g. level of details) and nature of the EMS (e.g. standardised or non-standardised) will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2. Good housekeeping 2. In order to minimise the environmental impact of the production process, BAT is to apply the principles of good housekeeping by applying the following techniques in combination: 1.2. Monitoring 3. BAT is to monitor emissions and other relevant process parameters, including those indicated below, with the given associated frequency and to monitor emissions according to EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 1.3. Minimising water consumption 4. In order to minimise water consumption, BAT is to use one or both of the techniques given below. The review of options for the reuse of process/washing water is part of an Environmental Management System (see BAT 1) and of the principles of good housekeeping (see BAT 2). The BAT-associated consumption levels for water See Table 1 (for bovine hides) and Table 2 (for sheepskins). Table 1 BAT-associated consumption levels for water for the processing of bovine hides Table 2 BAT-associated consumption levels for water for the processing of sheepskins 1.4. Reduction of emissions in waste water 1.4.1. Reduction of emissions in waste water from beamhouse process steps 5. In order to reduce the pollutant load in the waste water before effluent treatment arising from the beamhouse process steps, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. 1.4.2. Reduction of emissions in waste water from tanyard process steps 6. In order to reduce the pollutant load in the waste water before effluent treatment arising from the tanyard process steps, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. 1.4.3. Reduction of emissions in waste water from post-tanning process steps 7. In order to reduce the pollutant load in the waste water before effluent treatment arising from the post-tanning process steps, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. 1.4.4. Other reductions of emissions in waste water 8. In order to prevent the emission of specific pesticides in waste water, BAT is to only process hides or skins which have not been treated with those materials. Description The technique consists in the specification in supply contracts of materials free from pesticides that are: Examples include DDT, cyclodiene pesticides (aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, isodrin), and HCH including lindane. Applicability Generally applicable to tanneries within the constraints of controlling the specifications given to non-EU hides and skins suppliers. 9. In order to minimise the emissions of biocides in waste water, BAT is to process hides or skins only with biocidal products approved in accordance with the dispositions given by Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 8 ) . 1.5. Treatment of emissions to water 10. In order to reduce emissions to receiving waters, BAT is to apply waste water treatment comprising an appropriate on-site and/or off-site combination of the following techniques: Description The application of an appropriate combination of the techniques described below. The combination of techniques can be implemented on site and/or off site, in two or three stages. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 3. BAT-AELs apply for: Table 3 BAT-AELs for direct discharges of waste water after treatment 11. In order to reduce the chromium content of waste water discharges, BAT is to apply on-site or off-site chromium precipitation. Description See BAT 10, technique b. The efficiency of chromium precipitation is higher in the case of segregated, concentrated chromium-bearing streams. Applicability Generally applicable for on-site and/or off-site treatment of waste water effluents of tanneries carrying out chromium tanning and/or retanning. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 3 for chromium BAT-AELs for direct discharges to receiving water, and Table 4 for chromium BAT-AELs for indirect discharges into urban waste water treatment plants. 12. In order to reduce total chromium and sulphide emissions through indirect discharges of waste water from tanneries into urban waste water treatment plants, BAT is to apply chromium precipitation and sulphide oxidation. Description See BAT 10, technique b. The removal efficiency is higher in the case of segregated, concentrated chromium/sulphide-bearing streams. Sulphide oxidation consists of a catalytic oxidation (aeration in the presence of manganese salts). Applicability Chromium precipitation is generally applicable for on-site and/or off-site treatment of waste water effluents of tanneries carrying out chromium tanning and/or retanning. BAT-associated emissions levels See Table 4 for chromium and sulphide BAT-AELs for indirect discharges into urban waste water treatment plants. Table 4 BAT-AELs for total chromium and sulphide emissions through indirect discharges of waste water from tanneries into urban waste water treatment plants 1.6. Airborne emissions 1.6.1. Odour 13. In order to reduce the generation of ammonia odours from processing, BAT is to partially or completely replace ammonium compounds in deliming. Applicability The complete replacement of ammonium compounds by CO 2 during deliming cannot be applied to the processing of materials whose thickness is over 1,5 mm. The applicability of partial or complete replacement of ammonium compounds by CO 2 during deliming is also limited to both new and existing processing vessels that allow the use of, or can be modified to use, CO 2 during deliming. 14. In order to reduce the emission of odours from process steps and effluent treatment, BAT is to abate ammonia and hydrogen sulphide by the scrubbing and/or biofiltration of extracted air in which odour of these gases are noticeable. 15. In order to prevent the production of odours from the decomposition of raw hides or skins, BAT is to use curing and storage designed to prevent decomposition, and rigorous stock rotation. Description Correct salt curing or temperature control, both combined with rigorous stock rotation to eliminate decomposition odours. 16. In order to reduce the emission of odours from waste, BAT is to use handling and storage procedures designed to reduce waste decomposition. Description Control of waste storage and methodical removal of putrescible waste from the installation before its decomposition causes odour problems. Applicability Applies only to plants which produce putrescible wastes. 17. In order to reduce the emission of odours from the beamhouse effluent, BAT is to use pH control followed by treatments to remove the sulphide content. Description Maintaining the pH of effluents containing sulphide from the beamhouse above 9,5 until the sulphide has been treated (on or off site) by one of the following techniques: Applicability Applies only to plants carrying out sulphide unhairing. 1.6.2. Volatile organic compounds 18. In order to reduce the airborne emissions of halogenated volatile organic compounds, BAT is to replace halogenated volatile organic compounds used in the process with substances that are not halogenated. Description Replacement of halogenated solvents by non-halogenated solvents. Applicability Does not apply to the dry degreasing of sheepskins carried out in closed cycle machines. 19. In order to reduce airborne emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOC) from finishing, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below, priority being given to the first one. BAT-associated solvent use levels and BAT-associated emission levels for VOC Both the solvent use rates associated with the use of water-borne coatings in combination with an efficient application system and the BAT-AEL range for specific VOC emissions where an extraction ventilation and abatement system is used as an alternative to the use of water-borne finishing materials are given in Table 5. Table 5 BAT-associated solvent use levels and BAT-AELs for VOC emissions 1.6.3. Particulate matter 20. In order to reduce the airborne particulate matter emissions from the dry finishing stages of production, BAT is to use an extraction ventilation system fitted with bag filters or wet scrubbers. BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for particulate matter is 3 to 6 mg per normal m 3 of exhausted air expressed as a 30-minute mean. 1.7. Waste management 21. In order to limit the quantities of wastes sent for disposal, BAT is to organise operations on the site so as to maximise the proportion of process residues, which arise as by-products, including the following: 22. In order to limit the quantities of wastes sent for disposal, BAT is to organise operations on the site so as to facilitate waste reuse, or failing that, waste recycling, or failing that, ‘other recovery’, including the following: 23. In order to reduce the chemical consumption and reduce the amount of leather waste containing chromium-tanning agents sent for disposal, BAT is to use lime splitting. Description Carrying out the splitting operation at an earlier stage of processing, so as to produce an untanned by-product. Applicability Applies only to plants using chromium tanning. Not applicable: 24. In order to reduce the amount of chromium in sludge sent for disposal, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 25. In order to reduce energy, chemical and handling capacity requirements of sludge for its subsequent treatment, BAT is to reduce the water content of sludges by using sludge dewatering. Applicability Applies to all plants carrying out wet processing. 1.8. Energy 26. In order to reduce energy consumed in drying, BAT is to optimise the preparation for drying by samming or any other mechanical dewatering. 27. In order to reduce energy consumption for wet processes, BAT is to use short floats. Description Reducing the energy used to heat water by reducing hot water use. Applicability The technique cannot be applied in the dyeing process step and for the processing of calfskins. Applicability is also limited to: BAT-associated energy consumption rates See Table 6. Table 6 Specific energy consumption associated with BAT ( 1 ) OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 . ( 2 ) OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 . ( 3 ) Monthly average values. Processing of calfskins and vegetable tanning may require a higher water ( 4 ) Monthly average values. Wool-on sheepskins may require a higher water consumption. ( 5 ) OJ L 348, 24.12.2008, p. 84 . ( 6 ) OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 7 . ( 7 ) OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 . ( 8 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 9 ) The upper level is associated with COD inlet concentrations of ≥ 8 000 mg/l. ( 10 ) BAT-AEL range expressed as total carbon. ( 11 ) The energy consumption values (expressed as an annual average not corrected to primary energy) cover the energy use in the production process including electricity and the total heating for indoor spaces, but excluding the energy use for waste water treatment.