COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 1103/2010 of 29 November 2010 establishing, pursuant to Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, rules as regards capacity labelling of portable secondary (rechargeable) and automotive batteries and accumulators (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators and repealing Directive 91/157/EEC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 21(2) and 21(7) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 1. This Regulation shall apply to portable secondary (rechargeable) and automotive batteries and accumulators placed on the market for the first time 18 months after the date referred to in Article 5. 2. This Regulation shall not apply to portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators as listed in Annex I. Article 2 Determination of capacity 1. The electric charge that a battery or an accumulator can deliver under a specific set of conditions shall be considered as the capacity of the battery or the accumulator. 2. The capacity of portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators shall be determined on the basis of IEC/EN 61951-1, IEC/EN 61951-2, IEC/EN 60622, IEC/EN 61960 and IEC/EN 61056-1 standards depending on chemical substances contained therein as specified in Annex II, Part A. 3. The capacity of automotive batteries and accumulators shall be determined on the basis of standard IEC 60095-1/EN 50342-1 depending on chemical substances contained therein as specified in Annex II, Part B. Article 3 Unit of capacity measurement 1. The capacity of portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators shall be expressed in ‘milliampere-hour(s)’ or ‘ampere-hour(s)’, using the abbreviations mAh or Ah respectively. 2. The capacity of automotive batteries and accumulators shall be expressed in ‘ampere-hour(s)’ (Ah) and ‘Cold Cranking Amperes’ (A), using both these abbreviations. Article 4 Capacity label design 1. Portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators shall be marked with a label containing the information set out in Annex III, Part A. The minimum size of the label shall be determined according to the type of the battery and accumulator as specified in Annex IV, Part A. 2. All automotive batteries and accumulators shall be marked with a label containing the information set out in Annex III, Part B. The minimum size of the label shall be determined according to the type of the battery and accumulator as specified in Annex IV, Part B. Article 5 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 29 November 2010. For the Commission The President José Manuel BARROSO ( 1 ) OJ L 266, 26.9.2006, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 114, 27.4.2006, p. 9 . ANNEX I Exemptions from the capacity labelling requirements ANNEX II Capacity measurement of portable secondary (rechargeable) and automotive batteries and accumulators Part A. Portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators Part B. Automotive batteries and accumulators ANNEX III Information contained on capacity labels Part A. Portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators The capacity label of portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators shall contain the following information: Part B. Automotive batteries and accumulators The capacity label of automotive batteries and accumulators shall contain the following information: ANNEX IV Minimum size and location of capacity labels Part A. Portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators The capacity labels of portable secondary (rechargeable) batteries and accumulators shall comply with the following requirements: Part B. Automotive batteries and accumulators The capacity labels of automotive batteries and accumulators shall comply with the following requirements: ( 1 ) Height (H); Length (L).