COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/1185 of 8 July 2022 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Contec Hydrogen Peroxide Biocidal Product Family’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular the Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0027735-0000 is granted to Contec Europe for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘Contec Hydrogen Peroxide Biocidal Product Family’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union Authorisation is valid from 31 July 2022 to 30 June 2032. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 8 July 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 29 November 2021 on the Union authorisation of ‘Contec Hydrogen Peroxide Biocidal Product Family’ (ECHA/BPC/298/2021), Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Contec Hydrogen Peroxide Biocidal Product Family Product type 2 - Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0027735-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0027735-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL - META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1 – Use #1 - Application by trigger spray onto a suitable cleanroom wipe to distribute onto the inner surface of isolators and Restricted Access Barrier Systems ('RABS') 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Spray the product onto a cleanroom wipe inside the isolator or RABS and use to apply the product to the surface to be disinfected. Ensure the entire surface is visibly wet for the contact time: 15 minutes for bacteria and 30 minutes for yeasts and fungi. Do not use more than 50 ml product/m 2 . Uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. For visibly soiled surfaces, cleaning prior to the disinfection is required. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Avoid hand to eye contact. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section General directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section General directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section General directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 2 – Use #2 - Application by pouring into a container and using a suitable cleanroom wipe or mop to distribute onto the inner surface of isolators and RABS 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Pour the product into a suitable container inside the isolator or RABS and use a cleanroom wipe or mop to apply the product to the surface to be disinfected. Ensure the entire surface is visibly wet for the contact time: 15 minutes for bacteria and 30 minutes for yeasts and fungi. Do not use more than 50 ml product/m 2 . Uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. For visibly soiled surfaces, cleaning prior to the disinfection is required. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Avoid hand to eye contact. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section General directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section General directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section General directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 3 – Use #3 - Application by trigger spray onto a suitable cleanroom wipe to distribute onto the surface of cleanrooms 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Spray the product onto a cleanroom wipe and use to apply the product to the surface to be disinfected in the cleanroom. Ensure the entire surface is visibly wet for the contact time: 15 minutes for bacteria and 30 minutes for yeasts and fungi. Do not use more than 50 ml product/m 2 . Uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. For visibly soiled surfaces, cleaning prior to the disinfection is required. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures The product must only be applied for disinfection of small surfaces. The use of eye protection during handling of the product is mandatory. For use in cleanrooms, adequate technical/engineering controls to remove airborne residues is mandatory (e.g. room ventilation or Local Exhaust Ventilation ('LEV')). A minimum ventilation rate of 360/hr is mandatory for cleanrooms where the product is applied. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section General directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section General directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section General directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 4. Use # 4 – Use #4 - Application by pouring into a container and using a suitable cleanroom wipe or mop to distribute onto the surface of cleanrooms 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Pour the product into a suitable container and use a cleanroom wipe or mop to apply the product to the surface to be disinfected in the cleanroom. Ensure the entire surface is visibly wet for the contact time: 15 minutes for bacteria and 30 minutes for yeasts and fungi. Do not use more than 50 ml product/m 2 . Uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. For visibly soiled surfaces, cleaning prior to the disinfection is required. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Pouring of product shall be done in ventilated rooms only (with min. 3 air change/h). The use of eye protection during handling of the product is mandatory. For use in cleanrooms, adequate technical/engineering controls to remove airborne residues is mandatory (e.g. room ventilation or LEV. A minimum ventilation rate of 360/hr is mandatory for cleanrooms where the product is applied. If the product is applied by wiping, the disinfection must be limited to small area. When using the product with a mop to disinfect floors or other large surfaces in cleanrooms, additional risk mitigation measures must be considered: 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section General directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section General directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section General directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use See Use-specific instructions for use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Used wipes must be disposed in a closed container. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment DIRECT/INDIRECT EFFECTS Causes serious eye irritation. No other health injuries are known or expected under normal use. FIRST AID INSTRUCTIONS IF INHALED: If symptoms occur, call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: Rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur, call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for 5 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. EMERGENCY MEASURES TO PROTECT THE ENVIRONMENT Avoid release to the environment. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Disposal of this packaging should at all times comply with the waste disposal legislation and any regional local authority requirements. Do not discharge unused product on the ground, into water courses, into pipes (sink, toilets…) nor down the drains. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in a dry well ventilated area and protect from damage and direct sunlight. Store in properly designed bulk storage tanks or in original vented container. Keep container tightly closed. Do not freeze. Do not store at temperature above 30°C. The shelf-life: 24 months. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1.