Only the original UN/ECE texts have legal effect under international public law. The status and date of entry into force of this Regulation should be checked in the latest version of the UN/ECE status document TRANS/WP.29/343, available at: Regulation No 96 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UN/ECE) — Uniform provisions concerning the approval of compression ignition (C.I.) engines to be installed in agricultural and forestry tractors and in non-road mobile machinery with regard to the emissions of pollutants by the engine Incorporating all valid text up to: 04 series of amendments - Date of entry into force: 13 February 2014 CONTENTS ANNEXES 1. SCOPE This Regulation applies to the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from C.I. engines: 2. DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS 2.1. For the purpose of this Regulation, Figure 1 Definitions of system response: delay time (paragraph 2.1.17.), response time (paragraph 2.1.72.), rise time (paragraph 2.1.73.) and transformation time (paragraph 2.1.89.) 2.2. Symbols and abbreviations 2.2.1. Symbols The symbols are explained in Annex 4A, paragraph 1.4. and Annex 4B, paragraph 3.2. respectively. 2.2.2. Symbols and abbreviations for the chemical components Ar : Argon C 1 : Carbon 1 equivalent hydrocarbon CH 4 : Methane C 2 H 6 : Ethane C 3 H 8 : Propane CO : Carbon monoxide CO 2 : Carbon dioxide DOP : Di-octylphthalate H : Atomic hydrogen H 2 : Molecular hydrogen HC : Hydrocarbon H 2 O : Water He : Helium N 2 : Molecular nitrogen NMHC : Non-methane hydrocarbon NO x : Oxides of nitrogen NO : Nitric oxide NO 2 : Nitrogen dioxide O 2 : Oxygen PM : Particulate matter PTFE : Polytetrafluoroethylene S : Sulphur THC : Total hydrocarbon 2.2.3. Abbreviations ASTM : American Society for Testing and Materials BMD : Bag mini-diluter BSFC : Brake-specific fuel consumption CFV : Critical Flow Venturi CI : Compression-ignition CLD : Chemiluminescent Detector CVS : Constant Volume Sampler DeNO x : NO x after-treatment system DF : Deterioration factor ECM : Electronic control module EFC : Electronic flow control EGR : Exhaust gas recirculation FID : Flame Ionization Detector GC : Gas Chromatograph HCLD : Heated Chemiluminescent Detector HFID : Heated Flame Ionization Detector IBP : Initial boiling point ISO : International Organization for Standardization LPG : Liquefied Petroleum Gas NDIR : Nondispersive infrared (Analyser) NDUV : Nondispersive ultraviolet (Analyser) NIST : US National Institute for Standards and Technology NMC : Non-Methane Cutter PDP : Positive Displacement Pump %FS : Per cent of full scale PFD : Partial Flow Dilution PFS : Partial Flow System PTFE : Polytetrafluoroethylene (commonly known as Teflon™) RMC : Ramped-modal cycle RMS : Root-mean square RTD : Resistive temperature detector SAE : Society of Automotive Engineers SSV : Subsonic Venturi UCL : Upper confidence limit UFM : Ultrasonic flow-meter 3. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 3.1. Application for approval of an engine as a separate technical unit 4. APPROVAL 5. SPECIFICATION AND TESTS 5.1. General The components liable to affect the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants shall be so designed, constructed and assembled as to enable the engine, in normal use, despite the vibrations to which it may be subjected, to comply with the provisions of this Regulation. 5.1.1. The technical measures taken by the manufacturer shall be such as to ensure that the mentioned emissions are effectively limited, pursuant to this Regulation, throughout the normal life of the engine and under normal conditions of use. These provisions are deemed to be met: 5.1.2. For engines of power bands H and upwards, the manufacturer shall prove the durability of the engine and after-treatment device, if applicable, in accordance with Annex 8. 5.1.3. Systematic replacement of emission related components, after a certain running time of the engine, is permissible. Any adjustment, repair, disassembly, cleaning or replacement of engine components or systems which is performed on a periodic basis to prevent malfunction of the engine, shall only be done to the extent that is technologically necessary to ensure proper functioning of the emission control system. Accordingly, scheduled maintenance requirements shall be included in the customer's manual and be approved before an approval is granted. For engines of power bands L and upwards, further information shall be included according to the requirements of paragraph 5.3.3. 5.1.4. The corresponding extract from the manual with respect to maintenance/replacements of the after-treatment device(s) shall be included in the information document as set out in the appendices of Annex 1A to this Regulation. 5.2. Specifications concerning the emissions of pollutants The gaseous and particulate components emitted by the engine submitted for testing shall be measured by the methods described in Annex 4A for the power bands up to P, and in Annex 4B for power bands Q and R. At the request of the manufacturer and with the agreement of the Type Approval Authority the methods described in Annex 4B may be used for power bands up to P. 5.2.1. The emissions of the carbon monoxide, the emissions of hydrocarbons, the emissions of the oxides of nitrogen and the emissions of particulate matter obtained shall not exceed the amount shown in the table below: The limit values for power bands H to R shall include deterioration factors calculated in accordance with Annex 8. 5.2.2. Where, as defined, according to Annex 1B, one engine family covers more than one power band, the emission values of the parent engine (type approval) and of all engine types within the same family (COP) shall meet the more stringent requirements of the higher power band. 5.2.3. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: 5.3. Type approval requirements for power bands L to R 5.3.1. This paragraph shall apply to the type approval of electronically controlled engines, which use electronic control to determine both the quantity and timing of injecting fuel (hereafter 'engine'). This paragraph shall apply irrespective of the technology applied to such engines so as to comply with the emission limit values set out in paragraph 5.2.1. of this Regulation. 5.3.2. General requirements 5.3.2.1. Requirements for base emission control strategy 5.3.2.1.1. The base emission control strategy, activated throughout the speed and torque operating range of the engine, shall be designed as to enable the engine to comply with the provisions of this Regulation. 5.3.2.1.2. Any base emission control strategy that can distinguish engine operation between a standardized type approval test and other operating conditions and subsequently reduce the level of emission control when not operating under conditions substantially included in the type approval procedure is prohibited. 5.3.2.2. Requirements for auxiliary emission control strategy 5.3.2.2.1. An auxiliary emission control strategy may be used by an engine or a non-road mobile machine, provided that the auxiliary emission control strategy, when activated, modifies the base emission control strategy in response to a specific set of ambient and/or operating conditions but does not permanently reduce the effectiveness of the emission control system. 5.3.2.2.2. The control conditions applicable for power bands L to P and power bands Q to R are the following: 5.3.2.2.3. An auxiliary emission control strategy may be activated in particular for the following purposes: 5.3.2.2.4. The manufacturer shall demonstrate to the technical service at the time of the type approval test that the operation of any auxiliary emission strategy complies with the provisions of paragraph 5.3.2.2. The demonstration shall consist of an evaluation of the documentation referred to in paragraph 5.3.2.3. 5.3.2.2.5. Any operation of an auxiliary emission control strategy not compliant with paragraph 5.3.2.2. is prohibited. 5.3.2.3. Documentation requirements 5.3.2.3.1. The manufacturer shall provide an information folder accompanying the application for type approval at the time of submission to the technical service, which ensures access to any element of design and emission control strategy and the means by which the auxiliary strategy directly or indirectly controls the output variables. The information folder shall be made available in two parts: 5.3.2.3.2. The additional material referred to in sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 5.3.2.3.1. shall be treated as strictly confidential. It shall be made available to the Type Approval Authority on request. The Type Approval Authority shall treat this material as confidential. 5.3.3. Requirements on NO x control measures for engines of power bands L to P 5.3.3.1. The manufacturer shall provide information that fully describes the functional operational characteristics of the NO x control measures using the documents set out in paragraph 2. of Appendix 1 and paragraph 2. of Appendix 3 to Annex 1A. 5.3.3.2. If the emission control system requires a reagent, the characteristics of that reagent, including the type of reagent, information on concentration when the reagent is in solution, operational temperature conditions and reference to international standards for composition and quality shall be specified by the manufacturer, in paragraph 2.2.1.13. of Appendix 1 and in paragraph 3.2.1.13. of Appendix 3 to Annex 1A. 5.3.3.3. The engine emission control strategy shall be operational under all environmental conditions regularly pertaining in the territory of the Contracting Parties, especially at low ambient temperatures. 5.3.3.4. The manufacturer shall demonstrate that the emission of ammonia during the applicable emission test cycle of the type approval procedure, when a reagent is used, does not exceed a mean value of 25 ppm. 5.3.3.5. If separate reagent containers are installed on or connected to a non-road mobile machine, means for taking a sample of the reagent inside the containers shall be included. The sampling point shall be easily accessible without requiring the use of any specialized tool or device. 5.3.3.6. Use and maintenance requirements 5.3.3.6.1. The type approval shall be made conditional, in accordance with paragraph 5.1.3., upon providing to each operator of non-road mobile machinery written instructions comprising the following: The instructions shall be written in a clear and non-technical manner using the same language as is used in the operator's manual on non-road mobile machinery or engine. 5.3.3.7. Reagent control (where applicable) 5.3.3.7.1. The type approval shall be made conditional, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 6.1., upon providing indicators or other appropriate means, according to the configuration of the non-road mobile machinery, informing the operator on: 5.3.3.7.2. By the choice of the manufacturer the requirements of reagent compliance with the declared characteristics and the associated NO x emission tolerance shall be satisfied by one of the following means: 5.3.4. Requirements on NO x control measures for engines of power bands Q to R 5.3.4.1. The manufacturer shall provide information that fully describes the functional operational characteristics of the NO x control measures using the documents set out in paragraph 2 of Appendix 1 to Annex 1A and in paragraph 2 of Appendix 3 to Annex 1A. 5.3.4.2. The engine emission control strategy shall be operational under all environmental conditions regularly pertaining in the territory of the Contracting Parties especially at low ambient temperatures. This requirement is not restricted to the conditions under which a base emission control strategy must be used as specified in paragraph 5.3.2.2.2. 5.3.4.3. When a reagent is used, the manufacturer shall demonstrate that the emission of ammonia over the hot NRTC or NRSC at the type approval procedure does not exceed a mean value of 10 ppm. 5.3.4.4. If reagent containers are installed on or connected to a non-road mobile machine, means for taking a sample of the reagent inside the containers must be included. The sampling point must be easily accessible without requiring the use of any specialised tool or device. 5.3.4.5. The type approval shall be made conditional, in accordance with paragraph 6.1., upon the following: 5.3.5. Control area for power bands Q to R For engines of power bands Q to R the emissions sampled within the control area defined in paragraph 5.3.5. shall not exceed by more than 100 per cent the limit values of the emissions in paragraph 5.2.1. of this Regulation. 5.3.5.1. Demonstration requirements The technical service shall select up to three random load and speed points within the control area for testing. The technical service shall also determine a random running order of the test points. The test shall be run in accordance with the principal requirements of the NRSC, but each test point shall be evaluated separately. Each test point shall meet the limit values defined in paragraph 5.3.5. 5.3.5.2. Test requirements The test shall be carried out as follows: 5.3.5.3. Control area requirements 5.3.5.3.1. Engine control area The control area (see figure 2) is defined as follows: speed range: speed A to high speed; where: High speed and Low speed as defined in Annex 4B to this Regulation shall be used. If the measured engine speed A is within ± 3 per cent of the engine speed declared by the manufacturer, the declared engine speeds shall be used. If the tolerance is exceeded for any of the test speeds, the measured engine speeds shall be used. 5.3.5.3.2. The following engine operating conditions shall be excluded from testing: The manufacturer may request that the Technical Service excludes operating points from the control area defined in paragraph 5.5.1. and 5.5.2. during the certification/type approval. The Technical Service may grant this exclusion if the manufacturer can demonstrate that the engine is never capable of operating at such points when used in any machine combination. Figure 2 Control area 5.3.6 Verifying Emissions of Crankcase Gases for engines of power bands Q to R 5.3.6.1. No crankcase emissions shall be discharged directly into the ambient atmosphere, with the exception given in paragraph 5.3.6.3. 5.3.6.2. Engines may discharge crankcase emissions into the exhaust upstream of any after treatment device during all operation. 5.3.6.3. Engines equipped with turbochargers, pumps, blowers, or superchargers for air induction may discharge crankcase emissions to the ambient atmosphere. In this case the crankcase emissions shall be added to the exhaust emissions (either physically or mathematically) during all emission testing in accordance with paragraph 6.10. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. 5.4. Selection of engine power category 5.4.1. For the purposes of establishing the conformity of variable speed engines defined by paragraphs 1.1. and 1.2. of this Regulation with the emission limits given in paragraph 5.2.1. of this Regulation, they shall be allocated to power bands on the basis of the highest value of the net power measured in accordance with paragraph 2.1.49. of this Regulation. 5.4.2. For other engine types rated net power shall be used. 6. INSTALLATION ON THE VEHICLE 7. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 8. PENALTIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 9. MODIFICATIONS AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL OF THE APPROVED TYPE 10. PRODUCTION DEFINITIVELY DISCONTINUED If the holder of the approval completely ceases to manufacture the type or family approved in accordance with this Regulation he shall so inform the authority which granted the approval. Upon receiving the relevant communication that authority shall inform thereof the other Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation by means of a communication form conforming to the model in Annex 2 to this Regulation. 11. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 12. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING APPROVAL TESTS AND OF TYPE APPROVAL AUTHORITIES The Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement applying this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the Technical Services responsible for conducting approval tests and the Type Approval Authorities which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval, issued in other countries are to be sent. ( 1 ) As defined in the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3) (ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.2, para. 2) - www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29wgs/wp29gen/wp29resolutions.html ( 2 ) The distinguishing numbers of the Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement are reproduced in Annex 3 to the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3), document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.2/Amend.1 - www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29wgs/wp29gen/wp29resolutions.html ( 3 ) Centre of gravity of the tractor in accordance with standard ISO 789-6: 1982. ANNEX 1A Information document No … relating to the type approval and referring to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery Parent engine/engine type ( 1 ) : … 1. General Attachments: 2. Characteristics of engine-related parts of the mobile machinery (if applicable) 3. Photographs of the parent engine 4. List further attachments if any Date, file ( 1 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( 2 ) Specify the tolerance. Appendix 1 Essential characteristics of the (parent) engine 1. Description of engine 1.1. Manufacturer: … 1.2. Manufacturer's engine code: … 1.3. Cycle: four stroke/two stroke ( 1 ) 1.4. Bore: … mm 1.5. Stroke: … mm 1.6. Number and layout of cylinders: … 1.7. Engine capacity: … cm 3 1.8. Rated speed: … 1.9. Maximum torque speed: … 1.10. Volumetric compression ratio ( 2 ) : … 1.11. Combustion system description: … 1.12. Drawing(s) of combustion chamber and piston crown: … 1.13. Minimum cross sectional area of inlet and outlet ports: … 1.14. Cooling system 1.14.1. Liquid 1.14.1.1. Nature of liquid: … 1.14.1.2. Circulating pump(s): yes/no ( 1 ) 1.14.1.3. Characteristics or make(s) and type(s) (if applicable): … 1.14.1.4. Drive ratio(s) (if applicable): … 1.14.2. Air 1.14.2.1. Blower: yes/no ( 1 ) 1.14.2.2. Characteristics or make(s) and type(s) (if applicable): … 1.14.2.3. Drive ratio(s) (if applicable): … 1.15. Temperature permitted by the manufacturer 1.15.1. Liquid cooling: Maximum temperature at outlet: … K 1.15.2. Air cooling: Reference point: … Maximum temperature at reference point: … K 1.15.3. Maximum charge air outlet temperature of the inlet intercooler (if applicable): … K 1.15.4. Maximum exhaust temperature at the point in the exhaust pipe(s) adjacent to the outer flange(s) of the exhaust manifold(s): … K 1.15.5. Fuel temperature: … min: K … max: K 1.15.6 Lubricant temperature: … min: K … max: K 1.16. Pressure charger: yes/no ( 1 ) 1.16.1. Make: … 1.16.2. Type: … 1.16.3. Description of the system (e.g. max charge pressure, waste-gate, if applicable): … 1.16.4. Intercooler: yes/no ( 1 ) 1.17. Intake system: Maximum allowable intake depression at rated engine speed and at 100 per cent load: … kPa 1.18. Exhaust system: Maximum allowable exhaust backpressure at rated engine speed and at 100 per cent load: … kPa 2. Measures taken against air pollution 2.1. Device for recycling crankcase gases: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2. Additional anti-pollution devices (if any, and if not covered by another heading) 2.2.1. Catalytic converter: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.1.1. Make(s): … 2.2.1.2. Type(s): … 2.2.1.3. Number of catalytic converters and elements … 2.2.1.4. Dimensions- and volume of the catalytic converter(s): … 2.2.1.5. Type of catalytic action: … 2.2.1.6. Total charge of precious metals: … 2.2.1.7. Relative concentration: … 2.2.1.8. Substrate (structure and material): … 2.2.1.9. Cell density: … 2.2.1.10. Type of casing for the catalytic converter(s): … 2.2.1.11. Location of the catalytic converter(s) (place(s) and maximum/minimum distance(s) from engine): … 2.2.1.12. Normal operating range (K): … 2.2.1.13. Consumable reagent (where appropriate): … 2.2.1.13.1. Type and concentration of reagent needed for catalytic action: … 2.2.1.13.2. Normal operational temperature range of reagent: … 2.2.1.13.3. International standard (where appropriate): … 2.2.1.14. NO x sensor: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.2. Oxygen sensor: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.2.1. Make(s): … 2.2.2.2. Type: … 2.2.2.3. Location: … 2.2.3. Air injection: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.3.1. Type (pulse air, air pump, etc.): … 2.2.4. EGR: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.4.1. Characteristics (cooled/uncooled, high pressure/low pressure, etc.): … 2.2.5. Particulate trap: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.5.1. Dimensions and capacity of the particulate trap: … 2.2.5.2. Type and design of the particulate trap: … 2.2.5.3. Location (place(s) and maximum/minimum distance(s) from engine): … 2.2.5.4. Method or system of regeneration, description and/or drawing: … 2.2.5.5. Normal operating temperature (K) and pressure (kPa) range: … 2.2.6. Other systems: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.6.1. Description and operation: … 3. Fuel feed 3.1. Feed pump Pressure ( 2 ) or characteristic diagram: … kPa 3.2. Injection system 3.2.1. Pump 3.2.1.1. Make(s): … 3.2.1.2. Type(s): … 3.2.1.3. Delivery: … mm 3 per stroke ( 2 ) or cycle at pump speed of: … min –1 at full injection, or characteristic diagram. Mention the method used: On engine/on pump bench ( 1 ) 3.2.1.4. Injection advance 3.2.1.4.1. Injection advance curve ( 2 ) : … 3.2.1.4.2. Timing ( 2 ) : … 3.2.2. Injection piping 3.2.2.1. Length: … mm 3.2.2.2. Internal diameter: … mm 3.2.3. Injector(s) 3.2.3.1. Make(s): … 3.2.3.2. Type(s): … 3.2.3.3. Opening pressure ( 2 ) or characteristic diagram: … kPa 3.2.4. Governor 3.2.4.1. Make(s): … 3.2.4.2. Type(s): … 3.2.4.3. Speed at which cut-off starts under full load ( 2 ) : … min –1 3.2.4.4. Maximum no-load speed ( 2 ) : … min –1 3.2.4.5. Idling speed ( 2 ) : … min –1 3.3. Cold Start System 3.3.1. Make(s): … 3.3.2. Type(s): … 3.3.3. Description: … 4. Reserved 5. Valve timing 5.1. Maximum lift and angles of opening and closing in relation to dead centres or equivalent data: … 5.2. Reference and/or setting ranges ( 1 ) 5.3. Variable valve timing system (if applicable and where intake and/or exhaust) ( 1 ) 5.3.1. Type: continuous or on/off ( 1 ) 5.3.2. Cam phase shift angle: … 6. Reserved 7. Reserved ( 1 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( 2 ) Specify the tolerance. Appendix 2 Essential characteristics of the engine family 1. Common parameters ( 1 ) 2. Engine family listing ( 1 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( 2 ) Specify the tolerance. ( 3 ) If not applicable mark n.a. ( *1 ) For full details see Appendix 1. ( *2 ) For full details see Appendix 3. Appendix 3 Essential characteristics of engine types within the family 1. Description of engine 1.1. Manufacturer: … 1.2. Manufacturer's engine code: … 1.3. Cycle: four stroke/two stroke ( 1 ) 1.4. Bore: … mm 1.5. Stroke: … mm 1.6. Number and layout of cylinders: … 1.7. Engine capacity: … cm 3 1.8. Rated speed: … 1.9. Maximum torque speed: … 1.10. Volumetric compression ratio ( 2 ) : … 1.11. Combustion system description: … 1.12. Drawing(s) of combustion chamber and piston crown … 1.13. Minimum cross-sectional area of inlet and outlet ports: … 1.14. Cooling system 1.14.1. Liquid 1.14.1.1. Nature of liquid: … 1.14.1.2. Circulating pump(s): yes/no ( 1 ) 1.14.1.3. Characteristics or make(s) and type(s) (if applicable): … 1.14.1.4. Drive ratio(s) (if applicable): … 1.14.2. Air 1.14.2.1. Blower: yes/no ( 1 ) 1.14.2.2. Characteristics or make(s) and type(s) (if applicable): … 1.14.2.3. Drive ratio(s) (if applicable): … 1.15. Temperature permitted by the manufacturer 1.15.1. Liquid cooling: Maximum temperature at outlet: … K 1.15.2. Air cooling: Reference point: … Maximum temperature at reference point: …K 1.15.3. Maximum charge air outlet temperature of the inlet intercooler (if applicable): … K 1.15.4. Maximum exhaust temperature at the point in the exhaust pipe(s) adjacent to the outer flange(s) of the exhaust manifold(s): … K 1.15.5. Fuel temperature: … min: K … max: K 1.15.6. Lubricant temperature: … min: K … max: K 1.16. Pressure charger: yes/no ( 1 ) 1.16.1. Make: … 1.16.2. Type: … 1.16.3. Description of the system (e.g. max. charge pressure, waste-gate, if applicable): … 1.16.4. Intercooler: yes/no ( 1 ) 1.17. Intake system: Maximum allowable intake depression at rated engine speed and at 100 per cent load: … kPa 1.18. Exhaust system: Maximum allowable exhaust backpressure at rated engine speed and at 100 per cent load: … kPa 2. Measures taken against air pollution 2.1. Device for recycling crankcase gases: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2. Additional anti-pollution devices (if any, and if not covered by another heading) 2.2.1. Catalytic converter: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.1.1. Make(s): … 2.2.1.2. Type(s): … 2.2.1.3. Number of catalytic converters and elements: … 2.2.1.4. Dimensions and volume of the catalytic converter(s): … 2.2.1.5. Type of catalytic action: … 2.2.1.6. Total charge of precious metals: … 2.2.1.7. Relative concentration: … 2.2.1.8. Substrate (structure and material): … 2.2.1.9. Cell density: … 2.2.1.10. Type of casing for the catalytic converter(s): … 2.2.1.11. Location of the catalytic converter(s) (place(s) and maximum/minimum distance(s) from engine): … 2.2.1.12. Normal operating range (K) … 2.2.1.13. Consumable reagent (where appropriate): … 2.2.1.13.1. Type and concentration of reagent needed for catalytic action: … 2.2.1.13.2. Normal operational temperature range of reagent: … 2.2.1.13.3. International standard (where appropriate): … 2.2.1.14. NO x sensor: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.2. Oxygen sensor: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.2.1. Make(s): … 2.2.2.2. Type: … 2.2.2.3. Location: … 2.2.3. Air injection: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.3.1. Type (pulse air, air pump, etc.): … 2.2.4. EGR: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.4.1. Characteristics (cooled/uncooled, high pressure/low pressure, etc.): … 2.2.5. Particulate trap: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.5.1. Dimensions and capacity of the particulate trap: … 2.2.5.2. Type and design of the particulate trap: … 2.2.5.3. Location (place(s) and maximum/minimum distance(s) from engine): … 2.2.5.4. Method or system of regeneration, description and/or drawing: … 2.2.5.5. Normal operating temperature (K) and pressure (kPa) range: … 2.2.6. Other systems: yes/no ( 1 ) 2.2.6.1. Description and operation: … 3. Fuel feed 3.1. Feed pump Pressure ( 2 ) or characteristic diagram: … kPa 3.2. Injection system 3.2.1. Pump 3.2.1.1. Make(s): … 3.2.1.2. Type(s): … 3.2.1.3. Delivery: … mm 3 per stroke ( 2 ) or cycle at pump speed of … min –1 at full injection, or characteristic diagram. Mention the method used: On engine/on pump bench ( 1 ) 3.2.1.4. Injection advance 3.2.1.4.1. Injection advance curve ( 2 ) : … 3.2.1.4.2. Timing ( 2 ) : … 3.2.2. Injection piping 3.2.2.1. Length: … mm 3.2.2.2. Internal diameter: … mm 3.2.3. Injector(s) 3.2.3.1. Make(s): … 3.2.3.2. Type(s): … 3.2.3.3. Opening pressure ( 2 ) or characteristic diagram: … kPa 3.2.4. Governor 3.2.4.1. Make(s): … 3.2.4.2. Type(s): … 3.2.4.3. Speed at which cut-off starts under full load ( 2 ) : … min –1 3.2.4.4. Maximum no-load speed ( 2 ) : … min –1 3.2.4.5. Idling speed ( 2 ) : … min –1 3.3. Cold Start System 3.3.1. Make(s): … 3.3.2. Type(s): … 3.3.3. Description: … 4. Reserved 5. Valve timing 5.1. Maximum lift and angles of opening and closing in relation to dead centres or equivalent data: … 5.2. Reference and/or setting ranges ( 1 ) 5.3. Variable valve timing system (if applicable and where intake and/or exhaust) ( 1 ) 5.3.1. Type: continuous or on/off ( 1 ) 5.3.2. Cam phase shift angle: … 6. Reserved 7. Reserved ( 1 ) Strike out what does not apply. ( 2 ) Specify the tolerance. ANNEX 1B CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ENGINE FAMILY AND CHOICE OF THE PARENT ENGINE 1. PARAMETERS DEFINING THE ENGINE FAMILY 1.1. General An engine family is characterized by design parameters. These shall be common to all engines within the family. The engine manufacturer may decide which engines belong to an engine family, as long as the membership criteria listed in paragraph 1.3. are respected. The engine family shall be approved by the Type Approval Authority. The manufacturer shall provide to the Type Approval Authority the appropriate information relating to the emission levels of the members of the engine family. 1.2. Special cases 1.2.1. Interactions between parameters In some cases there may be interaction between parameters, which may cause emissions to change. This shall be taken into consideration to ensure that only engines with similar exhaust emission characteristics are included within the same engine family. These cases shall be identified by the manufacturer and notified to the Type Approval Authority. It shall then be taken into account as a criterion for creating a new engine family. 1.2.2. Devices or features having a strong influence on emissions In case of devices or features, which are not listed in paragraph 1.3. and which have a strong influence on the level of emissions, this equipment shall be identified by the manufacturer using good engineering judgment, and shall be notified to the Type Approval Authority. It shall then be taken into account as a criterion for creating a new engine family. 1.2.3. Additional criteria In addition to the parameters listed in paragraph 1.3., the manufacturer may introduce additional criteria allowing the definition of families of a more restricted size. These parameters are not necessarily parameters that have an influence on the level of emissions. 1.3. Parameters defining the engine family 1.3.1. Combustion cycle: 1.3.2. Configuration of the cylinders 1.3.2.1. Position of the cylinders in the block: 1.3.2.2. Relative position of the cylinders Engines with the same block may belong to the same family as long as their bore centre-to-centre dimensions are the same. 1.3.3. Main cooling medium: 1.3.4. Individual cylinder displacement Within 85 per cent and 100 per cent for engines with a unit cylinder displacement ≥ 0,75 dm 3 of the largest displacement within the engine family. Within 70 per cent and 100 per cent for engines with a unit cylinder displacement < 0,75 dm 3 of the largest displacement within the engine family. 1.3.5. Method of air aspiration: 1.3.6. Combustion chamber type/design: 1.3.7. Valves and porting: 1.3.8. Fuel supply type: 1.3.9. Miscellaneous devices: 1.3.10. Electronic control strategy The presence or absence of an electronic control unit (ECU) on the engine is regarded as a basic parameter of the family. In the case of electronically controlled engines, the manufacturer shall present the technical elements explaining the grouping of these engines in the same family, i.e. the reasons why these engines can be expected to satisfy the same emission requirements. The electronic governing of speed does not need to be in a different family from those with mechanical governing. The need to separate electronic engines from mechanical engines should only apply to the fuel injection characteristics, such as timing, pressure, rate shape, etc. 1.3.11. Exhaust after-treatment systems The function and combination of the following devices are regarded as membership criteria for an engine family: When an engine has been certified without an after-treatment system, whether as parent engine or as member of the family, then this engine, when equipped with an oxidation catalyst (not with particulate trap), may be included in the same engine family, if it does not require different fuel characteristics. If it requires specific fuel characteristics (e.g. particulate traps requiring special additives in the fuel to ensure the regeneration process), the decision to include it in the same family shall be based on technical elements provided by the manufacturer. These elements shall indicate that the expected emission level of the equipped engine complies with the same limit value as the non-equipped engine. When an engine has been certified with after-treatment system, whether as parent engine or as member of a family, whose parent engine is equipped with the same after-treatment system, then this engine, when equipped without after-treatment system, shall not be added to the same engine family. 2. CHOICE OF THE PARENT ENGINE ANNEX 2 COMMUNICATION (Maximum format: A4 (210 x 297 mm)) issued by: Name of administration Concerning ( 2 ): Approval granted Approval extended Approval refused Approval withdrawn Production definitively discontinued of a compression-ignition engine type or family of engine types as separate technical units with regard to the emission of pollutants pursuant to Regulation No. 96 Approval No.: … Extension No.: … 1. Trade name or mark of the engine: … 2. Engine type(s): 2.1. Engine family: … 2.2. Power band of engine family: … 2.3. Variable speed/constant speed ( 2 ) … 2.4. Types included in the engine family: 2.5. Tested type of engine or the representative of the engine family: 3. Manufacturer's name and address: … 4. If applicable, name and address of manufacturer's representative: … 5. Maximum allowable intake depression: … kPa 6. Maximum allowable back pressure: … kPa 7. Restriction of use (if any): … 8. Emission levels - final test results with DF: CO (g/kWh) HC (g/kWh) NO x (g/kWh) PM (g/kWh) 9. Engine submitted for test on: … 10. Technical Service responsible for conducting the approval test: … 11. Date of test report issued by that service: … 12. Number of test report issued by that service: … 13. Site of approval mark on the engine: … 14. Place: … 15. Date: … 16. Signature: … 17. The following documents, bearing the approval number shown above, are annexed to this communication: One copy of Annex 1A or Annex 1B to this Regulation completed and with drawings and diagrams referred to attached. ( 1 ) Distinguishing number of the country which has granted/extended/refused/withdrawn an approval (see approval provisions in the Regulation). ( 2 ) Strike out what does not apply. Appendix 1 Test report for compression ignition engines Test results ( 1 ) Information concerning the test engine Engine type: … Engine identification number: … 1. Information concerning the conduct of the test: 1.1. Reference fuel used for test 1.1.1. Cetane number: … 1.1.2. Sulphur content: … 1.1.3. Density: … 1.2. Lubricant 1.2.1. Make(s): … 1.2.2. Type(s): … (state percentage of oil in mixture if lubricant and fuel are mixed) 1.3. Engine driven equipment (if applicable) 1.3.1. Enumeration and identifying details: … 1.3.2. Power absorbed at indicated engine speeds (as specified by the manufacturer): 1.4. Engine performance 1.4.1. Engine speeds: Idle: … min -1 Intermediate: … min -1 Maximum Power: … min -1 Rated ( 5 ) : … min -1 1.4.2. Engine power ( 6 ) 2. Information concerning the conduct of the NRSC test: 2.1. Dynamometer setting (kW) 2.2. Emission results of the engine/parent engine ( 8 ) Deterioration Factor (DF): calculated/fixed ( 8 ) Specify the DF values and the emission results in the following table ( 7 ) : 2.3. Sampling system used for the NRSC test: 2.3.1. Gaseous emissions ( 9 ) : … 2.3.2. PM ( 9 ) : … 2.3.2.1. Method ( 8 ) : single/multiple filter 3. Information concerning the conduct of the NRTC test (if applicable) ( 10 ) : 3.1. Emission results of the engine/parent engine ( 8 ) Deterioration Factor (DF): calculated/fixed ( 8 ) Specify the DF values and the emission results in the following table ( 9 ) : Regeneration related data shall be reported for engines of power bands Q and R. Cycle work for hot start without regeneration kWh 3.2. Sampling system used for the NRTC test: Gaseous emissions ( 9 ) : … PM ( 9 ) : … Method ( 8 ) : single/multiple filter ( 1 ) For the case of several parent engines, the following are to be indicated for each of them. ( 2 ) Delete as appropriate. ( 3 ) Shall not be greater than 10 per cent of the power measured during the test. ( 4 ) Insert values at engine speed corresponding to 100 per cent normalised speed if NRSC test uses this speed. ( 5 ) Insert engine speed corresponding to 100 per cent normalised speed if NRSC test uses this speed. ( 6 ) Uncorrected power measured in accordance with paragraph 2.1.49. ( 7 ) Replace with values at engine speed corresponding to 100 per cent normalised speed if NRSC test uses this speed. ( 8 ) Delete as appropriate. ( 9 ) Indicate figure numbers of system used as defined in Annex 4A, Appendix 4, or paragraph 9. of Annex 4B to this regulation, as applicable. ( 10 ) In the case of several parent engines, each of them shall be indicated. ANNEX 3 ARRANGEMENTS OF APPROVAL MARKS Model A (See paragraph 4.4. of this Regulation) The above approval mark affixed to an engine shows that the engine type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E4) pursuant to Regulation No. 96 (according to the level corresponding to power band F as a variable speed engine, as indicated by the the letter A) and under approval number 031857. The first two digits of the approval number indicate that Regulation No. 96 was in its amended form (03 series of amendments) when the approval was granted. Model B (See paragraph 4.5. of this Regulation) The above approval mark affixed to an engine shows that the engine type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E4) pursuant to Regulations Nos. 96 (according to the level corresponding to power band F as a variable speed engine, as indicated by the the letter A) and 120. The first two digits of the approval number indicate that, at the dates when the respective approvals were granted, Regulation No. 96 was in its amended form (03 series of amendments) and 120 in its original version. ANNEX 4A METHOD OF DETERMINING EMISSIONS OF GASEOUS AND PARTICULATE POLLUTANTS 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1. This Annex describes the method of determining emissions of gaseous and particulate pollutants from the engine to be tested. The following test cycles shall apply: 1.2. The test shall be carried out with the engine mounted on a test bench and connected to a dynamometer. 1.3. Measurement principle: The engine exhaust emissions to be measured include the gaseous components (carbon monoxide, total hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen), and the particulates. Additionally, carbon dioxide is often used as a tracer gas for determining the dilution ratio of partial and full flow dilution systems. Good engineering practice recommends the general measurement of carbon dioxide as an excellent tool for the detection of measurement problems during the test run. 1.3.1. NRSC test: During a prescribed sequence of operating conditions, with the engines warmed up, the amounts of the above exhaust emissions shall be examined continuously by taking a sample from the raw exhaust gas. The test cycle consists of a number of speed and torque (load) modes, which cover the typical operating range of diesel engines. During each mode, the concentration of each gaseous pollutant, exhaust flow and power output shall be determined, and the measured values weighted (either by weighing factors or by sampling time). The particulate sample shall be diluted with conditioned ambient air. One sample over the complete test procedure shall be taken and collected on suitable filters. Alternatively, for discrete mode cycles, a sample may be taken on separate filters, one for each mode, and cycle-weighted results computed. The grams of each pollutant emitted per kilowatt-hour shall be calculated as described in Appendix 3 to this Annex. 1.3.2. NRTC test: The prescribed transient test cycle, based closely on the operating conditions of diesel engines installed in non-road machinery, is run twice: During this test sequence the above pollutants shall be examined. The test sequence consists of a cold start cycle following natural or forced cool-down of the engine, a hot soak period and a hot start cycle, resulting in a composite emissions calculation. Using the engine torque and speed feedback signals of the engine dynamometer, the power shall be integrated with respect to the time of the cycle, resulting in the work produced by the engine over the cycle. The concentrations of the gaseous components shall be determined over the cycle, either in the raw exhaust gas by integration of the analyser signal in accordance with Appendix 3 to this Annex, or in the diluted exhaust gas of a CVS full-flow dilution system by integration or by bag sampling in accordance with Appendix 3 to this Annex. For particulates, a proportional sample shall be collected from the diluted exhaust gas on a specified filter by either partial flow dilution or full-flow dilution. Depending on the method used, the diluted or undiluted exhaust gas flow rate shall be determined over the cycle to calculate the mass emission values of the pollutants. The mass emission values shall be related to the engine work to give the grams of each pollutant emitted per kilowatt-hour. Emissions (g/kWh) shall be measured during both the cold and hot start cycles. Composite weighted emissions shall be computed by weighing the cold start results 10 per cent and the hot start results 90 per cent. Weighted composite results shall meet the limits. 1.4. Symbols for test parameters 2. TEST CONDITIONS 2.1. General requirements All volumes and volumetric flow rates shall be related to 273 K (0 °C) and 101,3 kPa. 2.2. Engine test conditions 2.2.1. The absolute temperature T a of the engine intake air expressed in Kelvin, and the dry atmospheric pressure p s , expressed in kPa, shall be measured, and the parameter f a shall be determined according to the following provisions: 2.2.2. Test validity For a test to be recognized as valid, the parameter f a shall be such that: 0,96 ≤ fa ≤ 1,06 2.2.3. Engines with charge air cooling The charge air temperature shall be recorded and, at the declared rated speed and full load, shall be within ± 5 K of the maximum charge air temperature specified by the manufacturer. The temperature of the cooling medium shall be at least 293 K (20 °C). If a test shop system or external blower is used, the charge air temperature shall be set to within ± 5 K of the maximum charge air temperature specified by the manufacturer at the speed of the declared maximum power and full load. Coolant temperature and coolant flow rate of the charge air cooler at the above set point shall not be changed for the whole test cycle. The charge air cooler volume shall be based upon good engineering practice and typical vehicle/machinery applications. Optionally, the setting of the charge air cooler may be done in accordance with SAE J 1937 as published in January 1995. 2.3. Engine air inlet system The test engine shall be equipped with an air inlet system presenting an air inlet restriction within ± 300 Pa of the value specified by the manufacturer for a clean air cleaner at the engine operating conditions as specified by the manufacturer, which result in maximum air flow. The restrictions are to be set at rated speed and full load. A test shop system may be used, provided it duplicates actual engine operating conditions. 2.4. Engine exhaust system The test engine shall be equipped with an exhaust system with exhaust back pressure within ± 650 Pa of the value specified by the manufacturer at the engine operating conditions resulting in maximum declared power. If the engine is equipped with an exhaust after-treatment device, the exhaust pipe shall have the same diameter as found in-use for at least four pipe diameters upstream to the inlet of the beginning of the expansion section containing the after-treatment device. The distance from the exhaust manifold flange or turbocharger outlet to the exhaust after-treatment device shall be the same as in the machine configuration or within the distance specifications of the manufacturer. The exhaust backpressure or restriction shall follow the same criteria as above, and may be set with a valve. The after-treatment container may be removed during dummy tests and during engine mapping, and replaced with an equivalent container having an inactive catalyst support. 2.5. Cooling system An engine cooling system with sufficient capacity to maintain the engine at normal operating temperatures shall be prescribed by the manufacturer. 2.6. Lubricating oil Specifications of the lubricating oil used for the test shall be recorded and presented with the results of the test. 2.7. Test fuel The fuel shall be the reference fuel specified in Annex 6 for the respective power band: The fuel temperature at the injection pump inlet shall be 306-316 K (33-43 °C). 3. TEST RUN (NRSC TEST) 3.1. Determination of dynamometer settings The basis of specific emissions measurement is uncorrected brake power according to Regulation No. 120. During the test, the auxiliaries necessary for the engine operation shall be installed according to the requirements of Annex 7. Where auxiliaries have not been removed, the power absorbed by them at the test speeds shall be determined in order to calculate the dynamometer settings, except for engines where such auxiliaries form an integral part of the engine (e.g. cooling fans for air cool engines). The settings of inlet restriction and exhaust pipe backpressure shall be adjusted to the manufacturer's upper limits, in accordance with paragraphs 2.3. and 2.4. The maximum torque values at the specified test speeds shall be determined by experimentation in order to calculate the torque values for the specified test modes. For engines which are not designed to operate over a range on a full load torque curve, the maximum torque at the test speeds shall be declared by the manufacturer. The engine setting for each test mode shall be calculated using the formula: If the ratio, the value of P AE may be verified by the Type Approval Authority granting type approval. 3.2. Preparation of the sampling filters At least one hour before the test, each filter (pair) shall be placed in a closed, but unsealed, petri dish and placed in a weighing chamber for stabilization. At the end of the stabilization period, each filter (pair) shall be weighed and the tare weight shall be recorded. The filter (pair) shall then be stored in a closed petri dish or filter holder until needed for testing. If the filter (pair) is not used within eight hours of its removal from the weighing chamber, it shall be reweighed before use. 3.3. Installation of the measuring equipment The instrumentation and sample probes shall be installed as required. When using a full flow dilution system for exhaust gas dilution, the tailpipe shall be connected to the system. 3.4. Starting the dilution system and engine The dilution system and the engine shall be started and warmed up until all temperatures and pressures have stabilized at full load and rated speed (paragraph 3.6.2.). 3.5. Adjustment of the dilution ratio The particulate sampling system shall be started and running on bypass for the single filter method (optional for the multiple filter method). The particulate background level of the dilution air may be determined by passing dilution air through the particulate filters. If filtered dilution air is used, one measurement may be done at any time prior to, during, or after the test. If the dilution air is not filtered, the measurement shall be done on one sample taken for the duration of the test. The dilution air shall be set to obtain a filter face temperature between 315 K (42 °C) and 325 K (52 °C) at each mode. The total dilution ratio shall not be less than four. Note: For power bands up to and including K using discrete mode cycles the filter temperature may be kept at or below the maximum temperature of 325 K (52 °C) instead of respecting the temperature range of 42 °C to 52 °C. For the single and multiple filter methods, the sample mass flow rate through the filter shall be maintained at a constant proportion of the dilute exhaust mass flow rate for full flow systems for all modes. This mass ratio shall be within ± 5 per cent with respect to the averaged value of the mode, except for the first 10 s of each mode for systems without bypass capability. For partial flow dilution systems with single filter method, the mass flow rate through the filter shall be constant within ± 5 per cent with respect to the averaged value of the mode, except for the first 10 s of each mode for systems without bypass capability. For CO 2 or NO x concentration controlled systems, the CO 2 or NO x content of the dilution air shall be measured at the beginning and at the end of each test. The pre and post test background CO 2 or NO x concentration measurements of the dilution air shall be within 100 ppm or 5 ppm of each other, respectively. When using a dilute exhaust gas analysis system, the relevant background concentrations shall be determined by sampling dilution air into a sampling bag over the complete test sequence. Continuous (non-bag) background concentration may be taken at the minimum of three points, at the beginning, at the end, and a point near the middle of the cycle and averaged. At the manufacturer's request background measurements may be omitted. 3.6. Checking the analysers The emission analysers shall be set at zero and spanned. 3.7. Test cycle 3.7.1. Machinery specification according to paragraphs 1.1. to 1.3.: 3.7.1.1. Specification A For engines covered by paragraphs 1.1. and 1.2. of this Regulation, the discrete 8-mode cycle ( 1 ) of Annex 5, sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 1.1. shall be followed in dynamometer operation on the test engine. As an option, the corresponding ramped modal 9-mode cycle of Annex 5, sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 1.2. may be used. In this case, the cycle shall be run in accordance with Annex 4B, paragraph 7.8.2. instead of following the procedures in paragraphs 3.7.2. to 3.7.6. 3.7.1.2. Specification B For engines covered by paragraph 1.3. of this Regulation, the discrete 5-mode cycle ( 2 ) of Annex 5, sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 1.1. shall be followed in dynamometer operation on the test engine. As an option, the ramped modal 5-mode cycle of Annex 5, sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 1.2. may be used. In this case, the cycle shall be run in accordance with Annex 4B, paragraph 7.8.2. instead of following the procedures in paragraphs 3.7.2. to 3.7.6. The load figures are percentage values of the torque corresponding to the prime power rating defined as the maximum power available during a variable power sequence, which may be run for an unlimited number of hours per year, between stated maintenance intervals and under the stated ambient conditions, the maintenance being carried out as prescribed by the manufacturer. 3.7.2. Conditioning of the engine Warming up of the engine and the system shall be at maximum speed and torque in order to stabilize the engine parameters according to the recommendations of the manufacturer. Note: The conditioning period should also prevent the influence of deposits from a former test in the exhaust system. There is also a required period of stabilization between test points which has been included to minimize point to point influences. 3.7.3. Test sequence The test sequence shall be started. The test shall be performed in the order of the mode numbers as set out above for the test cycles. During each mode of the given test cycle after the initial transition period, the specified speed shall be held to within ±1 per cent of rated speed or ±3 min -1 , whichever is greater, except for low idle which shall be within the tolerances declared by the manufacturer. The specified torque shall be held so that the average over the period during which the measurements are being taken is within ±2 per cent of the maximum torque at the test speed. For each measuring point a minimum time of ten minutes is necessary. If for the testing of an engine, longer sampling times are required for reasons of obtaining sufficient particulate mass on the measuring filter the test mode period can be extended as necessary. The mode length shall be recorded and reported. The gaseous exhaust emission concentration values shall be measured and recorded during the last three minutes of the mode. The particulate sampling and the gaseous emission measurement should not commence before engine stabilization, as defined by the manufacturer, has been achieved and their completion shall be coincident. The fuel temperature shall be measured at the inlet to the fuel injection pump or as specified by the manufacturer, and the location of measurement recorded. 3.7.4. Analyser response The output of the analysers shall be recorded on a strip chart recorder or measured with an equivalent data acquisition system with the exhaust gas flowing through the analysers at least during the last three minutes of each mode. If bag sampling is applied for the diluted CO and CO 2 measurement (see Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 1.4.4.), a sample shall be bagged during the last three minutes of each mode, and the bag sample analysed and recorded. 3.7.5. Particulate sampling The particulate sampling can be done either with the single filter method or with the multiple filter method (Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 1.5.). Since the results of the methods may differ slightly, the method used shall be declared with the results. For the single filter method the modal weighing factors specified in the test cycle procedure shall be taken into account during sampling by adjusting sample flow rate and/or sampling time, accordingly. Sampling shall be conducted as late as possible within each mode. The sampling time per mode shall be at least 20 s for the single filter method and at least 60 s for the multifilter method. For systems without bypass capability, the sampling time per mode shall be at least 60 s for single and multiple filter methods. 3.7.6. Engine conditions The engine speed and load, intake air temperature, fuel flow and air or exhaust gas flow shall be measured for each mode once the engine has been stabilized. If the measurement of the exhaust gas flow or the measurement of combustion air and fuel consumption is not possible, it can be calculated using the carbon and oxygen balance method (see Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 1.2.3.). Any additional data required for calculation shall be recorded (see Annex 4A, Appendix 3, paragraphs 1.1. and 1.2.). 3.8. Re-checking the analysers After the emission test a zero gas and the same span gas will be used for re-checking. The test will be considered acceptable if the difference between the two measuring results is less than 2 per cent. 4. TEST RUN (NRTC TEST) 4.1. Introduction The non-road transient cycle (NRTC) is listed in Annex 5 as a second-by-second sequence of normalized speed and torque values applicable to all diesel engines covered by this Regulation. In order to perform the test on an engine test cell, the normalized values shall be converted to the actual values for the individual engine under test, based on the engine mapping curve. This conversion is referred to as denormalization, and the test cycle developed is referred to as the reference cycle of the engine to be tested. With these reference speed and torque values, the cycle shall be run on the test cell, and the feedback speed and torque values recorded. In order to validate the test run, a regression analysis between reference and feedback speed and torque values shall be conducted upon completion of the test. 4.1.1. The use of defeat devices or irrational control or irrational emission control strategies shall be prohibited 4.2. Engine mapping procedure When generating the NRTC on the test cell, the engine shall be mapped before running the test cycle to determine the speed vs. torque curve. 4.2.1. Determination of the mapping speed range The minimum and maximum mapping speeds are defined as follows: 4.2.2. Engine mapping curve The engine shall be warmed up at maximum power in order to stabilize the engine parameters according to the recommendation of the manufacturer and good engineering practice. When the engine is stabilized, the engine mapping shall be performed according to the following procedures. 4.2.2.1. Transient map 4.2.2.2. Step map 4.2.3. Mapping curve generation All data points recorded under paragraph 4.2.2. shall be connected using linear interpolation between points. The resulting torque curve is the mapping curve and shall be used to convert the normalized torque values of the engine dynamometer schedule of Annex 5 into actual torque values for the test cycle, as described in paragraph 4.3.3. 4.2.4. Alternate mapping If a manufacturer believes that the above mapping techniques are unsafe or unrepresentative for any given engine, alternate mapping techniques may be used. These alternate techniques shall satisfy the intent of the specified mapping procedures to determine the maximum available torque at all engine speeds achieved during the test cycles. Deviations from the mapping techniques specified in this paragraph for reasons of safety or representativeness shall be approved by the parties involved along with the justification for their use. In no case, however, shall the torque curve be run by descending engine speeds for governed or turbocharged engines. 4.2.5. Replicate tests An engine need not be mapped before each and every test cycle. An engine shall be remapped prior to a test cycle if: 4.3. Generation of the reference test cycle 4.3.1. Reference speed The reference speed ( n ref ) corresponds to the 100 per cent normalized speed values specified in the engine dynamometer schedule of Annex 5. The actual engine cycle resulting from denormalization to the reference speed depends largely on selection of the proper reference speed. The reference speed shall be determined by the following formula: (The high speed is the highest engine speed where 70 per cent of the rated power is delivered, while the low speed is the lowest engine speed where 50 per cent of the rated power is delivered). If the measured reference speed is within ±3 per cent of the reference speed as declared by the manufacturer, the declared reference speed may be used for the emissions test. If the tolerance is exceeded, the measured reference speed shall be used for the emissions test. (This is consistent with the ISO 8178-11:2006 standard.) 4.3.2. Denormalization of engine speed The speed shall be denormalized using the following equation: 4.3.3. Denormalization of engine torque The torque values in the engine dynamometer schedule of Annex 5 are normalized to the maximum torque at the respective speed. The torque values of the reference cycle shall be denormalized, using the mapping curve determined according to paragraph 4.2.2., as follows: for the respective actual speed as determined in paragraph 4.3.2. 4.3.4. Example of denormalization procedure As an example, the following test point shall be denormalized: % speed = 43 per cent % torque = 82 per cent Given the following values: idlespeed = 600 min –1 results in With the maximum torque of 700 Nm observed from the mapping curve at 1 288 min –1 4.4. Dynamometer 4.4.1. When using a load cell, the torque signal shall be transferred to the engine axis and the inertia of the dyno shall be considered. The actual engine torque is the torque read on the load cell plus the moment of inertia of the brake multiplied by the angular acceleration. The control system has to perform this calculation in real time. 4.4.2. If the engine is tested with an eddy-current dynamometer, it is recommended that the number of points, where the difference 4.5. Emissions test run The following flow chart outlines the test sequence: Engine preparation, pre-test measurements and calibrations Generation engine map (max torque curve) Generate reference test cycle Run one or more practice cycle as necessary to check engine/test cell/emissions systems Natural or forced cool down Ready all systems for sampling (analyzer calibration included) & data collection Cold start cycle exhaust emission phase Hot soak Hot start cycle exhaust emission phase One or more practice cycles may be run as necessary to check engine, test cell and emissions systems before the measurement cycle. 4.5.1. Preparation of the sampling filters At least one hour before the test, each filter shall be placed in a petri dish, which is protected against dust contamination and allows air exchange, and placed in a weighing chamber for stabilization. At the end of the stabilization period, each filter shall be weighed and the weight shall be recorded. The filter shall then be stored in a closed petri dish or sealed filter holder until needed for testing. The filter shall be used within eight hours of its removal from the weighing chamber. The tare weight shall be recorded. 4.5.2. Installation of the measuring equipment The instrumentation and sample probes shall be installed as required. The tailpipe shall be connected to the full-flow dilution system, if used. 4.5.3. Starting the dilution system The dilution system shall be started. The total diluted exhaust gas flow of a full-flow dilution system or the diluted exhaust gas flow through a partial flow dilution system shall be set to eliminate water condensation in the system, and to obtain a filter face temperature between 315 K (42 °C) and 325 K (52 °C). 4.5.4. Starting the particulate sampling system The particulate sampling system shall be started and run on by-pass. The particulate background level of the dilution air may be determined by sampling the dilution air prior to entrance of the exhaust into the dilution tunnel. It is preferred that background particulate sample be collected during the transient cycle if another PM sampling system is available. Otherwise, the PM sampling system used to collect transient cycle PM can be used. If filtered dilution air is used, one measurement may be done prior to or after the test. If the dilution air is not filtered, measurements should be carried out prior to the beginning and after the end of the cycle and the values averaged. 4.5.5. Checking the analysers The emission analysers shall be set at zero and spanned. If sample bags are used, they shall be evacuated. 4.5.6. Cool-down requirements A natural or forced cool-down procedure may be applied. For forced cool-down, good engineering judgment shall be used to set up systems to send cooling air across the engine, to send cool oil through the engine lubrication system, to remove heat from the coolant through the engine cooling system, and to remove heat from an exhaust after-treatment system. In the case of a forced after-treatment cool down, cooling air shall not be applied until the after-treatment system has cooled below its catalytic activation temperature. Any cooling procedure that results in unrepresentative emissions is not permitted. The cold start cycle exhaust emission test may begin after a cool-down only when the engine oil, coolant and after-treatment temperatures are stabilized between 20 °C and 30 °C for a minimum of fifteen minutes. 4.5.7. Cycle run 4.5.7.1. Cold start cycle The test sequence shall commence with the cold start cycle at the completion of the cool-down when all the requirements specified in paragraph 4.5.6. are met. The engine shall be started according to the starting procedure recommended by the manufacturer in the owner's manual, using either a production starter motor or the dynamometer. As soon as it is determined that the engine is started, start a "free idle" timer. Allow the engine to idle freely with no-load for 23 ± 1 s. Begin the transient engine cycle such that the first non-idle record of the cycle occurs at 23 ± 1 s. The free idle time is included in the 23 ± 1 s. The test shall be performed according to the reference cycle as set out in Annex 5. Engine speed and torque command set points shall be issued at 5 Hz (10 Hz recommended) or greater. The set points shall be calculated by linear interpolation between the 1 Hz set points of the reference cycle. Feedback engine speed and torque shall be recorded at least once every second during the test cycle, and the signals may be electronically filtered. 4.5.7.2. Analyser response At the start of the engine the measuring equipment shall be started, simultaneously: If raw exhaust measurement is used, the emission concentrations (HC, CO and NO x ) and the exhaust gas mass flow rate shall be measured continuously and stored with at least 2 Hz on a computer system. All other data may be recorded with a sample rate of at least 1 Hz. For analogue analysers the response shall be recorded, and the calibration data may be applied online or offline during the data evaluation. If a full flow dilution system is used, HC and NO x shall be measured continuously in the dilution tunnel with a frequency of at least 2 Hz. The average concentrations shall be determined by integrating the analyser signals over the test cycle. The system response time shall be no greater than 20 s, and shall be coordinated with CVS flow fluctuations and sampling time/test cycle offsets, if necessary. CO and CO 2 shall be determined by integration or by analysing the concentrations in the sample bag collected over the cycle. The concentrations of the gaseous pollutants in the dilution air shall be determined by integration or by collection in the background bag. All other parameters that need to be measured shall be recorded with a minimum of one measurement per second (1 Hz). 4.5.7.3. Particulate sampling At the start of the engine the particulate sampling system shall be switched from by-pass to collecting particulates. If a partial flow dilution system is used, the sample pump(s) shall be adjusted so that the flow rate through the particulate sample probe or transfer tube is maintained proportional to the exhaust mass flow rate. If a full flow dilution system is used, the sample pump(s) shall be adjusted so that the flow rate through the particulate sample probe or transfer tube is maintained at a value within ±5 per cent of the set flow rate. If flow compensation (i.e. proportional control of sample flow) is used, it shall be demonstrated that the ratio of main tunnel flow to particulate sample flow does not change by more than ± 5 per cent of its set value (except for the first 10 s of sampling). Note: For double dilution operation, sample flow is the net difference between the flow rate through the sample filters and the secondary dilution airflow rate. The average temperature and pressure at the gas meter(s) or flow instrumentation inlet shall be recorded. If the set flow rate cannot be maintained over the complete cycle (within ± 5 per cent) because of high particulate loading on the filter, the test shall be voided. The test shall be rerun using a lower flow rate and/or a larger diameter filter. 4.5.7.4. Engine stalling during the cold start test cycle If the engine stalls anywhere during the cold start test cycle, the engine shall be preconditioned, then the cool-down procedure repeated; finally the engine shall be restarted, and the test repeated. If a malfunction occurs in any of the required test equipment during the test cycle, the test shall be voided. 4.5.7.5. Operations after cold start cycle At the completion of the cold start cycle of the test, the measurement of the exhaust gas mass flow rate, the diluted exhaust gas volume, the gas flow into the collecting bags and the particulate sample pump shall be stopped. For an integrating analyser system, sampling shall continue until system response times have elapsed. The concentrations of the collecting bags, if used, shall be analysed as soon as possible and in any case not later than 20 minutes after the end of the test cycle. After the emission test, a zero gas and the same span gas shall be used for rechecking the analysers. The test will be considered acceptable if the difference between the pre-test and post-test results is less than 2 per cent of the span gas value. The particulate filters shall be returned to the weighing chamber no later than one hour after completion of the test. They shall be conditioned in a petri dish, which is protected against dust contamination and allows air exchange, for at least one hour, and then weighed. The gross weight of the filters shall be recorded. 4.5.7.6. Hot soak Immediately after the engine is turned off, the engine cooling fan(s) shall be turned off if used, as well as the CVS blower (or disconnect the exhaust system from the CVS), if used. Allow the engine to soak for 20 ± 1 minutes. Prepare the engine and dynamometer for the hot start test. Connect evacuated sample collection bags to the dilute exhaust and dilution air sample collection systems. Start the CVS (if used or not already on) or connect the exhaust system to the CVS (if disconnected). Start the sample pumps (except the particulate sample pump(s), the engine cooling fan(s) and the data collection system. The heat exchanger of the constant volume sampler (if used) and the heated components of any continuous sampling system(s) (if applicable) shall be preheated to their designated operating temperatures before the test begins. Adjust the sample flow rates to the desired flow rate and set the CVS gas flow measuring devices to zero. Carefully install a clean particulate filter in each of the filter holders and install assembled filter holders in the sample flow line. 4.5.7.7. Hot start cycle As soon as it is determined that the engine is started, start a "free idle" timer. Allow the engine to idle freely with no-load for 23 ± 1 s. Begin the transient engine cycle such that the first non-idle record of the cycle occurs at 23 ± 1 s. The free idle time is included in the 23 ± 1 s. The test shall be performed according to the reference cycle as set out in Annex 5. Engine speed and torque command set points shall be issued at 5 Hz (10 Hz recommended) or greater. The set points shall be calculated by linear interpolation between the 1 Hz set points of the reference cycle. Feedback engine speed and torque shall be recorded at least once every second during the test cycle, and the signals may be electronically filtered. The procedure described in previous paragraphs 4.5.7.2. and 4.5.7.3. shall then be repeated. 4.5.7.8. Engine stalling during the hot start cycle If the engine stalls anywhere during the hot start cycle, the engine may be shut off and re-soaked for 20 minutes. The hot start cycle may then be rerun. Only one hot re-soak and hot start cycle restart is permitted. 4.5.7.9. Operations after hot start cycle At the completion of the hot start cycle, the measurement of the exhaust gas mass flow rate, the diluted exhaust gas volume, the gas flow into the collecting bags and the particulate sample pump shall be stopped. For an integrating analyser system, sampling shall continue until system response times have elapsed. The concentrations of the collecting bags, if used, shall be analysed as soon as possible and in any case not later than 20 minutes after the end of the test cycle. After the emission test, a zero gas and the same span gas shall be used for re-checking the analysers. The test will be considered acceptable if the difference between the pre-test and post-test results is less than 2 per cent of the span gas value. The particulate filters shall be returned to the weighing chamber no later than one hour after completion of the test. They shall be conditioned in a petri dish, which is protected against dust contamination and allows air exchange, for at least one hour, and then weighed. The gross weight of the filters shall be recorded. 4.6. Verification of the test run 4.6.1. Data shift To minimize the biasing effect of the time lag between the feedback and reference cycle values, the entire engine speed and torque feedback signal sequence may be advanced or delayed in time with respect to the reference speed and torque sequence. If the feedback signals are shifted, both speed and torque shall be shifted by the same amount in the same direction. 4.6.2. Calculation of the cycle work The actual cycle work W act (kWh) shall be calculated using each pair of engine feedback speed and torque values recorded. The actual cycle work W act is used for comparison to the reference cycle work W ref and for calculating the brake specific emissions. The same methodology shall be used for integrating both reference and actual engine power. If values are to be determined between adjacent In integrating the reference and actual cycle work, all negative torque values shall be set equal to zero and included. If integration is performed at a frequency of less than 5 Hz, and if, during a given time segment, the torque value changes from positive to negative or negative to positive, the negative portion shall be computed and set equal to zero. The positive portion shall be included in the integrated value. W act shall be between – 15 per cent and + 5 per cent of W ref . 4.6.3. Validation statistics of the test cycle Linear regressions of the feedback values on the reference values shall be performed for speed, torque and power. This shall be done after any feedback data shift has occurred, if this option is selected. The method of least squares shall be used, with the best fit equation having the form: where: The standard error of estimate (SE) of y on x and the coefficient of determination (r 2 ) shall be calculated for each regression line. It is recommended that this analysis be performed at 1 Hz. For a test to be considered valid, the criteria of Table 1 shall be met. Table 1 Regression line tolerances For regression purposes only, point deletions are permitted where noted in Table 2 before doing the regression calculation. However, those points shall not be deleted for the calculation of cycle work and emissions. An idle point is defined as a point having a normalized reference torque of 0 per cent and a normalized reference speed of 0 per cent. Point deletion may be applied to the whole or to any part of the cycle. Table 2 Permitted point deletions from regression analysis (points to which the point deletion is applied have to be specified) ( 1 ) Identical with C1 cycle as described in paragraph 8.3.1.1. of ISO 8178-4: 2007 (corr. 2008). ( 2 ) Identical with D2 cycle as described in paragraph 8.4.1. of ISO 8178-4: 2007 (corr. 2008). Appendix 1 Measurement and sampling procedures (NRSC, NRTC) 1. MEASUREMENT AND SAMPLING PROCEDURES (NRSC TEST) Gaseous and particulate components emitted by the engine submitted for testing shall be measured by the methods described in Annex 4A, Appendix 4. The methods of Annex 4A, Appendix 4 describe the recommended analytical systems for the gaseous emissions (paragraph 1.1.) and the recommended particulate dilution and sampling systems (paragraph 1.2.). At the request of the manufacturer and with the agreement of the approval authority the methods described in Annex 4B, paragraph 9. may be used as an alternative to those in paragraph 1. of this appendix. 1.1. Dynamometer specification An engine dynamometer with adequate characteristics to perform the test cycle described in Annex 4A, paragraph 3.7.1. shall be used. The instrumentation for torque and speed measurement shall allow the measurement of the power within the given limits. Additional calculations may be necessary. The accuracy of the measuring equipment shall be such that the maximum tolerances of the figures given in paragraph 1.3. are not exceeded. 1.2. Exhaust gas flow The exhaust gas flow shall be determined by one of the methods mentioned in paragraphs 1.2.1. to 1.2.4. 1.2.1. Direct measurement method Direct measurement of the exhaust flow by flow nozzle or equivalent metering system (for detail see ISO 5167:2000). Note: Direct gaseous flow measurement is a difficult task. Precautions shall be taken to avoid measurement errors that will impact emission value errors. 1.2.2. Air and fuel measurement method Measurement of the airflow and the fuel flow. Air flow-meters and fuel flow-meters with the accuracy defined in paragraph 1.3. shall be used. The calculation of the exhaust gas flow is as follows: 1.2.3. Carbon balance method Exhaust mass calculation from fuel consumption and exhaust gas concentrations using the carbon balance method (Annex 4A, Appendix 3). 1.2.4. Tracer measurement method This method involves measurement of the concentration of a tracer gas in the exhaust. A known amount of an inert gas (e.g. pure helium) shall be injected into the exhaust gas flow as a tracer. The gas is mixed and diluted by the exhaust gas, but shall not react in the exhaust pipe. The concentration of the gas shall then be measured in the exhaust gas sample. In order to ensure complete mixing of the tracer gas, the exhaust gas sampling probe shall be located at least 1 m or 30 times the diameter of the exhaust pipe, whichever is larger, downstream of the tracer gas injection point. The sampling probe may be located closer to the injection point if complete mixing is verified by comparing the tracer gas concentration with the reference concentration when the tracer gas is injected upstream of the engine. The tracer gas flow rate shall be set so that the tracer gas concentration at engine idle speed after mixing becomes lower than the full scale of the trace gas analyser. The calculation of the exhaust gas flow is as follows: where: The background concentration of the tracer gas ( conc a ) may be determined by averaging the background concentration measured immediately before and after the test run. When the background concentration is less than 1 per cent of the concentration of the tracer gas after mixing ( conc mix. ) at maximum exhaust flow, the background concentration may be neglected. The total system shall meet the accuracy specifications for the exhaust gas flow and shall be calibrated according to Appendix 2, paragraph 1.11.2. 1.2.5. Air flow and air to fuel ratio measurement method This method involves exhaust mass calculation from the air flow and the air to fuel ratio. The calculation of the instantaneous exhaust gas mass flow is as follows: where: Note: The calculation refers to a diesel fuel with a H/C ratio equal to 1,8. The air flow-meter shall meet the accuracy specifications in Table 3, the CO 2 analyser used shall meet the specifications of paragraph 1.4.1., and the total system shall meet the accuracy specifications for the exhaust gas flow. Optionally, air to fuel ratio measurement equipment, such as a zirconia type sensor, may be used for the measurement of the relative air to fuel ratio in accordance with the specifications of paragraph 1.4.4. 1.2.6. Total dilute exhaust gas flow When using a full flow dilution system, the total flow of the dilute exhaust ( G TOTW ) shall be measured with a PDP or CFV or SSV (Annex 4A, Appendix 4, paragraph 1.2.1.2.). The accuracy shall conform to the provisions of Annex 4A, Appendix 2, paragraph 2.2. 1.3. Accuracy The calibration of all measurement instruments shall be traceable to national or international standards and comply with the requirements listed in Table 3. Table 3 Accuracy of measuring instruments 1.4. Determination of the gaseous components 1.4.1. General analyser specifications The analysers shall have a measuring range appropriate for the accuracy required to measure the concentrations of the exhaust gas components (paragraph 1.4.1.1.). It is recommended that the analysers be operated in such a way that the measured concentration falls between 15 per cent and 100 per cent of full scale. If the full scale value is 155 ppm (or ppm C) or less or if read-out systems (computers, data loggers) that provide sufficient accuracy and resolution below 15 per cent of full scale are used, concentrations below 15 per cent of full scale are also acceptable. In this case, additional calibrations are to be made to ensure the accuracy of the calibration curves – Annex 4A, Appendix 2, paragraph 1.5.5.2. The electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) of the equipment shall be on a level as to minimize additional errors. 1.4.1.1. Measurement error The analyser shall not deviate from the nominal calibration point by more than ± 2 per cent of the reading or ± 0,3 per cent of full scale, whichever is larger. Note: For the purposes of this Regulation, accuracy is defined as the deviation of the analyser reading from the nominal calibration values using a calibration gas (≡ true value) 1.4.1.2. Repeatability The repeatability, defined as 2,5 times the standard deviation of ten repetitive responses to a given calibration or span gas, shall be no greater than ± 1 per cent of full scale concentration for each range used above 155 ppm (or ppm C) or ± 2 per cent of each range used below 155 ppm (or ppm C). 1.4.1.3. Noise The analyser peak-to-peak response to zero and calibration or span gases over any ten second period shall not exceed 2 per cent of full scale on all ranges used. 1.4.1.4. Zero drift The zero drift during a one-hour period shall be less than 2 per cent of full scale on the lowest range used. The zero response is defined as the mean response, including noise, to a zero gas during a 30 s time interval. 1.4.1.5. Span drift The span drift during a one-hour period shall be less than 2 per cent of full scale on the lowest range used. Span is defined as the difference between the span response and the zero response. The span response is defined as the mean response, including noise, to a span gas during a 30 s time interval. 1.4.2. Gas drying The optional gas drying device shall have a minimal effect on the concentration of the measured gases. Chemical dryers are not an acceptable method of removing water from the sample. 1.4.3. Analysers Paragraphs 1.4.3.1. to 1.4.3.5. of this appendix describe the measurement principles to be used. A detailed description of the measurement systems is given in Annex 4A, Appendix 4. The gases to be measured shall be analysed with the following instruments. For non-linear analysers, the use of linearizing circuits is permitted. 1.4.3.1. Carbon monoxide (CO) analysis The carbon monoxide analyser shall be of the non-dispersive infra-red (NDIR) absorption type. 1.4.3.2. Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) analysis The carbon dioxide analyser shall be of the non-dispersive infra-red (NDIR) absorption type. 1.4.3.3. Hydrocarbon (HC) analysis The hydrocarbon analyser shall be of the heated flame ionization detector (HFID) type with detector, valves, pipework, etc, heated so as to maintain a gas temperature of 463 K (190 °C) ± 10 K. 1.4.3.4. Oxides of nitrogen (NO x ) analysis The oxides of nitrogen analyser shall be of the chemiluminescent detector (CLD) or heated chemiluminescent detector (HCLD) type with a NO 2 /NO converter, if measured on a dry basis. If measured on a wet basis, a HCLD with converter maintained above 328 K (55 °C) shall be used, provided the water quench check (Annex 4A, Appendix 2, paragraph 1.9.2.2.) is satisfied. For both CLD and HCLD, the sampling path shall be maintained at a wall temperature of 328 K to 473 K (55 to 200 °C) up to the converter for dry measurement, and up to the analyser for wet measurement. 1.4.4. Air to fuel measurement The air to fuel measurement equipment used to determine the exhaust gas flow as specified in paragraph 1.2.5. shall be a wide range air to fuel ratio sensor or lambda sensor of Zirconia type. The sensor shall be mounted directly on the exhaust pipe where the exhaust gas temperature is high enough to eliminate water condensation. The accuracy of the sensor with incorporated electronics shall be within: To fulfil the accuracy specified above, the sensor shall be calibrated as specified by the instrument manufacturer. 1.4.5. Sampling for gaseous emissions The gaseous emissions sampling probes shall be fitted at least 0,5 m or three times the diameter of the exhaust pipe (whichever is the larger) upstream of the exit of the exhaust gas system as far as applicable and sufficiently close to the engine as to ensure an exhaust gas temperature of at least 343 K (70 °C) at the probe. In the case of a multi-cylinder engine with a branched exhaust manifold, the inlet of the probe shall be located sufficiently far downstream so as to ensure that the sample is representative of the average exhaust emissions from all cylinders. In multi-cylinder engines having distinct groups of manifolds, such as in a 'V'-engine configuration, it is permissible to acquire a sample from each group individually and calculate an average exhaust emission. Other methods which have been shown to correlate with the above methods may be used. For exhaust emissions calculation the total exhaust mass flow of the engine shall be used. When a full flow dilution system is used for the determination of the particulates, the gaseous emissions may also be determined in the diluted exhaust gas. The sampling probes shall be close to the particulate sampling probe in the dilution tunnel (Annex 4A, Appendix 4, paragraph 1.2.1.2., DT and paragraph 1.2.2., PSP). CO and CO 2 may optionally be determined by sampling into a bag and subsequent measurement of the concentration in the sampling bag. 1.5. Determination of the particulates The determination of the particulates requires a dilution system. Dilution may be accomplished by a partial flow dilution system or a full flow dilution system. The flow capacity of the dilution system shall be large enough to completely eliminate water condensation in the dilution and sampling systems, and maintain the temperature of the diluted exhaust gas between 315 K (42 °C) and 325 K (52 °C) immediately upstream of the filter holders. De-humidifying the dilution air before entering the dilution system is permitted, if the air humidity is high. Dilution air pre-heating above the temperature limit of 303 K (30 °C) is recommended, if the ambient temperature is below 293 K (20 °C). However, the diluted air temperature shall not exceed 325 K (52 °C) prior to the introduction of the exhaust in the dilution tunnel. Note: For power bands up to and including K using discrete mode cycles, the filter temperature may be kept at or below the maximum temperature of 325 K (52 °C) instead of respecting the temperature range of 42 to 52 °C. For a partial flow dilution system, the particulate sampling probe shall be fitted close to and upstream of the gaseous probe as defined in paragraph 4.4. and in accordance with Annex 4A, Appendix 4, paragraph 1.2.1.1., Figure 4-12 EP and SP. The partial flow dilution system has to be designed to split the exhaust stream into two fractions, the smaller one being diluted with air and subsequently used for particulate measurement. From that it is essential that the dilution ratio be determined very accurately. Different splitting methods can be applied, whereby the type of splitting used dictates to a significant degree the sampling hardware and procedures to be used (Annex 4A, Appendix 4, paragraph 1.2.1.1.). To determine the mass of the particulates, a particulate sampling system, particulate sampling filters, a microgram balance and a temperature and humidity controlled weighing chamber are required. For particulate sampling, two methods may be applied: 1.5.1. Particulate sampling filters 1.5.1.1. Filter specification Fluorocarbon coated glass fibre filters or fluorocarbon based membrane filters are required for certification tests. For special applications different filter materials may be used. All filter types shall have a 0,3 μm DOP (di-octylphthalate) collection efficiency of at least 99 per cent at a gas face velocity between 35 and 100 cm/s. When performing correlation tests between laboratories or between a manufacturer and an approval authority, filters of identical quality shall be used. 1.5.1.2. Filter size Particulate filters shall have a minimum diameter of 47 mm (37 mm stain diameter). Larger diameter filters are acceptable (paragraph 1.5.1.5.). 1.5.1.3. Primary and back-up filters The diluted exhaust shall be sampled by a pair of filters placed in series (one primary and one back-up filter) during the test sequence. The back-up filter shall be located no more than 100 mm downstream of, and shall not be in contact with, the primary filter. The filters may be weighed separately or as a pair with the filters placed stain side to stain side. 1.5.1.4. Filter face velocity A gas face velocity through the filter of 35 to 100 cm/s shall be achieved. The pressure drop increase between the beginning and the end of the test shall be no more than 25 kPa. 1.5.1.5. Filter loading The recommended minimum filter loadings for the most common filter sizes are shown in the following table. For larger filter sizes, the minimum filter loading shall be 0,065 mg/1 000 mm 2 filter area. For the multiple filter method, the recommended minimum filter loading for the sum of all filters shall be the product of the appropriate value above and the square root of the total number of modes. 1.5.2. Weighing chamber and analytical balance specifications 1.5.2.1. Weighing chamber conditions The temperature of the chamber (or room) in which the particulate filters are conditioned and weighed shall be maintained to within 295 K (22 °C) ± 3 K during all filter conditioning and weighing. The humidity shall be maintained to a dew point of 282,5 (9,5 °C) ± 3 K and a relative humidity of 45 ± 8 per cent. 1.5.2.2. Reference filter weighing The chamber (or room) environment shall be free of any ambient contaminants (such as dust) that would settle on the particulate filters during their stabilization. Disturbances to weighing room specifications as outlined in paragraph 1.5.2.1. will be allowed if the duration of the disturbances does not exceed 30 minutes. The weighing room should meet the required specifications prior to personnel entrance into the weighing room. At least two unused reference filters or reference filter pairs shall be weighed within four hours of, but preferably at the same time as the sample filter (pair) weighing. They shall be the same size and material as the sample filters. If the average weight of the reference filters (reference filter pairs) changes between sample filter weighing by more than 10 μg, then all sample filters shall be discarded and the emissions test repeated. If the weighing room stability criteria outlined in paragraph 1.5.2.1. is not met, but the reference filter (pair) weighing meet the above criteria, the engine manufacturer has the option of accepting the sample filter weights or voiding the tests, fixing the weighing room control system and re-running the test. 1.5.2.3. Analytical balance The analytical balance used to determine the weights of all filters shall have a precision (standard deviation) of 2 μg and a resolution of 1 μg (1 digit = 1 μg) specified by the balance manufacturer. 1.5.2.4. Elimination of static electricity effects To eliminate the effects of static electricity, the filters shall be neutralized prior to weighing, for example, by a Polonium neutralizer or a device of similar effect. 1.5.3. Additional specifications for particulate measurement All parts of the dilution system and the sampling system from the exhaust pipe up to the filter holder, which are in contact with raw and diluted exhaust gas, shall be designed to minimize deposition or alteration of the particulates. All parts shall be made of electrically conductive materials that do not react with exhaust gas components, and shall be electrically grounded to prevent electrostatic effects. 2. MEASUREMENT AND SAMPLING PROCEDURES (NRTC TEST) 2.1. Introduction Gaseous and particulate components emitted by the engine submitted for testing shall be measured by the methods of Annex 4A, Appendix 4. The methods of Annex 4A, Appendix 4 describe the recommended analytical systems for the gaseous emissions (paragraph 1.1.) and the recommended particulate dilution and sampling systems (paragraph 1.2.). 2.2. Dynamometer and test cell equipment The following equipment shall be used for emission tests of engines on engine dynamometers: 2.2.1. Engine dynamometer An engine dynamometer shall be used with adequate characteristics to perform the test cycle described in Appendix 4 to this Annex. The instrumentation for torque and speed measurement shall allow the measurement of the power within the given limits. Additional calculations may be necessary. The accuracy of the measuring equipment shall be such that the maximum tolerances of the figures given in Table 4 are not exceeded. 2.2.2. Other instruments Measuring instruments for fuel consumption, air consumption, temperature of coolant and lubricant, exhaust gas pressure and intake manifold depression, exhaust gas temperature, air intake temperature, atmospheric pressure, humidity and fuel temperature shall be used, as required. These instruments shall satisfy the requirements given in Table 4: Table 4 Accuracy of measuring instruments 2.2.3. Raw exhaust gas flow For calculating the emissions in the raw exhaust gas and for controlling a partial flow dilution system, it is necessary to know the exhaust gas mass flow rate. For determining the exhaust mass flow rate, either of the methods described below may be used. For the purpose of emissions calculation, the response time of either method described below shall be equal to or less than the requirement for the analyser response time, as defined in Appendix 2, paragraph 1.11.1. For the purpose of controlling a partial flow dilution system, a faster response is required. For partial flow dilution systems with online control, a response time of ≤ 0,3 s is required. For partial flow dilution systems with look ahead control based on a pre-recorded test run, a response time of the exhaust flow measurement system of ≤ 5 s with a rise time of ≤ 1 s is required. The system response time shall be specified by the instrument manufacturer. The combined response time requirements for exhaust gas flow and partial flow dilution system are indicated in paragraph 2.4. 2.2.4. Diluted exhaust gas flow For calculation of the emissions in the diluted exhaust gas, it is necessary to know the diluted exhaust gas mass flow rate. The total diluted exhaust gas flow over the cycle (kg/test) shall be calculated from the measurement values over the cycle and the corresponding calibration data of the flow measurement device ( V 0 for PDP, K V for CFV, C d for SSV): the corresponding methods described in Appendix 3, paragraph 2.2.1. shall be used. If the total sample mass of particulates and gaseous pollutants exceeds 0,5 per cent of the total CVS flow, the CVS flow shall be corrected or the particulate sample flow shall be returned to the CVS prior to the flow measuring device. 2.3. Determination of the gaseous components 2.3.1. General analyser specifications The analysers shall have a measuring range appropriate for the accuracy required to measure the concentrations of the exhaust gas components (paragraph 1.4.1.1.). It is recommended that the analysers be operated in such a way that the measured concentration falls between 15 and 100 per cent of full scale. If the full scale value is 155 ppm (or ppm C) or less, or if read-out systems (computers, data loggers) that provide sufficient accuracy and resolution below 15 per cent of full scale are used, concentrations below 15 per cent of full scale are also acceptable. In this case, additional calibrations are to be made to ensure the accuracy of the calibration curves – Annex 4A, Appendix 2, paragraph 1.5.5.2. The electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) of the equipment shall be of a level such as to minimize additional errors. 2.3.1.1. Measurement error The analyser shall not deviate from the nominal calibration point by more than ± 2 per cent of the reading or ± 0,3 per cent of full scale, whichever is larger. Note: For the purposes of this Regulation, accuracy is defined as the deviation of the analyser reading from the nominal calibration values using a calibration gas (≡ true value). 2.3.1.2. Repeatability The repeatability, defined as 2,5 times the standard deviation of 10 repetitive responses to a given calibration or span gas, shall be no greater than ± 1 per cent of full scale concentration for each range used above 155 ppm (or ppm C) or ± 2 per cent for each range used below 155 ppm (or ppm C). 2.3.1.3. Noise The analyser peak-to-peak response to zero and calibration or span gases over any 10 s periods shall not exceed 2 per cent of full scale on all ranges used. 2.3.1.4. Zero drift The zero drift during a one-hour period shall be less than 2 per cent of full scale on the lowest range used. The zero response is defined as the mean response, including noise, to a zero gas during a 30 s time interval. 2.3.1.5. Span drift The span drift during a one-hour period shall be less than 2 per cent of full scale on the lowest range used. Span is defined as the difference between the span response and the zero response. The span response is defined as the mean response, including noise, to a span gas during a 30 s time interval. 2.3.1.6. Rise time For raw exhaust gas analysis, the rise time of the analyser installed in the measurement system shall not exceed 2,5 s. Note: Only evaluating the response time of the analyser alone will not clearly define the suitability of the total system for transient testing. Volumes, and especially dead volumes, throughout the system will not only affect the transportation time from the probe to the analyser, but also affect the rise time. Also transport times inside of an analyser would be defined as analyser response time, like the converter or water traps inside of a NO x analyser. The determination of the total system response time is described in Appendix 2, paragraph 1.11.1. 2.3.2. Gas drying Same specifications as for NRSC test cycle apply (paragraph 1.4.2.) as described here below. The optional gas drying device shall have a minimal effect on the concentration of the measured gases. Chemical dryers are not an acceptable method of removing water from the sample. 2.3.3. Analysers Same specifications as for NRSC test cycle apply (paragraph 1.4.3.) as described here below. The gases to be measured shall be analysed with the following instruments. For non-linear analysers, the use of linearizing circuits is permitted. 2.3.3.1. Carbon monoxide (CO) analysis The carbon monoxide analyser shall be of the non-dispersive infra-red (NDIR) absorption type. 2.3.3.2. Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) analysis The carbon dioxide analyser shall be of the non-dispersive infra-red (NDIR) absorption type. 2.3.3.3. Hydrocarbon (HC) analysis The hydrocarbon analyser shall be of the heated flame ionization detector (HFID) type with detector, valves, pipework etc., heated so as to maintain a gas temperature of 463K (190 °C) ± 10 K. 2.3.3.4. Oxides of nitrogen (NO x ) analysis The oxides of nitrogen analyser shall be of the chemiluminescent detector (CLD) or heated chemiluminescent detector (HCLD) type with a NO 2 /NO converter, if measured on a dry basis. If measured on a wet basis, a HCLD with converter maintained above 328 K (55 °C shall be used, provided the water quench check (Annex 4A, Appendix 2, paragraph 1.9.2.2.) is satisfied. For both CLD and HCLD, the sampling path shall be maintained at a wall temperature of 328K to 473 K (55 to 200 °C) up to the converter for dry measurement, and up to the analyser for wet measurement. 2.3.4. Air to fuel measurement The air to fuel measurement equipment used to determine the exhaust gas flow as specified in paragraph 2.2.3. shall be a wide range air to fuel ratio sensor or lambda sensor of Zirconia type. The sensor shall be mounted directly on the exhaust pipe where the exhaust gas temperature is high enough to eliminate water condensation. The accuracy of the sensor with incorporated electronics shall be within: To fulfil the accuracy specified above, the sensor shall be calibrated as specified by the instrument manufacturer. 2.3.5. Sampling of gaseous emissions 2.3.5.1. Raw exhaust gas flow For calculation of the emissions in the raw exhaust gas the same specifications as for NRSC test cycle apply (paragraph 1.4.4.), as described here below. The gaseous emissions sampling probes shall be fitted at least 0,5 m or three times the diameter of the exhaust pipe — whichever is the larger — upstream of the exit of the exhaust gas system as far as applicable and sufficiently close to the engine as to ensure an exhaust gas temperature of at least 343 K (70 °C) at the probe. In the case of a multicylinder engine with a branched exhaust manifold, the inlet of the probe shall be located sufficiently far downstream so as to ensure that the sample is representative of the average exhaust emissions from all cylinders. In multicylinder engines having distinct groups of manifolds, such as in a "V"-engine configuration, it is permissible to acquire a sample from each group individually and calculate an average exhaust emission. Other methods which have been shown to correlate with the above methods may be used. For exhaust emissions calculation the total exhaust mass flow of the engine shall be used. 2.3.5.2. Diluted exhaust gas flow If a full flow dilution system is used, the following specifications apply. The exhaust pipe between the engine and the full flow dilution system shall conform to the requirements of Annex 4A, Appendix 4. The gaseous emissions sample probe(s) shall be installed in the dilution tunnel at a point where the dilution air and exhaust gas are well mixed, and in close proximity to the particulates sampling probe. Sampling can generally be done in two ways: The background concentrations shall be sampled upstream of the dilution tunnel into a sampling bag, and shall be subtracted from the emissions concentration according to Appendix 3, paragraph 2.2.3. 2.4. Determination of the particulates Determination of the particulates requires a dilution system. Dilution may be accomplished by a partial flow dilution system or a full flow dilution system. The flow capacity of the dilution system shall be large enough to completely eliminate water condensation in the dilution and sampling systems, and maintain the temperature of the diluted exhaust gas between 315 K (42 °C) and 325 K (52 °C) immediately upstream of the filter holders. De-humidifying the dilution air before entering the dilution system is permitted, if the air humidity is high. Dilution air pre-heating above the temperature limit of 303 K (30 °C) is recommended if the ambient temperature is below 293 K (20 °C). However, the diluted air temperature shall not exceed 325 K (52 °C) prior to the introduction of the exhaust in the dilution tunnel. The particulate sampling probe shall be installed in close proximity to the gaseous emissions sampling probe, and the installation shall comply with the provisions of paragraph 2.3.5. To determine the mass of the particulates, a particulate sampling system, particulate sampling filters, microgram balance, and a temperature and humidity controlled weighing chamber, are required. Partial flow dilution system specifications The partial flow dilution system has to be designed to split the exhaust stream into two fractions, the smaller one being diluted with air and subsequently used for particulate measurement. For this it is essential that the dilution ratio be determined very accurately. Different splitting methods can be applied, whereby the type of splitting used dictates to a significant degree the sampling hardware and procedures to be used (Annex 4A, Appendix 4, paragraph 1.2.1.1.). For the control of a partial flow dilution system, a fast system response is required. The transformation time for the system shall be determined by the procedure described in Appendix 2, paragraph 1.11.1. If the combined transformation time of the exhaust flow measurement (see previous paragraph) and the partial flow system is less than 0,3 s, online control may be used. If the transformation time exceeds 0,3 s, look ahead control based on a pre-recorded test run shall be used. In this case, the rise time shall be ≤ 1 s and the delay time of the combination ≤ 10 s. The total system response shall be designed as to ensure a representative sample of the particulates, G SE , proportional to the exhaust mass flow. To determine the proportionality, a regression analysis of G SE versus G EXHW shall be conducted on a minimum 5 Hz data acquisition rate, and the following criteria shall be met: Optionally, a pre-test may be run, and the exhaust mass flow signal of the pre-test be used for controlling the sample flow into the particulate system (look-ahead control). Such a procedure is required if the transformation time of the particulate system, t 50,P or/and the transformation time of the exhaust mass flow signal, t 50,F are > 0,3 s. A correct control of the partial dilution system is obtained, if the time trace of G EXHW,pre of the pre-test, which controls G SE , is shifted by a 'look-ahead' time of t 50,P + t 50,F . For establishing the correlation between G SE and G EXHW the data taken during the actual test shall be used, with G EXHW time aligned by t 50,F relative to G SE (no contribution from t 50,P to the time alignment). That is, the time shift between G EXHW and G SE is the difference in their transformation times that were determined in Appendix 2, paragraph 2.6. For partial flow dilution systems, the accuracy of the sample flow G SE is of special concern, if not measured directly, but determined by differential flow measurement: In this case an accuracy of ± 2 per cent for G TOTW and G DILW is not sufficient to guarantee acceptable accuracies of G SE . If the gas flow is determined by differential flow measurement, the maximum error of the difference shall be such that the accuracy of G SE is within ± 5 per cent when the dilution ratio is less than 15. It can be calculated by taking the root-mean-square of the errors of each instrument. Acceptable accuracies of G SE can be obtained by either of the following methods: 2.4.1. Particulate sampling filters 2.4.1.1. Filter specification Fluorocarbon coated glass fibre filters or fluorocarbon based membrane filters are required for certification tests. For special applications different filter materials may be used. All filter types shall have a 0,3 μm DOP (di-octylphthalate) collection efficiency of at least 99 per cent at a gas face velocity between 35 and 100 cm/s. When performing correlation tests between laboratories or between a manufacturer and an approval authority, filters of identical quality shall be used. 2.4.1.2. Filter size Particulate filters shall have a minimum diameter of 47 mm (37 mm stain diameter). Larger diameter filters are acceptable (paragraph 2.4.1.5). 2.4.1.3. Primary and back-up filters The diluted exhaust shall be sampled by a pair of filters placed in series (one primary and one back-up filter) during the test sequence. The back-up filter shall be located no more than 100 mm downstream of, and shall not be in contact with, the primary filter. The filters may be weighed separately or as a pair with the filters placed stain side to stain side. 2.4.1.4. Filter face velocity A gas face velocity through the filter of 35 to 100 cm/s shall be achieved. The pressure drop increase between the beginning and the end of the test shall be no more than 25 kPa. 2.4.1.5. Filter loading The recommended minimum filter loadings for the most common filter sizes are shown in the following table. For larger filter sizes, the minimum filter loading shall be 0,065 mg/1 000 mm 2 filter area. 2.4.2. Weighing chamber and analytical balance specifications 2.4.2.1. Weighing chamber conditions The temperature of the chamber (or room) in which the particulate filters are conditioned and weighed shall be maintained to within 295 K (22 °C) ± 3 K during all filter conditioning and weighing. The humidity shall be maintained to a dewpoint of 282,5 (9,5 °C) ± 3 K and a relative humidity of 45 ± 8 per cent. 2.4.2.2. Reference filter weighing The chamber (or room) environment shall be free of any ambient contaminants (such as dust) that would settle on the particulate filters during their stabilization. Disturbances to weighing room specifications as outlined in paragraph 2.4.2.1. will be allowed if the duration of the disturbances does not exceed 30 minutes. The weighing room should meet the required specifications prior to personnel entrance into the weighing room. At least two unused reference filters or reference filter pairs shall be weighed within four hours of, but preferably at the same time as the sample filter (pair) weighing. They shall be the same size and material as the sample filters. If the average weight of the reference filters (reference filter pairs) changes between sample filter weighing by more than 10 μg, then all sample filters shall be discarded and the emissions test repeated. If the weighing room stability criteria outlined in paragraph 2.4.2.1. are not met, but the reference filter (pair) weighing meet the above criteria, the engine manufacturer has the option of accepting the sample filter weights or voiding the tests, fixing the weighing room control system and re-running the test. 2.4.2.3. Analytical balance The analytical balance used to determine the weights of all filters shall have a precision (standard deviation) of 2 μg and a resolution of 1 μg (1 digit = 1 μg) specified by the balance manufacturer. 2.4.2.4. Elimination of static electricity effects To eliminate the effects of static electricity, the filters shall be neutralized prior to weighing, for example, by a Polonium neutralizer or a device having similar effect. 2.4.3. Additional specifications for particulate measurement All parts of the dilution system and the sampling system from the exhaust pipe up to the filter holder, which are in contact with raw and diluted exhaust gas, shall be designed to minimize deposition or alteration of the particulates. All parts shall be made of electrically conductive materials that do not react with exhaust gas components, and shall be electrically grounded to prevent electrostatic effects. Appendix 2 Calibration procedure (NRSC, NRTC ( 1 ) ) 1. CALIBRATION OF THE ANALYTICAL INSTRUMENTS 1.1. Introduction Each analyser shall be calibrated as often as necessary to fulfil the accuracy requirements of this Regulation. The calibration method that shall be used is described in this paragraph for the analysers indicated in Appendix 1, paragraph 1.4.3. At the request of the manufacturer and with the agreement of the approval authority the methods described in Annex 4B, paragraphs 8.1. and 8.2. may be used as an alternative to those in paragraph 1. of this appendix. 1.2. Calibration gases The shelf life of all calibration gases shall be respected. The expiry date of the calibration gases stated by the manufacturer shall be recorded. 1.2.1. Pure gases The required purity of the gases is defined by the contamination limits given below. The following gases shall be available for operation: 1.2.2. Calibration and span gases Mixtures of gases having the following chemical compositions shall be available: Note: other gas combinations are allowed provided the gases do not react with one another. The true concentration of a calibration and span gas shall be within ± 2 per cent of the nominal value. All concentrations of calibration gas shall be given on a volume basis (volume per cent or volume ppm). The gases used for calibration and span may also be obtained by means of a gas divider, diluting with purified N 2 or with purified synthetic air. The accuracy of the mixing device shall be such that the concentration of the diluted calibration gases may be determined to within ± 2 per cent. This accuracy implies that primary gases used for blending shall be known to have an accuracy of at least ± 1 per cent, traceable to national or international gas standards. The verification shall be performed at between 15 and 50 per cent of full scale for each calibration incorporating a blending device. An additional verification may be performed using another calibration gas, if the first verification has failed. Optionally, the blending device may be checked with an instrument which by nature is linear, e.g. using NO gas with a CLD. The span value of the instrument shall be adjusted with the span gas directly connected to the instrument. The blending device shall be checked at the used settings and the nominal value shall be compared to the measured concentration of the instrument. This difference shall in each point be within ± 1 per cent of the nominal value. Other methods may be used based on good engineering practice and with the prior agreement of the parties involved. Note: A precision gas divider of accuracy is within ± 1 per cent, is recommended for establishing the accurate analyser calibration curve. The gas divider shall be calibrated by the instrument manufacturer. 1.3. Operating procedure for analysers and sampling system The operating procedure for analysers shall follow the start-up and operating instructions of the instrument manufacturer. The minimum requirements given in paragraphs 1.4. to 1.9. shall be included. 1.4. Leakage test A system leakage test shall be performed. The probe shall be disconnected from the exhaust system and the end plugged. The analyser pump shall be switched on. After an initial stabilization period all flow-meters should read zero. If not, the sampling lines shall be checked and the fault corrected. The maximum allowable leakage rate on the vacuum side shall be 0,5 per cent of the in-use flow rate for the portion of the system being checked. The analyser flows and bypass flows may be used to estimate the in-use flow rates. Another method is the introduction of a concentration step change at the beginning of the sampling line by switching from zero to span gas. If after an adequate period of time the reading shows a lower concentration compared to the introduced concentration, this points to calibration or leakage problems. 1.5. Calibration procedure 1.5.1. Instrument assembly The instrument assembly shall be calibrated and calibration curves checked against standard gases. The same gas flow rates shall be used as when sampling exhaust. 1.5.2. Warming-up time The warming-up time should be according to the recommendations of the manufacturer. If not specified, a minimum of two hours is recommended for warming-up the analysers. 1.5.3. NDIR and HFID analyser The NDIR analyser shall be tuned, as necessary, and the combustion flame of the HFID analyser shall be optimized (paragraph 1.8.1.). 1.5.4. Calibration Each normally used operating range shall be calibrated. Using purified synthetic air (or nitrogen), the CO, CO 2 , NO x , HC and O 2 analysers shall be set at zero. The appropriate calibration gases shall be introduced to the analysers, the values recorded, and the calibration curve established according to paragraph 1.5.6. The zero setting shall be rechecked and the calibration procedure repeated, if necessary. 1.5.5. Establishment of the calibration curve 1.5.5.1. General guidelines The analyser calibration curve is established by at least six calibration points (excluding zero) spaced as uniformly as possible. The highest nominal concentration shall be equal to or higher than 90 per cent of full scale. The calibration curve is calculated by the method of least squares. If the resulting polynomial degree is greater than three, the number of calibration points (zero included) shall be at least equal to this polynomial degree plus two. The calibration curve shall not differ by more than ± 2 per cent from the nominal value of each calibration point and by more than ± 0,3 per cent of full scale at zero. From the calibration curve and the calibration points, it is possible to verify that the calibration has been carried out correctly. The different characteristic parameters of the analyser shall be indicated, particularly: 1.5.5.2. Calibration below 15 per cent of full scale The analyser calibration curve is established by at least ten calibration points (excluding zero) spaced so that 50 per cent of the calibration points are below 10 per cent of full scale. The calibration curve is calculated by the method of least squares. The calibration curve shall not differ by more than ± 4 per cent from the nominal value of each calibration point and by more than ± 0,3 per cent of full scale at zero. 1.5.5.3. Alternative methods If it can be shown that alternative technology (e.g. computer, electronically controlled range switch, etc.) can give equivalent accuracy, then these alternatives may be used. 1.6. Verification of the calibration Each normally used operating range shall be checked prior to each analysis in accordance with the following procedure. The calibration is checked by using a zero gas and a span gas whose nominal value is more than 80 per cent of full scale of the measuring range. If, for the two points considered, the value found does not differ by more than ± 4 per cent of full scale from the declared reference value, the adjustment parameters may be modified. Should this not be the case, a new calibration curve shall be established in accordance with paragraph 1.5.4. 1.7. Efficiency test of the NO x converter The efficiency of the converter used for the conversion of NO 2 into NO is tested as given in paragraphs 1.7.1. to 1.7.8. (Figure 1). 1.7.1. Test set-up Using the test set-up as shown in Figure 1 (see also Appendix 1, paragraph 1.4.3.5.) and the procedure below, the efficiency of converters can be tested by means of an ozonator. Figure 1 Schematic of NO 2 converter efficiency device 1.7.2. Calibration The CLD and the HCLD shall be calibrated in the most common operating range following the manufacturer's specifications using zero and span gas (the NO content of which shall amount to about 80 per cent of the operating range and the NO 2 concentration of the gas mixture to less than 5 per cent of the NO concentration). The NO x analyser shall be in the NO mode so that the span gas does not pass through the converter. The indicated concentration has to be recorded. 1.7.3. Calculation The efficiency of the NO x converter is calculated as follows: where: 1.7.4. Adding of oxygen Via a T-fitting, oxygen or zero air is added continuously to the gas flow until the concentration indicated is about 20 per cent less than the indicated calibration concentration given in paragraph 1.7.2. (The analyser is in the NO mode.) The indicated concentration c shall be recorded. The ozonator is kept de-activated throughout the process. 1.7.5. Activation of the ozonator The ozonator is now activated to generate enough ozone to bring the NO concentration down to about 20 per cent (minimum 10 per cent) of the calibration concentration given in paragraph 1.7.2. The indicated concentration d shall be recorded. (The analyser is in the NO mode.) 1.7.6. NO x mode The NO analyser is then switched to the NO x mode so that the gas mixture (consisting of NO, NO 2 , O 2 and N 2 ) now passes through the converter. The indicated concentration a shall be recorded. (The analyser is in the NO x mode.) 1.7.7. De-activation of the ozonator The ozonator is now de-activated. The mixture of gases described in paragraph 1.7.6. passes through the converter into the detector. The indicated concentration b shall be recorded. (The analyser is in the NO x mode.) 1.7.8. NO mode Switched to NO mode with the ozonator de-activated, the flow of oxygen or synthetic air is also shut off. The NO x reading of the analyser shall not deviate by more than ± 5 per cent from the value measured according to paragraph 1.7.2. (The analyser is in the NO mode.) 1.7.9. Test interval The efficiency of the converter shall be tested prior to each calibration of the NO x analyser. 1.7.10. Efficiency requirement The efficiency of the converter shall not be less than 90 per cent, but a higher efficiency of 95 per cent is strongly recommended. Note: If, with the analyser in the most common range, the ozonator cannot give a reduction from 80 per cent to 20 per cent according to paragraph 1.7.5., then the highest range which will give the reduction shall be used. 1.8. Adjustment of the FID 1.8.1. Optimization of the detector response The HFID shall be adjusted as specified by the instrument manufacturer. A propane in air span gas should be used to optimize the response on the most common operating range. With the fuel and air flow rates set at the manufacturer's recommendations, a 350 ± 75 ppm C span gas shall be introduced to the analyser. The response at a given fuel flow shall be determined from the difference between the span gas response and the zero gas response. The fuel flow shall be incrementally adjusted above and below the manufacturer's specification. The span and zero response at these fuel flows shall be recorded. The difference between the span and zero response shall be plotted and the fuel flow adjusted to the rich side of the curve. 1.8.2. Hydrocarbon response factors The analyser shall be calibrated using propane in air and purified synthetic air, according to paragraph 1.5. Response factors shall be determined when introducing an analyser into service and after major service intervals. The response factor ( R f ) for a particular hydrocarbon species is the ratio of the FID C1 reading to the gas concentration in the cylinder expressed by ppm C1. The concentration of the test gas shall be at a level to give a response of approximately 80 per cent of full scale. The concentration shall be known to an accuracy of ± 2 per cent in reference to a gravimetric standard expressed in volume. In addition, the gas cylinder shall be pre-conditioned for 24 hours at a temperature of 298 K (25 °C) ± 5 K. The test gases to be used and the recommended relative response factor ranges are as follows: These values are relative to the response factor ( R f ) of 1,00 for propane and purified synthetic air. 1.8.3. Oxygen interference check The oxygen interference check shall be determined when introducing an analyser into service and after major service intervals. A range shall be chosen where the oxygen interference check gases will fall within the upper 50 per cent. The test shall be conducted with the oven temperature set as required. 1.8.3.1. Oxygen interference gases Oxygen interference check gases shall contain propane with 350 ppmC to 75 ppmC hydrocarbon. The concentration value shall be determined to calibration gas tolerances by chromatographic analysis of total hydrocarbons plus impurities or by dynamic blending. Nitrogen shall be the predominant diluent with the balance oxygen. Blends required for Diesel engine testing are: 1.8.3.2. Procedure 1.9. Interference effects with NDIR and CLD analysers Gases present in the exhaust other than the one being analysed can interfere with the reading in several ways. Positive interference occurs in NDIR instruments where the interfering gas gives the same effect as the gas being measured, but to a lesser degree. Negative interference occurs in NDIR instruments by the interfering gas broadening the absorption band of the measured gas, and in CLD instruments by the interfering gas quenching the radiation. The interference checks in paragraphs 1.9.1. and 1.9.2. shall be performed prior to an analyser's initial use and after major service intervals. 1.9.1. CO analyser interference check Water and CO 2 can interfere with the CO analyser performance. Therefore a CO 2 span gas having a concentration of 80 to 100 per cent of full scale of the maximum operating range used during testing shall be bubbled through water at room temperature and the analyser response recorded. The analyser response shall not be more than 1 per cent of full scale for ranges equal to or above 300 ppm or more than 3 ppm for ranges below 300 ppm. 1.9.2. NO x analyser quench checks The two gases of concern for CLD (and HCLD) analysers are CO 2 and water vapour. Quench responses of these gases are proportional to their concentrations, and therefore require test techniques to determine the quench at the highest expected concentrations experienced during testing. 1.9.2.1. CO 2 quench check A CO 2 span gas having a concentration of 80 to 100 per cent of full scale of the maximum operating range shall be passed through the NDIR analyser and the CO 2 value recorded as A. It shall then be diluted approximately 50 per cent with NO span gas and passed through the NDIR and (H)CLD with the CO 2 and NO values recorded as B and C, respectively. The CO 2 shall be shut off and only the NO span gas be passed through the (H)CLD and the NO value recorded as D. The quench shall be calculated as follows: and shall not be greater than 3 per cent of full scale. where: 1.9.2.2. Water quench check This check applies to wet gas concentration measurements only. Calculation of water quench shall consider dilution of the NO span gas with water vapour and scaling of water vapour concentration of the mixture to that expected during testing. A NO span gas having a concentration of 80 to 100 per cent of full scale to the normal operating range shall be passed through the (H)CLD and the NO value recorded as D . The NO gas shall be bubbled through water at room temperature and passed through the (H)CLD and NO value recorded as C . The water temperature shall be determined and recorded as F . The mixture's saturation vapour pressure that corresponds to the bubbler water temperature ( F ) shall be determined and recorded as G . The water vapour concentration (in per cent) of the mixture shall be calculated as follows: and recorded as H . The expected diluted NO span gas (in water vapour) concentration shall be calculated as follows: and recorded as De . For diesel exhaust, the maximum exhaust water vapour concentration (in per cent) expected during testing shall be estimated, under the assumption of a fuel atom H/C ratio of 1,8 to 1,0, from the maximum CO 2 concentration in the exhaust gas or from the undiluted CO 2 span gas concentration (A, as measured in paragraph 1.9.2.1.) as follows: and recorded as Hm. The water quench shall be calculated as follows: and shall not be greater than 3 per cent of full scale. Note: It is important that the NO span gas contains minimal NO 2 concentration for this check, since absorption of NO 2 in water has not been accounted for in the quench calculations. 1.10. Calibration intervals The analysers shall be calibrated according to paragraph 1.5. at least every three months or whenever a system repair or change is made that could influence calibration. 1.11. Additional calibration requirements for raw exhaust measurements over NRTC test 1.11.1. Response time check of the analytical system The system settings for the response time evaluation shall be exactly the same as during measurement of the test run (i.e. pressure, flow rates, filter settings on the analysers and all other response time influences). The response time determination shall be done with gas switching directly at the inlet of the sample probe. The gas switching shall be done in less than 0,1 s. The gases used for the test shall cause a concentration change of at least 60 per cent FS. The concentration trace of each single gas component shall be recorded. The response time is defined as the difference in time between the gas switching and the appropriate change of the recorded concentration. The system response time ( t 90 ) consists of the delay time to the measuring detector and the rise time of the detector. The delay time is defined as the time from the change ( t 0 ) until the response is 10 per cent of the final reading ( t 10 ). The rise time is defined as the time between 10 and 90 per cent response of the final reading ( t 90 – t 10 ). For time alignment of the analyser and exhaust flow signals in the case of raw measurement, the transformation time is defined as the time from the change ( t 0 ) until the response is 50 per cent of the final reading ( t 50 ). The system response time shall be ≤ 10 s with a rise time ≤ 2,5 s for all limited components (CO, NO x , HC) and all ranges used. 1.11.2. Calibration of tracer gas analyser for exhaust flow measurement The analyser for measurement of the tracer gas concentration, if used, shall be calibrated using the standard gas. The calibration curve shall be established by at least 10 calibration points (excluding zero) spaced so that a half of the calibration points are placed between 4 to 20 per cent of analyser's full scale and the rest are in between 20 to 100 per cent of the full scale. The calibration curve is calculated by the method of least squares. The calibration curve shall not differ by more than ± 1 per cent of the full scale from the nominal value of each calibration point, in the range from 20 to 100 per cent of the full scale. It shall also not differ by more than ± 2 per cent from the nominal value in the range from 4 to 20 per cent of the full scale. The analyser shall be set at zero and spanned prior to the test run using a zero gas and a span gas whose nominal value is more than 80 per cent of the analyser full scale. 2. CALIBRATION OF THE PARTICULATE MEASURING SYSTEM 2.1. Introduction Each component shall be calibrated as often as necessary to fulfil the accuracy requirements of this Regulation. The calibration method to be used is described in this paragraph for the components indicated in Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 1.5. and Appendix 4. At the request of the manufacturer and with the agreement of the approval authority the methods described in Annex 4B, paragraphs 8.1. and 8.2. may be used as an alternative to those in paragraph 2. of this appendix. 2.2. Flow measurement The calibration of gas flow-meters or flow measurement instrumentation shall be traceable to national and/or international standards. The maximum error of the measured value shall be within ± 2 per cent of reading. For partial flow dilution systems, the accuracy of the sample flow G SE is of special concern, if not measured directly, but determined by differential flow measurement: In this case an accuracy of ± 2 per cent for G TOTW and G DILW is not sufficient to guarantee acceptable accuracies of G SE . If the gas flow is determined by differential flow measurement, the maximum error of the difference shall be such that the accuracy of G SE is within ± 5 per cent when the dilution ratio is less than 15. It can be calculated by taking root-mean-square of the errors of each instrument. 2.3. Checking the dilution ratio When using particulate sampling systems without EGA (Annex 4A, Appendix 4, paragraph 1.2.1.1.), the dilution ratio shall be checked for each new engine installation with the engine running and the use of either the CO 2 or NO x concentration measurements in the raw and dilute exhaust. The measured dilution ratio shall be within ± 10 per cent of the calculated dilution ratio from CO 2 or NO x concentration measurement. 2.4. Checking the partial flow conditions The range of the exhaust gas velocity and the pressure oscillations shall be checked and adjusted according to the requirements of Annex 4A, Appendix 4, paragraph 1.2.1.1., EP, if applicable. 2.5. Calibration intervals The flow measurement instrumentation shall be calibrated at least every three months, or whenever a system change is made that could influence calibration. 2.6. Additional calibration requirements for partial flow dilution systems 2.6.1. Periodical calibration If the sample gas flow is determined by differential flow measurement the flow-meter or the flow measurement instrumentation shall be calibrated by one of the following procedures, such that the probe flow G SE into the tunnel fulfils the accuracy requirements of Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 2.4.: The flow-meter for G DILW is connected in series to the flow-meter for G TOTW , the difference between the two flow-meters is calibrated for at least five set points with flow values equally spaced between the lowest G DILW value used during the test and the value of G TOTW used during the test. The dilution tunnel may be bypassed. A calibrated mass flow device is connected in series to the flow-meter for G TOTW and the accuracy is checked for the value used for the test. Then the calibrated mass flow device is connected in series to the flow-meter for G DILW , and the accuracy is checked for at least five settings corresponding to the dilution ratio between 3 and 50, relative to G TOTW used during the test. The transfer tube TT is disconnected from the exhaust, and a calibrated flow measuring device with a suitable range to measure G SE is connected to the transfer tube. Then G TOTW is set to the value used during the test, and G DILW is sequentially set to at least five values corresponding to dilution ratios q between 3 and 50. Alternatively, a special calibration flow path may be provided, in which the tunnel is bypassed, but the total and dilution air flow through the corresponding meters are maintained as in the actual test. A tracer gas is fed into the transfer tube TT. This tracer gas may be a component of the exhaust gas, like CO 2 or NO x . After dilution in the tunnel the tracer gas component is measured. This shall be carried out for five dilution ratios between 3 and 50. The accuracy of the sample flow is determined from the dilution ratio q : The accuracies of the gas analysers shall be taken into account to guarantee the accuracy of G SE . 2.6.2. Carbon flow check A carbon flow check using actual exhaust is strongly recommended for detecting measurement and control problems and verifying the proper operation of the partial flow dilution system. The carbon flow check should be run at least each time a new engine is installed, or something significant is changed in the test cell configuration. The engine shall be operated at peak torque load and speed or any other steady-state mode that produces 5 per cent or more of CO 2 . The partial flow sampling system shall be operated with a dilution factor of about 15 to 1. 2.6.3. Pre-test check A pre-test check shall be performed within two hours before the test run in the following way: The accuracy of the flow-meters shall be checked by the same method as used for calibration for at least two points, including flow values of G DILW that correspond to dilution ratios between five and 15 for the G TOTW value used during the test. If it can be demonstrated by records of the calibration procedure described above that the flow-meter calibration is stable over a longer period of time, the pre-test check may be omitted. 2.6.4. Determination of the transformation time The system settings for the transformation time evaluation shall be exactly the same as during measurement of the test run. The transformation time shall be determined by the following method: An independent reference flow-meter with a measurement range appropriate for the probe flow shall be put in series with and closely coupled to the probe. This flow-meter shall have a transformation time of less than 100 ms for the flow step size used in the response time measurement, with flow restriction sufficiently low not to affect the dynamic performance of the partial flow dilution system, and consistent with good engineering practice. A step change shall be introduced to the exhaust flow (or air flow if exhaust flow is calculated) input of the partial flow dilution system, from a low flow to at least 90 per cent of full scale. The trigger for the step change should be the same one as that used to start the look-ahead control in actual testing. The exhaust flow step stimulus and the flow-meter response shall be recorded at a sample rate of at least 10 Hz. From this data, the transformation time shall be determined for the partial flow dilution system, which is the time from the initiation of the step stimulus to the 50 per cent point of the flow-meter response. In a similar manner, the transformation times of the G SE signal of the partial flow dilution system and of the G EXHW signal of the exhaust flow-meter shall be determined. These signals are used in the regression checks performed after each test (Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 2.4.). The calculation shall be repeated for at least five rise-and-fall stimuli, and the results shall be averaged. The internal transformation time (< 100 ms) of the reference flow-meter shall be subtracted from this value. This is the 'look-ahead' value of the partial flow dilution system, which shall be applied in accordance with Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 2.4. 3. CALIBRATION OF THE CVS SYSTEM 3.1. General The CVS system shall be calibrated by using an accurate flow-meter and means to change operating conditions. The flow through the system shall be measured at different flow operating settings, and the control parameters of the system shall be measured and related to the flow. Various types of flow-meters may be used, e.g. calibrated venturi, calibrated laminar flow-meter, calibrated turbine meter. At the request of the manufacturer and with the agreement of the approval authority the methods described in Annex 4B, paragraphs 8.1. and 8.2. may be used as an alternative to those in paragraph 3. of this appendix. 3.2. Calibration of the positive displacement pump (PDP) All the parameters related to the pump shall be simultaneously measured along with the parameters related to a calibration venturi which is connected in series with the pump. The calculated flow rate (in m 3 /min at pump inlet, absolute pressure and temperature) shall be plotted against a correlation function which is the value of a specific combination of pump parameters. The linear equation which relates the pump flow and the correlation function shall be determined. If a CVS has a multiple speed drive, the calibration shall be performed for each range used. Temperature stability shall be maintained during calibration. Leaks in all the connections and ducting between the calibration venturi and the CVS pump shall be maintained lower than 0,3 per cent of the lowest flow point (highest restriction and lowest PDP speed point). 3.2.1. Data analysis The air flowrate ( Q s ) at each restriction setting (minimum 6 settings) shall be calculated in standard m 3 /min. from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer's prescribed method. The air flow rate shall then be converted to pump flow ( V 0 ) in m 3 /rev at absolute pump inlet temperature and pressure as follows: where: To account for the interaction of pressure variations at the pump and the pump slip rate, the correlation function ( X 0 ) between pump speed, pressure differential from pump inlet to pump outlet and absolute pump outlet pressure shall be calculated as follows: where, A linear least-square fit shall be performed to generate the calibration equation as follows: D 0 and m are the intercept and slope constants, respectively, describing the regression lines. For a CVS system with multiple speeds, the calibration curves generated for the different pump flow ranges shall be approximately parallel, and the intercept values ( D 0 ) shall increase as the pump flow range decreases. The values calculated by the equation shall be within ± 0,5 per cent of the measured value of V 0 . Values of m will vary from one pump to another. Particulate influx over time will cause the pump slip to decrease, as reflected by lower values for m. Therefore, calibration shall be performed at pump start-up, after major maintenance, and if the total system verification (paragraph 3.5.) indicates a change in the slip rate. 3.3. Calibration of the critical flow venturi (CFV) Calibration of the CFV is based upon the flow equation for a critical venturi. Gas flow is a function of inlet pressure and temperature, as shown below: where, 3.3.1. Data analysis The air flow rate ( Q s ) at each restriction setting (minimum 8 settings) shall be calculated in standard m 3 /min. from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer's prescribed method. The calibration coefficient shall be calculated from the calibration data for each setting as follows: where: To determine the range of critical flow, K v shall be plotted as a function of venturi inlet pressure. For critical (choked) flow, K v will have a relatively constant value. As pressure decreases (vacuum increases), the venturi becomes unchoked and K v decreases, which indicates that the CFV is operated outside the permissible range. For a minimum of eight points in the region of critical flow, the average K V and the standard deviation shall be calculated. The standard deviation shall not exceed ± 0,3 per cent of the average K V . 3.4. Calibration of the subsonic venturi (SSV) Calibration of the SSV is based upon the flow equation for a subsonic venturi. Gas flow is a function of inlet pressure and temperature, pressure drop between the SSV inlet and throat, as shown below: where: A 0 = collection of constants and units conversions = 0,006111 in SI units d = diameter of the SSV throat (m) C d = discharge coefficient of the SSV p A = absolute pressure at venturi inlet (kPa) T = temperature at the venturi inlet ( K ) r = ratio of the SSV throat to inlet absolute, ß = ratio of the SSV throat diameter, d, to the 3.4.1. Data analysis The air flow rate ( Q SSV ) at each flow setting (minimum 16 settings) shall be calculated in standard m 3 /min from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer's prescribed method. The discharge coefficient shall be calculated from the calibration data for each setting as follows: where: To determine the range of subsonic flow, C d shall be plotted as a function of Reynolds number, at the SSV throat. The Re at the SSV throat is calculated with the following formula: where: Because Q SSV is an input to the Re formula, the calculations shall be started with an initial guess for Q SSV or C d of the calibration venturi, and repeated until Q SSV converges. The convergence method shall be accurate to 0,1 per cent or better. For a minimum of sixteen points in the subsonic flow region, the calculated values of C d from the resulting calibration curve fit equation shall be within ± 0,5 per cent of the measured C d for each calibration point. 3.5. Total system verification The total accuracy of the CVS sampling system and analytical system shall be determined by introducing a known mass of a pollutant gas into the system while it is being operated in the normal manner. The pollutant is analysed, and the mass calculated according to Annex 4A, Appendix 3, paragraph 2.4.1. except in the case of propane where a factor of 0,000472 is used in place of 0,000479 for HC. Either of the following two techniques shall be used. 3.5.1. Metering with a critical flow orifice A known quantity of pure gas (propane) shall be fed into the CVS system through a calibrated critical orifice. If the inlet pressure is high enough, the flow rate, which is adjusted by means of the critical flow orifice, is independent of the orifice outlet pressure (critical flow). The CVS system shall be operated as in a normal exhaust emission test for about five to 10 minutes. A gas sample shall be analysed with the usual equipment (sampling bag or integrating method), and the mass of the gas calculated. The mass so determined shall be within ± 3 per cent of the known mass of the gas injected. 3.5.2. Metering by means of a gravimetric technique The weight of a small cylinder filled with propane shall be determined with a precision of ± 0,01 g. For about five to 10 minutes, the CVS system shall be operated as in a normal exhaust emission test, while carbon monoxide or propane is injected into the system. The quantity of pure gas discharged shall be determined by means of differential weighing. A gas sample shall be analysed with the usual equipment (sampling bag or integrating method), and the mass of the gas calculated. The mass so determined shall be within ± 3 per cent of the known mass of the gas injected. ( 1 ) The calibration procedure is common for both NRSC and NRTC tests, with the exception of the requirements specified in paragraphs 1.11. and 2.6. Appendix 3 Data evaluation and calculations 1. DATA EVALUATION AND CALCULATIONS – NRSC TEST 1.1. Gaseous emissions data evaluation For the evaluation of the gaseous emissions, the chart reading of the last 60 s of each mode shall be averaged, and the average concentrations ( conc ) of HC, CO, NO x and CO 2 if the carbon balance method is used, during each mode shall be determined from the average chart readings and the corresponding calibration data. A different type of recording can be used if it ensures an equivalent data acquisition. The average background concentrations ( conc d ) may be determined from the bag readings of the dilution air or from the continuous (non-bag) background reading and the corresponding calibration data. If the ramped modal cycles of Annex 5, sub-paragraphs (a) or (b) of paragraph 1.2., respectively, are used, the data evaluation and calculation procedures of Annex 4B, paragraph 7.8.2.2., and the applicable sections of paragraphs A.8.2., A.8.3. and A.8.4. shall apply. The final test results shall be calculated according to equations A.8-60 and A.8-61 or A.7-49 and A.7-50, respectively. 1.2. Particulate emissions For the evaluation of the particulates, the total sample masses ( M SAM,i ) through the filters shall be recorded for each mode. The filters shall be returned to the weighing chamber and conditioned for at least one hour, but not more than 80 hours, and then weighed. The gross weight of the filters shall be recorded and the tare weight (see paragraph 3.1., Annex 4A) subtracted. The particulate mass ( M f for single filter method; M f,i for the multiple filter method) is the sum of the particulate masses collected on the primary and back-up filters. If background correction is to be applied, the dilution air mass ( M DIL ) through the filters and the particulate mass ( M d ) shall be recorded. If more than one measurement was made, the quotient M d / M DIL shall be calculated for each single measurement and the values averaged. If the ramped modal cycles of Annex 5, sub-paragraphs (a) or (b) of paragraph 1.2., respectively, are used, the data evaluation and calculation procedures of Annex 4B, paragraph 7.8.2.2., and the applicable sections of paragraphs A.8.2., A.8.3. and A.8.4. shall apply. The final test results shall be calculated according to equation A.8-64 or A.7-53, respectively. 1.3. Calculation of the gaseous emissions The finally reported test results shall be derived through the following steps: 1.3.1. Determination of the exhaust gas flow The exhaust gas flow rate ( G EXHW , i ) shall be determined for each mode according to Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraphs 1.2.1. to 1.2.3. When using a full flow dilution system, the total dilute exhaust gas flow rate ( G TOTW , i ) shall be determined for each mode according to Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 1.2.4. 1.3.2. Dry/wet correction Dry/wet correction ( G EXHW , i ) shall be determined for each mode according to Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraphs 1.2.1. to 1.2.3. When applying G EXHW the measured concentration shall be converted to a wet basis according to the following formulae, if not already measured on a wet basis: For the raw exhaust gas: For the diluted gas: For the dilution air: For the intake air (if different from the dilution air): where: Note : H a and H d may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 1.3.3. Humidity correction for NO x As the NO x emission depends on ambient air conditions, the NO x concentration shall be corrected for ambient air temperature and humidity by the factors K H given in the following formula: where: Note : H a may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 1.3.4. Calculation of emission mass flow rates The emission mass flow rates for each mode shall be calculated as follows: where: conc c is the background corrected concentration The coefficients u – wet shall be used according to Table 5: Table 5 Values of the coefficient u – wet for various exhaust components The density of HC is based upon an average carbon to hydrogen ratio of 1:1.85. 1.3.5. Calculation of the specific emissions The specific emission (g/kWh) shall be calculated for all individual components in the following way: The weighing factors and the number of modes (n) used in the above calculation are according to Annex 4A, paragraph 3.7.1. 1.4. Calculation of the particulate emission The particulate emission shall be calculated in the following way: 1.4.1. Humidity correction factor for particulates As the particulate emission of diesel engines depends on ambient air conditions, the particulate mass flow rate shall be corrected for ambient air humidity with the factor K p given in the following formula: where: H a = humidity of the intake air, gram of water per kg dry air where: R a = relative humidity of the intake air (per cent) p a = saturation vapour pressure of the intake air (kPa) p B = total barometric pressure (kPa). Note : H a may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 1.4.2. Partial flow dilution system The final reported test results of the particulate emission shall be derived through the following steps. Since various types of dilution rate control may be used, different calculation methods for equivalent diluted exhaust gas mass flow rate G EDF apply. All calculations shall be based upon the average values of the individual modes (i) during the sampling period. 1.4.2.1. Isokinetic systems where r corresponds to the ratio of the cross sectional areas of the isokinetic probe A p and exhaust pipe A T : 1.4.2.2. Systems with measurement of CO 2 or NO x concentration where: Concentrations measured on a dry basis shall be converted to a wet basis according to paragraph 1.3.2. 1.4.2.3. Systems with CO 2 measurement and carbon balance method where: (concentrations in volume per cent on wet basis) This equation is based upon the carbon balance assumption (carbon atoms supplied to the engine are emitted as CO 2 ) and derived through the following steps: 1.4.2.4. Systems with flow measurement 1.4.3. Full flow dilution system The final reported test results of the particulate emission shall be derived through the following steps. All calculations shall be based upon the average values of the individual modes ( i ) during the sampling period. G EDFW, i = G TOTW, i 1.4.4. Calculation of the particulate mass flow rate The particulate mass flow rate shall be calculated as follows: The particulate mass flow rate may be background corrected as follows: 1.4.5. Calculation of the specific emissions The specific emission of particulates PT (g/kWh) shall be calculated in the following way ( 3 ) : 1.4.6. Effective weighing factor For the single filter method, the effective weighing factor WF E, i for each mode shall be calculated in the following way: where i = l, … n. The value of the effective weighing factors shall be within ±0,005 (absolute value) of the weighing factors listed in Annex 4A, paragraph 3.7.1. 2. DATA EVALUATION AND CALCULATIONS (NRTC TEST) The two following measurement principles that can be used for the evaluation of pollutant emissions over the NRTC cycle are described in this paragraph: 2.1. Calculation of gaseous emissions in the raw exhaust gas and of the particulate emissions with a partial flow dilution system 2.1.1. Introduction The instantaneous concentration signals of the gaseous components are used for the calculation of the mass emissions by multiplication with the instantaneous exhaust mass flow rate. The exhaust mass flow rate may be measured directly, or calculated using the methods described in Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 2.2.3. (intake air and fuel flow measurement, tracer method, intake air and air/fuel ratio measurement). Special attention shall be paid to the response times of the different instruments. These differences shall be accounted for by time aligning the signals. For particulates, the exhaust mass flow rate signals are used for controlling the partial flow dilution system to take a sample proportional to the exhaust mass flow rate. The quality of proportionality is checked by applying a regression analysis between sample and exhaust flow as described in Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 2.4. 2.1.2. Determination of the gaseous components 2.1.2.1. Calculation of mass emission The mass of the pollutants M gas (g/test) shall be determined by calculating the instantaneous mass emissions from the raw concentrations of the pollutants, the u values from Table 6 (see also paragraph 1.3.4.) and the exhaust mass flow, aligned for the transformation time and integrating the instantaneous values over the cycle. Preferably, the concentrations should be measured on a wet basis. If measured on a dry basis, the dry/wet correction as described here below shall be applied to the instantaneous concentration values before any further calculation is done. Table 6 Values of the coefficient u – wet for various exhaust components The density of HC is based upon an average carbon to hydrogen ratio of 1:1,85. The following formula shall be applied: where: For the calculation of NO x , the humidity correction factor k H , as described here below, shall be used. The instantaneously measured concentration shall be converted to a wet basis as described here below, if not already measured on a wet basis 2.1.2.2. Dry/wet correction If the instantaneously measured concentration is measured on a dry basis, it shall be converted to a wet basis according to the following formulae: where: where: Note : H a may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 2.1.2.3. NO x correction for humidity and temperature As the NO x emission depends on ambient air conditions, the NO x concentration shall be corrected for humidity and ambient air temperature with the factors given in the following formula: Note : H a may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 2.1.2.4. Calculation of the specific emissions The specific emissions (g/kWh) shall be calculated for each individual component in the following way: where: 2.1.3. Particulate determination 2.1.3.1. Calculation of mass emission The particulate masses M PT,cold and M PT,hot (g/test) shall be calculated by either of the following methods: Note : In case of the total sampling type system, M SAM and M TOTW are identical 2.1.3.2. Particulate correction factor for humidity As the particulate emission of diesel engines depends on ambient air conditions, the particulate concentration shall be corrected for ambient air humidity with the factor k p given in the following formulae. where: H a = humidity of the intake air in g water per kg dry air where: R a = relative humidity of the intake air (per cent) p a = saturation vapour pressure of the intake air (kPa) p B = total barometric pressure (kPa). Note : H a may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 2.1.3.3. Calculation of the specific emissions The specific emissions (g/kWh) shall be calculated for in the following way: where: 2.2. Determination of gaseous and particulate components with a full flow dilution system For calculation of the emissions in the diluted exhaust gas, it is necessary to know the diluted exhaust gas mass flow rate. The total diluted exhaust gas flow over the cycle M TOTW (kg/test) shall be calculated from the measurement values over the cycle and the corresponding calibration data of the flow measurement device ( V 0 for PDP, K V for CFV, C d for SSV): the corresponding methods described in paragraph 2.2.1. may be used. If the total sample mass of particulates ( M SAM ) and gaseous pollutants exceeds 0,5 per cent of the total CVS flow ( M TOTW ), the CVS flow shall be corrected for M SAM or the particulate sample flow shall be returned to the CVS prior to the flow measuring device. 2.2.1. Determination of the diluted exhaust gas flow PDP-CVS system The calculation of the mass flow over the cycle, if the temperature of the diluted exhaust is kept within ±6 K over the cycle by using a heat exchanger, is as follows: where: If a system with flow compensation is used (i.e. without heat exchanger), the instantaneous mass emissions shall be calculated and integrated over the cycle. In this case, the instantaneous mass of the diluted exhaust gas shall be calculated as follows: where: N P, i = total revolutions of pump per time interval CFV-CVS system The calculation of the mass flow over the cycle, if the temperature of the diluted exhaust gas is kept within ± 11 K over the cycle by using a heat exchanger, is as follows: where: If a system with flow compensation is used (i.e. without heat exchanger), the instantaneous mass emissions shall be calculated and integrated over the cycle. In this case, the instantaneous mass of the diluted exhaust gas shall be calculated as follows: where: Δ t i = time interval(s) SSV-CVS system The calculation of the mass flow over the cycle is as follows if the temperature of the diluted exhaust is kept within ± 11 K over the cycle by using a heat exchanger: where: If a system with flow compensation is used (i.e. without heat exchanger), the instantaneous mass emissions shall be calculated and integrated over the cycle. In this case, the instantaneous mass of the diluted exhaust gas shall be calculated as follows: where: Δ t i = time interval (s) The real time calculation shall be initialised with either a reasonable value for C d , such as 0,98, or a reasonable value of Q ssv . If the calculation is initialised with Q ssv , the initial value of Q ssv shall be used to evaluate Re . During all emissions tests, the Reynolds number at the SSV throat shall be in the range of Reynolds numbers used to derive the calibration curve developed in Appendix 2, paragraph 3.2. 2.2.2. NO x correction for humidity As the NO x emission depends on ambient air conditions, the NO x concentration shall be corrected for ambient air humidity with the factors given in the following formulae. where: Note : H a may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 2.2.3. Calculation of the emission mass flow 2.2.3.1. Systems with constant mass flow For systems with heat exchanger, the mass of the pollutants M GAS (g/test) shall be determined from the following equation: where: As the NO x emission depends on ambient air conditions, the NO x concentration shall be corrected for ambient air humidity with the factor k H , as described in paragraph 2.2.2. Concentrations measured on a dry basis shall be converted to a wet basis in accordance with paragraph 1.3.2. 2.2.3.1.1. Determination of the background corrected concentrations The average background concentration of the gaseous pollutants in the dilution air shall be subtracted from measured concentrations to get the net concentrations of the pollutants. The average values of the background concentrations can be determined by the sample bag method or by continuous measurement with integration. The following formula shall be used. where: The dilution factor shall be calculated as follows: 2.2.3.2. Systems with flow compensation For systems without heat exchanger, the mass of the pollutants M GAS (g/test) shall be determined by calculating the instantaneous mass emissions and integrating the instantaneous values over the cycle. Also, the background correction shall be applied directly to the instantaneous concentration value. The following formulae shall be applied: where: As the NO x emission depends on ambient air conditions, the NO x concentration shall be corrected for ambient air humidity with the factor k H , as described in paragraph 2.2.2. 2.2.4. Calculation of the specific emissions The specific emissions (g/kWh) shall be calculated for each individual component in the following way: where: 2.2.5. Calculation of the particulate emission 2.2.5.1. Calculation of the mass flow The particulate masses M PT,cold and M PT,hot (g/test) shall be calculated as follows: where: If a double dilution system is used, the mass of the secondary dilution air shall be subtracted from the total mass of the double diluted exhaust gas sampled through the particulate filters. where: If the particulate background level of the dilution air is determined in accordance with paragraph 4.4.4. of Annex 4A, the particulate mass may be background corrected. In this case, the particulate masses M PT,cold and M PT,hot (g/test) shall be calculated as follows: where: 2.2.5.2. Particulate correction factor for humidity As the particulate emission of diesel engines depends on ambient air conditions, the particulate concentration shall be corrected for ambient air humidity with the factor k p given in the following formula. where: H a = humidity of the intake air (g water per kg dry air) where: R a = relative humidity of the intake air (per cent) p a = saturation vapour pressure of the intake air (kPa) p B = total barometric pressure (kPa). Note : H a may be derived from relative humidity measurement, as described above, or from dewpoint measurement, vapour pressure measurement or dry/wet bulb measurement using the generally accepted formulae. 2.2.5.3. Calculation of the specific emissions The specific emissions (g/kWh) shall be calculated for in the following way: where: ( 1 ) In the case of NO x , the NO x concentration (NO x conc or NO x conc c ) has to be multiplied by K HNOx (humidity correction factor for NO x quoted in section 1.3.3) as follows: K HNOx · conc or K HNOx · conc c ( 2 ) In the case of NO x , the NO x concentration (NO x conc or NO x conc c ) has to be multiplied by K HNOx (humidity correction factor for NO x quoted in section 1.3.3) as follows: K HNOx · conc or K HNOx · conc c ( 3 ) The particulate mass flow rate PT mass has to be multiplied by K p (humidity correction factor for particulates quoted in section 1.4.1). Appendix 4 Analytical and sampling system 1. GASEOUS AND PARTICULATE SAMPLING SYSTEMS 1.1. Determination of the gaseous emissions Paragraph 1.1.1. and Figures 2 and 3 contain detailed descriptions of the recommended sampling and analysing systems. Since various configurations can produce equivalent results, exact conformance with these figures is not required. Additional components such as instruments, valves, solenoids, pumps and switches may be used to provide additional information and coordinate the functions of the component systems. Other components which are not needed to maintain the accuracy on some systems may be excluded if their exclusion is based upon good engineering judgement. 1.1.1. Gaseous exhaust components CO, CO 2 , HC, NO x An analytical system for the determination of the gaseous emissions in the raw or diluted exhaust gas is described based on the use of: For the raw exhaust gas (Figure 2), the sample for all components may be taken with one sampling probe or with two sampling probes located in close proximity and internally split to the different analysers. Care shall be taken that no condensation of exhaust components (including water and sulphuric acid) occurs at any point of the analytical system. For the diluted exhaust gas (Figure 3), the sample for the hydrocarbons shall be taken with another sampling probe than the sample for the other components. Care shall be taken that no condensation of exhaust components (including water and sulphuric acid) occurs at any point of the analytical system. Figure 2 Flow diagram of exhaust gas analysis system for CO, NO x and HC Figure 3 Flow diagram of dilute exhaust gas analysis system for CO, CO 2 , NO x and HC Descriptions — Figures 2 and 3 General statement: All components in the sampling gas path shall be maintained at the temperature specified for the respective systems. — SP1 raw exhaust gas sampling probe (Figure 2 only) A stainless steel straight closed and multihole probe is recommended. The inside diameter shall not be greater than the inside diameter of the sampling line. The wall thickness of the probe shall not be greater than 1 mm. There shall be a minimum of three holes in three different radial planes sized to sample approximately the same flow. The probe shall extend across at least 80 per cent of the diameter of the exhaust pipe. — SP2 dilute exhaust gas HC sampling probe (Figure 3 only) The probe shall: — SP3 dilute exhaust gas CO, CO 2 , NO x sampling probe (Figure 3 only) The probe shall: — HSL1 heated sampling line The sampling line provides gas sampling from a single probe to the split point(s) and the HC analyser. The sampling line shall: — HSL2 heated NO x sampling line The sampling line shall: Since the sampling line need only be heated to prevent condensation of water and sulphuric acid, the sampling line temperature will depend on the sulphur content of the fuel. — SL sampling line for CO (CO 2 ) The line shall be made of PTFE or stainless steel. It may be heated or unheated. — BK background bag (optional; Figure 3 only) For the measurement of the background concentrations. — BG sample bag (optional; Figure 3 CO and CO 2 only) For the measurement of the sample concentrations. — F1 heated pre-filter (optional) The temperature shall be the same as HSL1. — F2 heated filter The filter shall extract any solid particles from the gas sample prior to the analyser. The temperature shall be the same as HSL1. The filter shall be changed as needed. — P heated sampling pump The pump shall be heated to the temperature of HSL1. — HC Heated flame ionization detector (HFID) for the determination of the hydrocarbons. The temperature shall be kept at 453 to 473 K (180 to 200 °C). — CO, CO 2 NDIR analysers for the determination of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. — NO 2 (H)CLD analyser for the determination of the oxides of nitrogen. If a HCLD is used it shall be kept at a temperature of 328 to 473 K (55 to 200 °C). — C converter A converter shall be used for the catalytic reduction of NO 2 to NO prior to analysis in the CLD or HCLD. — B cooling bath To cool and condense water from the exhaust sample. The bath shall be maintained at a temperature of 273 to 277 K (0 to 4 °C) by ice or refrigeration. It is optional if the analyser is free from water vapour interference as determined in Annex 4A, Appendix 2, paragraphs 1.9.1. and 1.9.2. Chemical dryers are not allowed for removing water from the sample. — T1, T2, T3 temperature sensor To monitor the temperature of the gas stream. — T4 temperature sensor Temperature of the NO 2 -NO converter. — T5 temperature sensor To monitor the temperature of the cooling bath. — G1, G2, G3 pressure gauge To measure the pressure in the sampling lines. — R1, R2 pressure regulator To control the pressure of the air and the fuel, respectively, for the HFID. — R3, R4, R5 pressure regulator To control the pressure in the sampling lines and the flow to the analysers. — FL1, FL2, FL3 flow-meter To monitor the sample bypass flow. — FL4 to FL7 flow-meter (optional) To monitor the flow rate through the analysers. — V1 to V6 selector valve Suitable valving for selecting sample, span gas or zero gas flow to the analyser. — V7, V8 solenoid valve To bypass the NO 2 -NO converter. — V9 needle valve To balance the flow through the NO 2 -NO converter and the bypass. — V10, V11 needle valve To regulate the flows to the analysers. — V12, V13 toggle valve To drain the condensate from the bath B. — V14 selector valve Selecting the sample or background bag. 1.2. Determination of the particulates Paragraphs 1.2.1. and 1.2.2. and Figures 4 to 15 contain detailed descriptions of the recommended dilution and sampling systems. Since various configurations can produce equivalent results, exact conformance with these figures is not required. Additional components such as instruments, valve, solenoids, pumps and switches may be used to provide additional information and coordinate the functions of the component systems. Other components which are not needed to maintain the accuracy on some systems may be excluded if their exclusion is based on good engineering judgement. 1.2.1. Dilution system 1.2.1.1. Partial flow dilution system (Figures 4 to 12) ( 1 ) A dilution system is described based on the dilution of a part of the exhaust stream. Splitting of the exhaust stream and the following dilution process may be done by different dilution system types. For subsequent collection of the particulates, the entire dilute exhaust gas or only a portion of the dilute exhaust gas may be passed to the particulate sampling system (paragraph 1.2.2., Figure 14). The first method is referred to as total sampling type, the second method as fractional sampling type. The calculation of the dilution ratio depends on the type of system used. The following types are recommended: The systems described pay attention to these critical areas. Figure 4 Partial flow dilution system with isokinetic probe and fractional sampling (SB control) Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe to EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the transfer tube TT by the isokinetic sampling probe ISP. The differential pressure of the exhaust gas between exhaust pipe and inlet to the probe is measured with the pressure transducer DPT. This signal is transmitted to the flow controller FC1 that controls the suction blower SB to maintain a differential pressure of zero at the tip of the probe. Under these conditions, exhaust gas velocities in EP and ISP are identical, and the flow through ISP and TT is a constant fraction (split) of the exhaust gas flow. The split ratio is determined from the cross sectional areas of EP and ISP. The dilution air flow rate is measured with the flow measurement device FM1. The dilution ratio is calculated from the dilution air flow rate and the split ratio. Figure 5 Partial flow dilution system with isokinetic probe and fractional sampling (PB control) Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the transfer tube TT by the isokinetic sampling probe ISP. The differential pressure of the exhaust gas between exhaust pipe and inlet to the probe is measured with the pressure transducer DPT. This signal is transmitted to the flow controller FC1 that controls the pressure blower PB to maintain a differential pressure of zero at the tip of the probe. This is done by taking a small fraction of the dilution air whose flow rate has already been measured with the flow measurement device FM1, and feeding it to TT by means of a pneumatic orifice. Under these conditions, exhaust gas velocities in EP and ISP are identical, and the flow through ISP and TT is a constant fraction (split) of the exhaust gas flow. The split ratio is determined from the cross sectional areas of EP and ISP. The dilution air is sucked through DT by the suction blower SB, and the flow rate is measured with FM1 at the inlet to DT. The dilution ratio is calculated from the dilution air flow rate and the split ratio. Figure 6 Partial flow dilution system with CO 2 or NO x concentration measurement and fractional sampling Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the sampling probe SP and the transfer tube TT. The concentrations of a tracer gas (CO 2 or NO x ) are measured in the raw and diluted exhaust gas as well as in the dilution air with the exhaust gas analyser(s) EGA. These signals are transmitted to the flow controller FC2 that controls either the pressure blower PB or the suction blower SB to maintain the desired exhaust split and dilution ratio in DT. The dilution ratio is calculated from the tracer gas concentrations in the raw exhaust gas, the diluted exhaust gas, and the dilution air. Figure 7 Partial flow dilution system with CO 2 concentration measurement, carbon balance and total sampling Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the sampling probe SP and the transfer tube TT. The CO 2 concentrations are measured in the diluted exhaust gas and in the dilution air with the exhaust gas analyser(s) EGA. The CO 2 and fuel flow G FUEL signals are transmitted either to the flow controller FC2, or to the flow controller FC3 of the particulate sampling system (Figure 14). FC2 controls the pressure blower PB, while FC3 controls the particulate sampling system (Figure 14), thereby adjusting the flows into and out of the system so as to maintain the desired exhaust split and dilution ratio in DT. The dilution ratio is calculated from the CO 2 concentrations and G FUEL using the carbon balance assumption. Figure 8 Partial flow dilution system with single venturi, concentration measurement and fractional sampling Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the sampling probe SP and the transfer tube TT due to the negative pressure created by the venturi VN in DT. The gas flow rate through TT depends on the momentum exchange at the venturi zone, and is therefore affected by the absolute temperature of the gas at the exit of TT. Consequently, the exhaust split for a given tunnel flow rate is not constant, and the dilution ratio at low load is slightly lower than at high load. The tracer gas concentrations (CO 2 or NO x ) are measured in the raw exhaust gas, the diluted exhaust gas, and the dilution air with the exhaust gas analyser(s) EGA, and the dilution ratio is calculated from the values so measured. Figure 9 Partial flow dilution system twin venturi or twin orifice, concentration measurement and fractional sampling Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the sampling probe SP and the transfer tube TT by a flow divider that contains a set of orifices or venturis. The first one (FD1) is located in EP, the second one (FD2) in TT. Additionally, two pressure control valves (PCV1 and PCV2) are necessary to maintain a constant exhaust split by controlling the backpressure in EP and the pressure in DT. PCV1 is located downstream of SP in EP, PCV2 between the pressure blower PB and DT. The tracer gas concentrations (CO 2 or NO x ) are measured in the raw exhaust gas, the diluted exhaust gas, and the dilution air with the exhaust gas analyser(s) EGA. They are necessary for checking the exhaust split, and may be used to adjust PCV1 and PCV2 for precise split control. The dilution ratio is calculated from the tracer gas concentrations. Figure 10 Partial flow dilution system with multiple tube splitting, concentration measurement and fractional sampling Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the transfer tube TT by the flow divider FD3 that consists of a number of tubes of the same dimensions (same diameter, length and bed radius) installed in EP. The exhaust gas through one of these tubes is lead to DT, and the exhaust gas through the rest of the tubes is passed through the damping chamber DC. Thus, the exhaust split is determined by the total number of tubes. A constant split control requires a differential pressure of zero between DC and the outlet of TT, which is measured with the differential pressure transducer DPT. A differential pressure of zero is achieved by injecting fresh air into DT at the outlet of TT. The tracer gas concentrations (CO 2 or NO x ) are measured in the raw exhaust gas, the diluted exhaust gas, and the dilution air with the exhaust gas analyser(s) EGA. They are necessary for checking the exhaust split and may be used to control the injection air flow rate for precise split control. The dilution ratio is calculated from the tracer gas concentrations. Figure 11 Partial flow dilution system with flow control and total sampling Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the sampling probe SP and the transfer tube TT. The total flow through the tunnel is adjusted with the flow controller FC3 and the sampling pump P of the particulate sampling system (Figure 13). The dilution air flow is controlled by the flow controller FC2, which may use G EXH , G AIR or G FUEL as command signals, for the desired exhaust split. The sample flow into DT is the difference of the total flow and the dilution air flow. The dilution air flow rate is measured with flow measurement device FM1, the total flow rate with the flow measurement device FM3 of the particulate sampling system (Figure 14). The dilution ratio is calculated from these two flow rates. Figure 12 Partial flow dilution system with flow control and fractional sampling Raw exhaust gas is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP to the dilution tunnel DT through the sampling probe SP and the transfer tube TT. The exhaust split and the flow into DT is controlled by the flow controller FC2 that adjusts the flows (or speeds) of the pressure blower PB and the suction blower SB, accordingly. This is possible since the sample taken with the particulate sampling system is returned into DT. G EXH , G AIR or G FUEL may be used as command signals for FC2. The dilution air flow rate is measured with the flow measurement device FM1, the total flow with the flow measurement device FM2. The dilution ratio is calculated from these two flow rates. Description – Figures 4 to 12 — EP exhaust pipe The exhaust pipe may be insulated. To reduce the thermal inertia of the exhaust pipe a thickness to diameter ratio of 0,015 or less is recommended. The use of flexible sections shall be limited to a length to diameter ratio of 12 or less. Bends will be minimized to reduce inertial deposition. If the system includes a test bed silencer, the silencer may also be insulated. For an isokinetic system, the exhaust pipe shall be free of elbows, bends and sudden diameter changes for at least six pipe diameters upstream and three pipe diameters downstream of the tip of the probe. The gas velocity at the sampling zone shall be higher than 10 m/s except at idle mode. Pressure oscillations of the exhaust gas shall not exceed ±500 Pa on the average. Any steps to reduce pressure oscillations beyond using a chassis-type exhaust system (including silencer and after-treatment device) shall not alter engine performance nor cause the deposition of particulates. For systems without isokinetic probes, it is recommended to have a straight pipe of six pipe diameters upstream and three pipe diameters downstream of the tip of the probe. — SP sampling probe (Figures 6 to 12) The minimum inside diameter shall be 4 mm. The minimum diameter ratio between exhaust pipe and probe shall be four. The probe shall be an open tube facing upstream on the exhaust pipe centre-line, or a multiple hole probe as described under SP1 in paragraph 1.1.1. — ISP isokinetic sampling probe (Figures 4 and 5) The isokinetic sampling probe shall be installed facing upstream on the exhaust pipe centre-line where the flow conditions in section EP are met, and designed to provide a proportional sample of the raw exhaust gas. The minimum inside diameter shall be 12 mm. A control system is necessary for isokinetic exhaust splitting by maintaining a differential pressure of zero between EP and ISP. Under these conditions exhaust gas velocities in EP and ISP are identical and the mass flow through ISP is a constant fraction of the exhaust gas flow. The ISP has to be connected to a differential pressure transducer. The control to provide a differential pressure of zero between EP and ISP is done with blower speed or flow controller. — FD1, FD2 flow divider (Figure 9) A set of venturis or orifices is installed in the exhaust pipe EP and in the transfer tube TT, respectively, to provide a proportional sample of the raw exhaust gas. A control system consisting of two pressure control valves PCV1 and PCV2 is necessary for proportional splitting by controlling the pressures in EP and DT. — FD3 flow divider (Figure 10) A set of tubes (multiple tube unit) is installed in the exhaust pipe EP to provide a proportional sample of the raw exhaust gas. One of the tubes feeds exhaust gas to the dilution tunnel DT, whereas the other tubes exit exhaust gas to a damping chamber DC. The tubes shall have the same dimensions (same diameter, length, bend radius), so that the exhaust split depends on the total number of tubes. A control system is necessary for proportional splitting by maintaining a differential pressure of zero between the exit of the multiple tube unit into DC and the exit of TT. Under these conditions, exhaust gas velocities in EP and FD3 are proportional, and the flow TT is a constant fraction of the exhaust gas flow. The two points have to be connected to a differential pressure transducer DPT. The control to provide a differential pressure of zero is done with the flow controller FC1. — EGA exhaust gas analyser (Figures 6 to 10) CO 2 or NO x analysers may be used (with carbon balance method CO 2 only). The analysers shall be calibrated like the analysers for the measurement of the gaseous emissions. One or several analysers may be used to determine the concentration differences. The accuracy of the measuring systems has to be such that the accuracy of G EDFW, i is within ±4 per cent. — TT transfer tube (Figures 4 to 12) The particulate sample transfer tube shall be: If the tube is 1 metre or less in length, it is to be insulated with material with a maximum thermal conductivity of 0,05 W/(m · K) with a radial insulation thickness corresponding to the diameter of the probe. If the tube is longer than 1 metre, it shall be insulated and heated to a minimum wall temperature of 523 K (250 °C). Alternatively, the transfer tube wall temperatures required may be determined through standard heat transfer calculations. — DPT differential pressure transducer (Figures 4, 5 and 10) The differential pressure transducer shall have a range of ±500 Pa or less. — FC1 flow controller (Figures 4, 5 and 10) For the isokinetic systems (Figures 4 and 5) a flow controller is necessary to maintain a differential pressure of zero between EP and ISP. The adjustment can be done by: In the case of a pressure controlled system the remaining error in the control loop shall not exceed ±3 Pa. The pressure oscillations in the dilution tunnel shall not exceed ±250 Pa on average. For a multi-tube system (Figure 10) a flow controller is necessary for proportional exhaust splitting to maintain a differential pressure of zero between the outlet of the multi-tube unit and the exit of TT. The adjustment can be done by controlling the injection air flow rate into DT at the exit of TT. — PCV1, PCV2 pressure control valve (Figure 9) Two pressure control valves are necessary for the twin venturi/twin orifice system for proportional flow splitting by controlling the backpressure of EP and the pressure in DT. The valves shall be located downstream of SP in EP and between PB and DT. — DC damping chamber (Figure 10) A damping chamber shall be installed at the exit of the multiple tube unit to minimize the pressure oscillations in the exhaust pipe EP. — VN venturi (Figure 8) A venturi is installed in the dilution tunnel DT to create a negative pressure in the region of the exit of the transfer tube TT. The gas flow rate through TT is determined by the momentum exchange at the venturi zone, and is basically proportional to the flow rate of the pressure blower PB leading to a constant dilution ratio. Since the momentum exchange is affected by the temperature at the exit of TT and the pressure difference between EP and DT, the actual dilution ratio is slightly lower at low load than at high load. — FC2 flow controller (Figures 6, 7, 11 and 12; optional) A flow controller may be used to control the flow of the pressure blower PB and/or the suction blower SB. It may be connected to the exhaust flow or fuel flow signal and/or to the CO 2 or NO x differential signal. When using a pressurised air supply (Figure 11) FC2 directly controls the air flow. — FM1 flow measurement device (Figures 6, 7, 11 and 12) Gas meter or other flow instrumentation to measure the dilution air flow. FM1 is optional if PB is calibrated to measure the flow. — FM2 flow measurement device (Figure 12) Gas meter or other flow instrumentation to measure the diluted exhaust gas flow. FM2 is optional if the suction blower SB is calibrated to measure the flow. — PB pressure blower (Figures 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12) To control the dilution air flow rate, PB may be connected to the flow controllers FC1 or FC2. PB is not required when using a butterfly valve. PB may be used to measure the dilution air flow, if calibrated. — SB suction blower (Figures 4, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 12) For fractional sampling systems only. SB may be used to measure the dilute exhaust gas flow, if calibrated. — DAF dilution air filter (Figures 4 to 12) It is recommended that the dilution air be filtered and charcoal scrubbed to eliminate background hydrocarbons. The dilution air shall have a temperature of 298 K (25 °C) ± 5 K. At the manufacturer's request the dilution air shall be sampled according to good engineering practice to determine the background particulate levels, which can then be subtracted from the values measured in the diluted exhaust. — PSP particulate sampling probe (Figures 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 12) The probe is the leading section of PTT and — DT dilution tunnel (Figures 4 to 12) The dilution tunnel: The engine exhaust shall be thoroughly mixed with the dilution air. For fractional sampling systems, the mixing quality shall be checked after introduction into service by means of a CO 2 profile of the tunnel with the engine running (at least four equally spaced measuring points). If necessary, a mixing orifice may be used. Note: If the ambient temperature in the vicinity of the dilution tunnel (DT) is below 293 K (20 °C), precautions should be taken to avoid particle losses onto the cool walls of the dilution tunnel. Therefore, heating and/or insulating the tunnel within the limits given above is recommended. At high engine loads, the tunnel may be cooled by a non-aggressive means such as a circulating fan, as long as the temperature of the cooling medium is not below 293 K (20 °C). — HE heat exchanger (Figures 9 and 10) The heat exchanger shall be of sufficient capacity to maintain the temperature at the inlet to the suction blower SB within ±11 K of the average operating temperature observed during the test. 1.2.1.2. Full flow dilution system (Figure 13) A dilution system is described based upon the dilution of the total exhaust using the constant volume sampling (CVS) concept. The total volume of the mixture of exhaust and dilution air shall be measured. Either a PDP or a CFV or a SSV system may be used. For subsequent collection of the particulates, a sample of the dilute exhaust gas is passed to the particulate sampling system (paragraph 1.2.2., Figures 14 and 15). If this is done directly, it is referred to as single dilution. If the sample is diluted once more in the secondary dilution tunnel, it is referred to as double dilution. This is useful, if the filter face temperature requirement cannot be met with single dilution. Although partly a dilution system, the double dilution system is described as a modification of a particulate sampling system in paragraph 1.2.2. (Figure 15), since it shares most of the parts with a typical particulate sampling system. The gaseous emissions may also be determined in the dilution tunnel of a full flow dilution system. Therefore, the sampling probes for the gaseous components are shown in Figure 13 but do not appear in the description list. The respective requirements are described in paragraph 1.1.1. Descriptions (Figure 13) — EP exhaust pipe The exhaust pipe length from the exit of the engine exhaust manifold, turbocharger outlet or after-treatment device to the dilution tunnel is required to be not more than 10 m. If the system exceeds 4 m in length, then all tubing in excess of 4 m shall be insulated, except for an in-line smoke-meter, if used. The radial thickness of the insulation shall be at least 25 mm. The thermal conductivity of the insulating material shall have a value no greater than 0,1 W/(m · K) measured at 673 K (400 °C). To reduce the thermal inertia of the exhaust pipe a thickness to diameter ratio of 0,015 or less is recommended. The use of flexible sections shall be limited to a length to diameter ratio of 12 or less. Figure 13 Full flow dilution system see figure 3 The total amount of raw exhaust gas is mixed in the dilution tunnel DT with the dilution air. The diluted exhaust gas flow rate is measured either with a positive displacement pump PDP or with a critical flow venturi CFV or with a sub-sonic venturi SSV. A heat exchanger HE or electronic flow compensation EFC may be used for proportional particulate sampling and for flow determination. Since particulate mass determination is based on the total diluted exhaust gas flow, the dilution ratio is not required to be calculated. — PDP positive displacement pump The PDP meters total diluted exhaust flow from the number of the pump revolutions and the pump displacement. The exhaust system back pressure shall not be artificially lowered by the PDP or dilution air inlet system. Static exhaust back pressure measured with the CVS system operating shall remain within ±1,5 kPa of the static pressure measured without connection to the CVS at identical engine speed and load. The gas mixture temperature immediately ahead of the PDP shall be within ±6 K of the average operating temperature observed during the test, when no flow compensation is used. Flow compensation can only be used if the temperature at the inlet of the PDP does not exceed 50 °C (323 K). — CFV critical flow venturi CFV measures total diluted exhaust flow by maintaining the flow at choked conditions (critical flow). Static exhaust backpressure measured with the CFV system operating shall remain within ±1,5 kPa of the static pressure measured without connection to the CFV at identical engine speed and load. The gas mixture temperature immediately ahead of the CFV shall be within ±11 K of the average operating temperature observed during the test, when no flow compensation is used. — SSV subsonic venturi SSV measures total diluted exhaust flow as a function of inlet pressure, inlet temperature, pressure drop between the SSV inlet and throat. Static exhaust backpressure measured with the SSV system operating shall remain within ±1,5 kPa of the static pressure measured without connection to the SSV at identical engine speed and load. The gas mixture temperature immediately ahead of the SSV shall be within ±11 K of the average operating temperature observed during the test, when no flow compensation is used. — HE heat exchanger (optional if EFC is used) The heat exchanger shall be of sufficient capacity to maintain the temperature within the limits required above. — EFC electronic flow compensation (optional if HE is used) If the temperature at the inlet to either the PDP or CFV or SSV is not kept within the limits stated above, a flow compensation system is required for continuous measurement of the flow rate and control of the proportional sampling in the particulate system. To that purpose, the continuously measured flow rate signals are used to correct the sample flow rate through the particulate filters of the particulate sampling system (Figures 14 and 15), accordingly. — DT dilution tunnel The dilution tunnel: The engine exhaust shall be directed downstream at the point where it is introduced into the dilution tunnel, and thoroughly mixed. When using single dilution, a sample from the dilution tunnel is transferred to the particulate sampling system (paragraph 1.2.2., Figure 14). The flow capacity of the PDP or CFV or SSV shall be sufficient to maintain the diluted exhaust at a temperature of less than or equal to 325 K (52 °C) immediately before the primary particulate filter. When using double dilution, a sample from the dilution tunnel is transferred to the secondary dilution tunnel where it is further diluted, and then passed through the sampling filters (paragraph 1.2.2., Figure 15). The flow capacity of the PDP or CFV or SSV shall be sufficient to maintain the diluted exhaust stream in the DT at a temperature of less than or equal to 464 K (191 °C) at the sampling zone. The secondary dilution system shall provide sufficient secondary dilution air to maintain the doubly-diluted exhaust stream at a temperature of less than or equal to 325 K (52 °C) immediately before the primary particulate filter. — DAF dilution air filter It is recommended that the dilution air be filtered and charcoal scrubbed to eliminate background hydrocarbons. The dilution air shall have a temperature of 298 K (25 °C) ± 5 K. At the manufacturer's request the dilution air shall be sampled according to good engineering practice to determine the background particulate levels, which can then be subtracted from the values measured in the diluted exhaust. — PSP particulate sampling probe The probe is the leading section of PTT and 1.2.2. Particulate sampling system (Figures 14 and 15) The particulate sampling system is required for collecting the particulates on the particulate filter. In the case of total sampling partial flow dilution, which consists of passing the entire dilute exhaust sample through the filters, dilution (paragraph 1.2.1.1., Figures 7 and 11) and sampling system usually form an integral unit. In the case of fractional sampling partial flow dilution or full flow dilution, which consists of passing through the filters only a portion of the diluted exhaust, the dilution (paragraph 1.2.1.1, Figures 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 12 and paragraph 1.2.1.2., Figure 13) and sampling systems usually form different units. In this Regulation, the double dilution system DDS (Figure 15) of a full flow dilution system is considered as a specific modification of a typical particulate sampling system as shown in Figure 14. The double dilution system includes all important parts of the particulate sampling system, like filter holders and sampling pump, and additionally some dilution features, like a dilution air supply and a secondary dilution tunnel. In order to avoid any impact on the control loops, it is recommended that the sample pump be running throughout the complete test procedure. For the single filter method, a bypass system shall be used for passing the sample through the sampling filters at the desired times. Interference of the switching procedure on the control loops shall be minimized. Descriptions – Figures 14 and 15 — PSP particulate sampling probe (Figures 14 and 15) The particulate sampling probe shown in the figures is the leading section of the particulate transfer tube PTT. The probe: Figure 14 Particulate sampling system optional from EGA from PDP from CFV from GFUEL A sample of the diluted exhaust gas is taken from the dilution tunnel DT of a partial flow or full flow dilution system through the particulate sampling probe PSP and the particulate transfer tube PTT by means of the sampling pump P. The sample is passed through the filter holder(s) FH that contain the particulate sampling filters. The sample flow rate is controlled by the flow controller FC3. If electronic flow compensation EFC (Figure 13) is used, the diluted exhaust gas flow is used as command signal for FC3. Figure 15 Dilution system (full flow system only) A sample of the diluted exhaust gas is transferred from the dilution tunnel DT of a full flow dilution system through the particulate sampling probe PSP and the particulate transfer tube PTT to the secondary dilution tunnel SDT, where it is diluted once more. The sample is then passed through the filter holder(s) FH that contain the particulate sampling filters. The dilution air flow rate is usually constant whereas the sample flow rate is controlled by the flow controller FC3. If electronic flow compensation EFC (Figure 13) is used, the total diluted exhaust gas flow is used as command signal for FC3. — PTT particulate transfer tube (Figures 14 and 15) The particulate transfer tube shall not exceed 1 020 mm in length, and shall be minimized in length whenever possible. The dimensions are valid for: The transfer tube: — SDT secondary dilution tunnel (Figure 15) The secondary dilution tunnel should have a minimum diameter of 75 mm and should be sufficient length so as to provide a residence time of at least 0,25 s for the doubly-diluted sample. The primary filter holder, FH, shall be located within 300 mm of the exit of the SDT. The secondary dilution tunnel: — FH filter holder(s) (Figures 14 and 15) For primary and back-up filters one filter housing or separate filter housings may be used. The requirements of Annex 4A, Appendix 1, paragraph 1.5.1.3. have to be met. The filter holder(s): — P sampling pump (Figures 14 and 15) The particulate sampling pump shall be located sufficiently distant from the tunnel so that the inlet gas temperature is maintained constant (±3 K), if flow correction by FC3 is not used. — DP dilution air pump (Figure 15) (full flow double dilution only) The dilution air pump shall be located so that the secondary dilution air is supplied at a temperature of 298 K (25 °C) ± 5 K. — FC3 flow controller (Figures 14 and 15) A flow controller shall be used to compensate the particulate sample flow rate for temperature and backpressure variations in the sample path, if no other means are available. The flow controller is required if electronic flow compensation EFC (Figure 13) is used. — FM3 flow measurement device (Figures 14 and 15) (particulate sample flow) The gas meter or flow instrumentation shall be located sufficiently distant from the sample pump so that the inlet gas temperature remains constant (±3 K), if flow correction by FC3 is not used. — FM4 flow measurement device (Figure 15) (dilution air, full flow double dilution only) The gas meter or flow instrumentation shall be located so that the inlet gas temperature remains at 298 K (25 °C) ± 5 K. — BV ball valve (optional) The ball valve shall have a diameter not less than the inside diameter of the sampling tube and a switching time of less than 0,5 s. Note: If the ambient temperature in the vicinity of PSP, PTT, SDT, and FH is below 239 K (20 °C), precautions should be taken to avoid particle losses onto the cool wall of these parts. Therefore, heating and/or insulating these parts within the limits given in the respective descriptions is recommended. It is also recommended that the filter face temperature during sampling be not below 293 K (20 °C). At high engine loads, the above parts may be cooled by a non-aggressive means such as a circulating fan, as long as the temperature of the cooling medium is not below 293 K (20 °C). ( 1 ) Figures 4 to 12 show many types of partial flow dilution systems, which normally can be used for the steady-state test (NRSC). But, because of very severe constraints of the transient tests, only those partial flow dilution systems (Figures 4 to 12) able to fulfill all the requirements quoted in paragraph 2.4. Appendix 1, Annex 4A - Partial flow dilution system specifications -, are accepted for the transient test (NRTC). ANNEX 4B Test procedure for compression-ignition engines to be installed in agricultural and forestry tractors and in non-road mobile machinery with regard to the emissions of pollutants by the engine 1. RESERVED 2. RESERVED 3. DEFINITIONS, SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS 3.1. Definitions See paragraph 2.1. of this Regulation 3.2. General symbols ( 1 ) 3.3. Subscripts 3.4. Symbols and abbreviations for the chemical components (used also as a subscript) See paragraph 2.2.2. of this Regulation 3.5. Abbreviations See paragraph 2.2.3. of this Regulation 4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS The engine system shall be designed, constructed and assembled so as to enable it to comply with the provisions of this Regulation. The technical measures taken by the manufacturer shall be such as to ensure that the mentioned emissions are effectively limited, pursuant to this Regulation, throughout the useful life of the engine and under normal conditions of use. For this, engines shall meet the performance requirements of paragraph 5. when tested in accordance with the test conditions of paragraph 6. and the test procedure of paragraph 7. 5. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 5.1. General requirements 5.1.1. Reserved ( 2 ) 5.1.2. Emissions of gaseous and particulate pollutants The pollutants are represented by: The measured values of gaseous and particulate pollutants exhausted by the engine refer to the brake-specific emissions in grams per kilowatt-hour (g/kWh). Other system of units may be used with appropriate conversion. The emissions shall be determined on the duty cycles (steady-state and/or transient), as described in paragraph 7. The measurement systems shall meet the calibration and performance checks of paragraph 8. with measurement equipment of paragraph 9. Other systems or analysers may be approved by the Type Approval Authority if it is found that they yield equivalent results in accordance with paragraph 5.1.3. 5.1.3. Equivalency The determination of system equivalency shall be based on a seven-sample pair (or larger) correlation study between the system under consideration and one of the systems of this annex. "Results" refer to the specific cycle weighted emissions value. The correlation testing is to be performed at the same laboratory, test cell, and on the same engine, and is preferred to be run concurrently. The equivalency of the sample pair averages shall be determined by F -test and t -test statistics as described in Annex 4B, Appendix A.2. obtained under the laboratory test cell and the engine conditions described above. Outliers shall be determined in accordance with ISO 5725 and excluded from the database. The systems to be used for correlation testing shall be subject to the approval by the Type Approval Authority. 5.2. Reserved 6. TEST CONDITIONS 6.1. Laboratory test conditions The absolute temperature ( T a ) of the engine air at the inlet to the engine expressed in Kelvin, and the dry atmospheric pressure ( p s ), expressed in kPa shall be measured and the parameter f a shall be determined according to the following provisions. In multi-cylinder engines having distinct groups of intake manifolds, such as in a 'V' engine configuration, the average temperature of the distinct groups shall be taken. The parameter f a shall be reported with the test results. For better repeatability and reproducibility of the test results, it is recommended that the parameter f a be such that: 0,93 ≤ f a ≤ 1,07. Naturally aspirated and mechanically supercharged engines: Turbocharged engines with or without cooling of the intake air: The temperature of intake air shall be maintained to (25 ± 5) °C, as measured upstream of any engine component. It is allowed to use: 6.2. Engines with charge air cooling 6.3. Engine power 6.3.1. Basis for emission measurement The basis of specific emissions measurement is uncorrected power. 6.3.2. Auxiliaries to be fitted During the test, the auxiliaries necessary for the engine operation shall be installed on the test bench according to the requirements of Annex 7. 6.3.3. Auxiliaries to be removed Certain auxiliaries whose definition is linked with the operation of the machine and which may be mounted on the engine shall be removed for the test. Where auxiliaries cannot be removed, the power they absorb in the unloaded condition may be determined and added to the measured engine power (see note g in the table of Annex 7). If this value is greater than 3 per cent of the maximum power at the test speed it may be verified by the test authority. The power absorbed by auxiliaries shall be used to adjust the set values and to calculate the work produced by the engine over the test cycle. 6.4. Engine intake air 6.4.1. Introduction The intake-air system installed on the engine or one that represents a typical in-use configuration shall be used. This includes the charge-air cooling and exhaust gas recirculation systems. 6.4.2. Intake air restriction An engine air intake system or a test laboratory system shall be used presenting an air intake restriction within ±300 Pa of the maximum value specified by the manufacturer for a clean air cleaner at the rated speed and full load. The static differential pressure of the restriction shall be measured at the location and at the speed and torque set points specified by the manufacturer. If the manufacturer does not specify a location, this pressure shall be measured upstream of any turbocharger or exhaust gas recirculation system connection to the intake air system. If the manufacturer does not specify speed and torque points, this pressure shall be measured while the engine outputs maximum power. 6.5. Engine exhaust system The exhaust system installed with the engine or one that represents a typical in-use configuration shall be used. For aftertreatment devices the exhaust restriction shall be defined by the manufacturer according to the aftertreatment condition (e.g. degreening/aging and regeneration/loading level). The exhaust system shall conform to the requirements for exhaust gas sampling, as set out in paragraph 9.3. An engine exhaust system or a test laboratory system shall be used presenting a static exhaust backpressure within 80 to 100 per cent of the maximum exhaust restriction at the engine speed and torque specified by the manufacturer. If the maximum restriction is 5 kPa or less, the set point shall be no less than 1,0 kPa from the maximum. If the manufacturer does not specify speed and torque points, this pressure shall be measured while the engine produces maximum power. 6.6. Engine with exhaust after-treatment system If the engine is equipped with an exhaust after-treatment system, the exhaust pipe shall have the same diameter as found in-use for at least four pipe diameters upstream of the expansion section containing the after-treatment device. The distance from the exhaust manifold flange or turbocharger outlet to the exhaust after-treatment system shall be the same as in the vehicle configuration or within the distance specifications of the manufacturer. The exhaust backpressure or restriction shall follow the same criteria as above, and may be set with a valve. The after-treatment container may be removed during dummy tests and during engine mapping, and replaced with an equivalent container having an inactive catalyst support. The emissions measured on the test cycle shall be representative of the emissions in the field. In the case of an engine equipped with an exhaust after-treatment system that requires the consumption of a reagent, the reagent used for all tests shall be declared by the manufacturer. For engines equipped with exhaust after-treatment systems that are regenerated on an infrequent (periodic) basis, as described in paragraph 6.6.2., emission results shall be adjusted to account for regeneration events. In this case, the average emission depends on the frequency of the regeneration event in terms of fraction of tests during which the regeneration occurs. After-treatment systems with continuous regeneration according to paragraph 6.6.1. do not require a special test procedure. 6.6.1. Continuous regeneration For an exhaust aftertreatment system based on a continuous regeneration process the emissions shall be measured on an aftertreatment system that has been stabilized so as to result in repeatable emissions behaviour. The regeneration process shall occur at least once during the NRTC hot start test or ramped-modal cycle (RMC) test and the manufacturer shall declare the normal conditions under which regeneration occurs (soot load, temperature, exhaust back-pressure, etc.). In order to demonstrate that the regeneration process is continuous, at least three NRTC hot start tests or ramped-modal cycle (RMC) tests shall be conducted. In case of NRTC hot start test, the engine shall be warmed up in accordance with paragraph 7.8.2.1., the engine be soaked according to paragraph 7.4.2. and the first NRTC hot start test be run. The subsequent NRTC hot start tests shall be started after soaking according to paragraph 7.4.2. During the tests, exhaust temperatures and pressures shall be recorded (temperature before and after the after-treatment system, exhaust back pressure, etc.). The aftertreatment system is considered to be satisfactory if the conditions declared by the manufacturer occur during the test during a sufficient time and the emission results do not scatter by more than ±25 per cent or 0,005 g/kWh, whichever is greater. If the exhaust aftertreatment has a security mode that shifts to a periodic (infrequent) regeneration mode, it shall be checked according to paragraph 6.6.2. For that specific case, the applicable emission limits could be exceeded and would not be weighted. 6.6.2. Infrequent (periodic) regeneration This provision only applies for engines equipped with emission controls that are regenerated on a periodic basis. For engines which are run on the discrete mode cycle this procedure cannot be applied. The emissions shall be measured on at least three NRTC hot start tests or ramped-modal cycle (RMC) tests, one with and two without a regeneration event on a stabilized aftertreatment system. The regeneration process shall occur at least once during the NRTC or RMC test. If regeneration takes longer than one NRTC or RMC test, consecutive NRTC or RMC tests shall be run and emissions continued to be measured without shutting the engine off until regeneration is completed and the average of the tests shall be calculated. If regeneration is completed during any test, the test shall be continued over its entire length. The engine may be equipped with a switch capable of preventing or permitting the regeneration process provided this operation has no effect on the original engine calibration. The manufacturer shall declare the normal parameter conditions under which the regeneration process occurs (soot load, temperature, exhaust back-pressure, etc.). The manufacturer shall also provide the frequency of the regeneration event in terms of number of tests during which the regeneration occurs. The exact procedure to determine this frequency shall be agreed by the Type Approval Authority based upon good engineering judgement. For a regeneration test, the manufacturer shall provide an aftertreatment system that has been loaded. Regeneration shall not occur during this engine conditioning phase. As an option, the manufacturer may run consecutive NRTC hot start or RMC tests until the aftertreatment system is loaded. Emissions measurement is not required on all tests. Average emissions between regeneration phases shall be determined from the arithmetic mean of several approximately equidistant NRTC hot start or RMC tests. As a minimum, at least one hot NRTC or RMC as close as possible prior to a regeneration test and one hot NRTC or RMC immediately after a regeneration test shall be conducted. During the regeneration test, all the data needed to detect regeneration shall be recorded (CO or NO x emissions, temperature before and after the after-treatment system, exhaust back pressure, etc.). During the regeneration process, the applicable emission limits may be exceeded. The test procedure is schematically shown in Figure 6.1. Figure 6.1 Scheme of infrequent (periodic) regeneration with n number of measurements and n r number of measurements during regeneration The average specific emission rate related to hot start where: At the choice of the manufacturer and based on upon good engineering analysis, the regeneration adjustment factor k r , expressing the average emission rate, may be calculated either multiplicative or additive as follows: Upward adjustment factors are multiplied with or added to measured emission rates for all tests in which the regeneration does not occur. Downward adjustment factors are multiplied with or added to measured emission rates for all tests in which the regeneration occurs. The occurrence of the regeneration shall be identified in a manner that is readily apparent during all testing. Where no regeneration is identified, the upward adjustment factor shall be applied. With reference to Annex 4B, Appendices A.7-8 on brake specific emission calculations, the regeneration adjustment factor: The following options shall be considered: 6.7. Cooling system An engine cooling system with sufficient capacity to maintain the engine, with its intake-air, oil, coolant, block and head temperatures, at normal operating temperatures prescribed by the manufacturer shall be used. Laboratory auxiliary coolers and fans may be used. 6.8. Lubricating oil The lubricating oil shall be specified by the manufacturer and be representative of lubricating oil available in the market; the specifications of the lubricating oil used for the test shall be recorded and presented with the results of the test. 6.9. Specification of the reference fuel The reference fuel is specified in Annex 6, Table 3. The fuel temperature shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The fuel temperature shall be measured at the inlet to the fuel injection pump or as specified by the manufacturer, and the location of measurement recorded. 6.10. Crankcase emissions No crankcase emissions shall be discharged directly into the ambient atmosphere, with the following exception: engines equipped with turbochargers, pumps, blowers, or superchargers for air induction may discharge crankcase emissions to the ambient atmosphere if the emissions are added to the exhaust emissions (either physically or mathematically) during all emission testing. Manufacturers taking advantage of this exception shall install the engines so that all crankcase emission can be routed into the emissions sampling system. For the purpose of this paragraph, crankcase emissions that are routed into the exhaust upstream of exhaust aftertreatment during all operation are not considered to be discharged directly into the ambient atmosphere. Open crankcase emissions shall be routed into the exhaust system for emission measurement, as follows: 7. TEST PROCEDURES 7.1. Introduction This paragraph describes the determination of brake specific emissions of gaseous and particulate pollutants on engines to be tested. The test engine shall be the parent engine configuration for the engine family as specified in paragraph 5.2. A laboratory emission test consists of measuring emissions and other parameters for the test cycles specified in this annex. The following aspects are treated (in this Annex 4B): 7.2. Principle of emission measurement To measure the brake-specific emissions the engine shall be operated over the test cycles defined in paragraph 7.4., as applicable. The measurement of brake-specific emissions requires the determination of the mass of pollutants in the exhaust (i.e. HC, NMHC, CO, NO x and PM) and the corresponding engine work. 7.2.1. Mass of constituent The total mass of each constituent shall be determined over the applicable test cycle by using the following methods: 7.2.1.1. Continuous sampling In continuous sampling, the constituent's concentration is measured continuously from raw or dilute exhaust. This concentration is multiplied by the continuous (raw or dilute) exhaust flow rate at the emission sampling location to determine the constituent's flow rate. The constituent's emission is continuously summed over the test interval. This sum is the total mass of the emitted constituent. 7.2.1.2. Batch sampling In batch sampling, a sample of raw or dilute exhaust is continuously extracted and stored for later measurement. The extracted sample shall be proportional to the raw or dilute exhaust flow rate. Examples of batch sampling are collecting diluted gaseous emissions in a bag and collecting PM on a filter. In principal the method of emission calculation is done as follows: the batch sampled concentrations are multiplied by the total mass or mass flow (raw or dilute) from which it was extracted during the test cycle. This product is the total mass or mass flow of the emitted constituent. To calculate the PM concentration, the PM deposited onto a filter from proportionally extracted exhaust shall be divided by the amount of filtered exhaust. 7.2.1.3. Combined sampling Any combination of continuous and batch sampling is permitted (e.g. PM with batch sampling and gaseous emissions with continuous sampling). The following figure illustrates the two aspects of the test procedures for measuring emissions: the equipments with the sampling lines in raw and diluted exhaust gas and the operations requested to calculate the pollutant emissions in steady-state and transient test cycles (Figure 7.1). Figure 7.1 Test procedures for emission measurement Note on Figure 7.1: The term "Partial flow PM sampling" includes the partial flow dilution to extract only raw exhaust with constant or varying dilution ratio. Exhaust Raw gaseous sampling Transient ( 1 ) For whole test: Continuous gas analysis + continuous flow measurement Calculation of instantaneous emission [g/h] Integration of instantaneous emissions Steady-state ( 2 ) For each mode: Average gas analysis concentration Average flow Calculation of emission [g/h] Multiplying modal emissions with weighting factors Partial flow PM sampling Transient ( 1 ) Varying dilution ratio Single filter method Calculation of emission for whole test [g/h] Steady-state ( 2 ) Constant dilution ratio Multipe filter method Calculation of emission for each mode [g/h] Multiplying modal emissions with weighting factors Full flow dilution for gaseous and PM Transient and steady-state ( 3 ) Varying dilution ratio Continuous gas analysis Calculation of average concentration Emission calculation by multiplication of average concentration (from continuous or batch sampling) with average flow Batch sampling Gaseous emissions CO, CO 2 Secondary dilution system (Option) Filter ( 1 ) Transient and Ramped Modal Test Cycle; ( 2 ) Discrete Mode Steady State Cycle; ( 3 ) Transient, ramped modal and discrete mode Steady-State Cycles 7.2.2. Work determination The work shall be determined over the test cycle by synchronously multiplying speed and brake torque to calculate instantaneous values for engine brake power. Engine brake power shall be integrated over the test cycle to determine total work. 7.3. Verification and calibration 7.3.1. Pre-test procedures 7.3.1.1. Preconditioning To achieve stable conditions, the sampling system and the engine shall be preconditioned before starting a test sequence as specified in paragraphs 7.3. and 7.4. The preconditioning for cooling down the engine in view of a cold start transient test is specially indicated in paragraph 7.4.2. 7.3.1.2. Verification of HC contamination If there is any presumption of an essential HC contamination of the exhaust gas measuring system, the contamination with HC may be checked with zero gas and the hang-up may then be corrected. If the amount of contamination of the measuring system and the background HC system has to be checked, it shall be conducted within 8 hours prior to starting each test-cycle. The values shall be recorded for later correction. Before this check, the leak check has to be performed and the FID analyser has to be calibrated. 7.3.1.3. Preparation of measurement equipment for sampling The following steps shall be taken before emission sampling begins: 7.3.1.4. Calibration of gas analysers Appropriate gas analyser ranges shall be selected. Emission analysers with automatic or manual range switching are allowed. During a ramped modal or a NRTC test and during a sampling period of a gaseous emission at the end of each mode for discrete mode testing, the range of the emission analysers may not be switched. Also the gains of an analyser's analogue operational amplifier(s) may not be switched during a test cycle. All continuous analysers shall be zeroed and spanned using internationally-traceable gases that meet the specifications of paragraph 9.5.1. FID analysers shall be spanned on a carbon number basis of one ( C 1 ). 7.3.1.5. PM filter preconditioning and tare weighing The procedures for PM filter preconditioning and tare weighing shall be followed according to paragraph 8.2.3. 7.3.2. Post-test procedures The following steps shall be taken after emission sampling is complete: 7.3.2.1. Verification of proportional sampling For any proportional batch sample, such as a bag sample or PM sample, it shall be verified that proportional sampling was maintained according to paragraph 8.2.1. For the single filter method and the discrete steady-state test cycle, effective PM weighing factor shall be calculated. Any sample that does not fulfil the requirements of paragraph 8.2.1. shall be voided. 7.3.2.2. Post-test PM conditioning and weighing Used PM sample filters shall be placed into covered or sealed containers or the filter holders shall be closed, in order to protect the sample filters against ambient contamination. Thus protected, the loaded filters have to be returned to the PM-filter conditioning chamber or room. Then the PM sample filters shall be conditioned and weighted accordingly to paragraph 8.2.4. (PM filter post-conditioning and total weighing procedures). 7.3.2.3. Analysis of gaseous batch sampling As soon as practical, the following shall be performed: 7.3.2.4. Drift verification After quantifying exhaust gases, drift shall be verified as follows: 7.4. Test cycles The following duty cycles apply: 7.4.1. Steady-state test cycles Steady-state test cycles are specified in Annex 5 as a list of discrete modes (operating points), where each operating point has one value of speed and one value of torque. A steady-state test cycle shall be measured with a warmed up and running engine according to manufacturer's specification. A steady-state test cycle may be run as a discrete-mode cycle or a ramped-modal cycle, as explained in the following paragraphs. 7.4.1.1. Steady-state discrete mode test cycles The steady-state discrete 8-mode test cycle consists of eight speed and load modes (with the respective weighing factor for each mode) which cover the typical operating range of variable speed engines. The cycle is shown in Annex 5. The steady-state discrete 5-mode constant-speed test cycle consists of five load modes (with the respective weighing factor for each mode) all at rated speed which cover the typical operating range of constant speed engines. The cycle is shown in Annex 5. 7.4.1.2. Steady-state ramped test cycles The ramped modal test cycles (RMC) are hot running cycles where emissions shall be started to be measured after the engine is started, warmed up and running as specified in paragraph 7.8.2.1. The engine shall be continuously controlled by the test bed control unit during the RMC test cycle. The gaseous and particulate emissions shall be measured and sampled continuously during the RMC test cycle in the same way as in a transient cycle. In case of the 5-mode test cycle the RMC consists of the same modes in the same order as the corresponding discrete steady-state test cycle. For the 8-mode test cycle the RMC has one mode more (split idle mode) and the mode sequence is not the same as the corresponding steady-state discrete mode cycle, in order to avoid extreme changes in the after-treatment temperature. The length of the modes shall be selected to be equivalent to the weighing factors of the corresponding discrete steady-state test cycle. The change in engine speed and load from one mode to the next one has to be linearly controlled in a time of 20 ± 1 s. The mode change time is part of the new mode (including the first mode). 7.4.2. Transient test cycle (NRTC) The Non-Road Transient Cycle (NRTC) is specified in Annex 5 as a second-by-second sequence of normalized speed and torque values. In order to perform the test in an engine test cell, the normalized values shall be converted to their equivalent reference values for the individual engine to be tested, based on specific speed and torque values identified in the engine-mapping curve. The conversion is referred to as denormalization, and the resulting test cycle is the reference NRTC test cycle of the engine to be tested (see paragraph 7.7.2.). A graphical display of the normalized NRTC dynamometer schedule is shown in Annex 5. The transient test cycle shall be run twice (see paragraph 7.8.3.): 7.5. General test sequence To measure engine emissions the following steps have to be performed: The following diagram gives an overview about the procedures needed to conduct NRMM test cycles with measuring exhaust engine emissions. Figure 7.3 Test sequence Steady-state discrete & ramped If transient cycle is not applied. Defining steady-state test cycle Ready all systems for sampling (analyzer calibration included) & data collection Warm-up engine Exhaust emission test 1) Data collection 2) Post-test procedures 3) Evaluations Emissions calculation A.7.-A.8. Transient NRTC Generation engine map (max. torque curve) If transient cycle and steady-state are applied. Generate reference test cycle Run one or more practice cycle as necessary to check engine/test Natural or forced cool down Cold start exhaust emission phase Hot soak Hot start exhaust emission phase 7.5.1. Engine starting, and restarting 7.5.1.1. Engine start The engine shall be started: Cranking shall be stopped within 1 s of starting the engine. If the engine does not start after 15 s of cranking, cranking shall be stopped and the reason for the failure to start determined, unless the owner's manual or the service-repair manual describes a longer cranking time as normal. 7.5.1.2. Engine stalling 7.6. Engine mapping Before starting the engine mapping, the engine shall be warmed up and towards the end of the warm up it shall be operated for at least 10 minutes at maximum power or according to the recommendation of the manufacturer and good engineering judgment in order to stabilize the engine coolant and lube oil temperatures. When the engine is stabilized, the engine mapping shall be performed. Except constant speed engines, engine mapping shall be performed with fully open fuel lever or governor using discrete speeds in ascending order. The minimum and maximum mapping speeds are defined as follows: Where n hi is the high speed, defined as the highest engine speed where 70 per cent of the maximum power is delivered. If the highest speed is unsafe or unrepresentative (e.g., for ungoverned engines), good engineering judgment shall be used to map up to the maximum safe speed or the maximum representative one. 7.6.1. Engine mapping for steady-state 8-mode cycle In the case of engine mapping for the steady-state 8-mode cycle (only for engines which have not to run the NRTC cycle), good engineering judgment shall be used to select a sufficient number (20 to 30) of evenly spaced set-points. At each setpoint, speed shall be stabilized and torque allowed to stabilize at least for 15 seconds. The mean speed and torque shall be recorded at each set-point. Linear interpolation shall be used to determine the 8-mode test speeds and torques if needed. If the derived test speeds and loads do not deviate for more than ± 2,5 per cent from the speeds and torques indicated by the manufacturer, the manufacturer defined speeds and loads shall be applied. When engines shall be run on the NRTC too, then the NRTC engine mapping curve shall be used to determine steady-state test speeds and torques. 7.6.2. Engine mapping for NRTC cycle The engine mapping shall be performed according to the following procedure: 7.6.3. Engine mapping for constant-speed engines: For constant speed engines good engineering judgment shall be used to apply other methods to record max torque and power at the defined operating speed(s). 7.7. Test cycle generation 7.7.1. Generation of steady-state test cycles (NRSC) 7.7.1.1. Rated and denormalization speed For engines that are tested with the NRSC and also the NRTC, the denormalization speed shall be calculated according to the transient procedure (paragraphs 7.6.2. and 7.7.2.1. and Figure 7.3.). In case of the steady state cycle, the denormalization speed ( n denorm ) shall be used in place of the rated speed. If the calculated denormalization speed ( n denorm ) is within ±2,5 per cent of the denormalization speed as declared by the manufacturer, the declared denormalization speed ( n denorm ) may be used for the emission test. If the tolerance is exceeded, the calculated denormalization speed ( n denorm ) shall be used for the emissions test. For variable speed engines that are not tested with the NRTC, the rated speed of tables in Annex 5 to this Regulation for the 8-mode discrete and the derived ramped mode cycle shall be calculated according to the steady state procedure (paragraph 7.6.1. and Figure 7.3.). The rated speed is defined in paragraph 2.1.69. For constant speed engines, the rated speed and engine governed speed of tables in Annex 5 to this Regulation for the 5-mode discrete and the derived ramped mode cycle shall be that defined in paragraphs 2.1.30. and 2.1.69. 7.7.1.2. Generation of steady-state 8-mode test cycle (discrete and ramp modal) The intermediate speed shall be determined from the calculations according to its definition (see paragraph 2.1.42.). Consistent with paragraph 7.7.1.1., for engines that are tested with the NRSC and also the NRTC the denormalization speed ( n denorm ) shall be used in place of rated speed when determining the intermediate speed. The engine setting for each test mode shall be calculated using the formula: where: During the test cycle, the engine shall be operated at the engine speeds and torques that are defined in Annex 5. The maximum mapping torque values at the specified test speeds shall be derived from the mapping curve (see paragraph 7.6.1. or 7.6.2.). "Measured" values are either directly measured during the engine mapping process or they are determined from the engine map. "Declared" values are specified by the manufacturer. When both measured and declared values are available, declared values may be used instead of measured torques if they don't deviate more than ± 2,5 per cent. Otherwise, measured torques derived from the engine mapping shall be used. 7.7.1.3. Generation of steady-state 5-mode test cycle (discrete and ramp modal) During the test cycle, the engine shall be operated at the engine speeds and torques that are defined in Annex 5. The maximum mapping torque value at the specified rated speed (see paragraph 7.7.1.1.) shall be used to generate the 5-mode test cycle. A warm minimum torque that is representative of in-use operation may be declared. For example, if the engine is typically connected to a machine that does not operate below a certain minimum torque, this torque may be declared and used for cycle generation. When both measured and declared values are available for the maximum test torque for cycle generation, the declared value may be used instead of the measured value if it is within 95 to 100 per cent of the measured value. The torque figures are percentage values of the torque corresponding to the prime power ( 3 ) rating. The prime power is defined as the maximum power available during a variable power sequence, which may be run for an unlimited number of hours per year, between stated maintenance intervals and under the stated ambient conditions. The maintenance shall be carried out as prescribed by the manufacturer. 7.7.2. Generation of transient test cycle (NRTC denormalization) Annex 5 defines applicable test cycles in a normalized format. A normalized test cycle consists of a sequence of paired values for speed and torque expressed in per cent. Normalized values of speed and torque shall be transformed using the following conventions: 7.7.2.1. Denormalization speed ( n denorm ) The denormalization speed ( n denorm ) is selected to equal the 100 per cent normalized speed values specified in the engine dynamometer schedule of Annex 5. The reference engine cycle resulting from denormalization to the reference speed, depends on the selection of the proper denormalization speed ( n denorm ). For the calculation of the denormalization speed ( n denorm ), obtained from the measured mapping curve, either of the following equivalent formulae can be used in agreement with the Type Approval Authorities: Note that if multiple maximum values are found, the denormalization speed ( n denorm ) should be taken as the lowest speed of all points with the same maximum sum of squares. A higher declared speed may be used if the length of the vector at the declared speed is within 2 per cent of the length of the vector at the measured value. If the falling part of the full load curve has a very steep edge, this may cause problems to drive the 105 per cent speeds of the NRTC test cycle correctly. In this case it is allowed with previous agreement with type approval or certification authorities, to reduce the denormalization speed ( n denorm ) slightly (maximum 3 per cent) in order to make correct driving of the NRTC possible. If the measured denormalization speed ( n denorm ) is within ±3 per cent of the denormalization speed as declared by the manufacturer, the declared denormalization speed ( n denorm ) may be used for the emissions test. If the tolerance is exceeded, the measured denormalization speed ( n denorm ) shall be used for the emissions test. 7.7.2.2. Denormalization of engine speed The engine speed shall be denormalized using the following equation: where: 7.7.2.3. Denormalization of engine torque The torque values in the engine dynamometer schedule of Annex 5 paragraph 1.3. are normalized to the maximum torque at the respective speed. The torque values of the reference cycle shall be denormalized, using the mapping curve determined according to paragraph 7.6.2., as follows: for the respective reference speed as determined in paragraph 7.7.2.2. 7.7.2.4. Example of denormalization procedure As an example, the following test point shall be denormalized: Given the following values: results in With the maximum torque of 700 Nm observed from the mapping curve at 1 288 min -1 7.8. Specific test cycle running procedure 7.8.1. Emission test sequence for discrete steady-state test cycles 7.8.1.1. Engine warming-up for steady state discrete-mode test cycles For preconditioning the engine shall be warmed up according to the recommendation of the manufacturer and good engineering judgment. Before emission sampling can start, the engine shall be running until engine temperatures (cooling water and lube oil) have been stabilized (normally at least 10 minutes) on mode 1 (100 per cent torque and rated speed for the 8-mode test cycle and at rated or nominal constant engine speed and 100 per cent torque for the 5-mode test cycle). Immediately from this engine conditioning point, the test cycle measurement starts. Pre-test procedure according to paragraph 7.3.1. shall be performed, including analyser calibration. 7.8.1.2. Performing discrete-mode test cycles 7.8.1.3. Validation criteria During each mode of the given steady-state test cycle after the initial transition period, the measured speed shall not deviate from the reference speed for more than ± 1 per cent of rated speed or ± 3 min -1 , whichever is greater except for idle which shall be within the tolerances declared by the manufacturer. The measured torque shall not deviate from the reference torque for more than ± 2 per cent of the maximum torque at the test speed. 7.8.2. Ramped modal test cycles 7.8.2.1. Engine warming-up Before starting the steady-state ramped modal test cycles (RMC), the engine shall be warmed-up and running until engine temperatures (cooling water and lube oil) have been stabilized on 50 per cent speed and 50 per cent torque for the RMC test cycle (derived from the 8-mode test cycle) and at rated or nominal engine speed and 50 per cent torque for the RMC test cycle (derived from 5-mode test cycle). Immediately after this engine conditioning procedure, engine speed and torque shall be changed in a linear ramp of 20 ± 1 s to the first mode of the test. In between 5 to 10 s after the end of the ramp, the test cycle measurement shall start. 7.8.2.2. Performing a ramped modal test cycle The ramped modal cycles derived from 8-mode and 5-mode test cycle are shown in Annex 5. The engine shall be operated for the prescribed time in each mode. The transition from one mode to the next shall be done linearly in 20 s ± 1 s following the tolerances prescribed in paragraph 7.8.2.4. (see Annex 5). For ramped modal cycles, reference speed and torque values shall be generated at a minimum frequency of 1 Hz and this sequence of points shall be used to run the cycle. During the transition between modes, the denormalized reference speed and torque values shall be linearly ramped between modes to generate reference points. The normalized reference torque values shall not be linearly ramped between modes and then denormalized. If the speed and torque ramp runs through a point above the engine's torque curve, it shall be continued to command the reference torques and it shall be allowed for the operator demand to go to maximum. Over the whole RMC test cycle (during each mode and including the ramps between the modes), the concentration of each gaseous pollutant shall be measured and the PM be sampled. The gaseous pollutants may be measured raw or diluted and be recorded continuously; if diluted, they can also be sampled into a sampling bag. The particulate sample shall be diluted with conditioned and clean air. One sample over the complete test procedure shall be taken, and collected on a single PM sampling filter. For calculation of the brake specific emissions, the actual cycle work shall be calculated by integrating actual engine power over the complete cycle. 7.8.2.3. Emission test sequence: 7.8.2.4. Validation criteria RMC tests shall be validated using the regression analysis as described in paragraphs 7.8.3.3. and 7.8.3.5. The allowed RMC tolerances are given in the following Table 7.1. Note that the RMC tolerances are different from the NRTC tolerances of Table 7.2. Table 7.1 RMC Regression line tolerances In case of running the RMC test not on a transient test bed, where the second by second speed and torque values are not available, the following validation criteria shall be used. At each mode the requirements for the speed and torque tolerances are given in paragraph 7.8.1.3. For the 20 s linear speed and linear torque transitions between the RMC steady-state test modes (paragraph 7.4.1.2.) the following tolerances for speed and load shall be applied for the ramp: the speed shall be held linear within ±2 per cent of rated speed. The torque shall be held linear within ±5 per cent of the maximum torque at rated speed. 7.8.3. Transient test cycle (NRTC) Reference speeds and torques commands shall be sequentially executed to perform the transient test cycle. Speed and torque commands shall be issued at a frequency of at least 5 Hz. Because the reference test cycle is specified at 1 Hz, the in between speed and torque commands shall be linearly interpolated from the reference torque values generated from cycle generation. Small denormalized speed values near warm idle speed may cause low-speed idle governors to activate and the engine torque to exceed the reference torque even though the operator demand is at a minimum. In such cases, it is recommended to control the dynamometer so it gives priority to follow the reference torque instead of the reference speed and let the engine govern the speed. Under cold-start conditions engines may use an enhanced-idle device to quickly warm up the engine and aftertreatment devices. Under these conditions, very low normalized speeds will generate reference speeds below this higher enhanced idle speed. In this case it is recommended controlling the dynamometer so it gives priority to follow the reference torque and let the engine govern the speed when the operator demand is at minimum. During an emission test, reference speeds and torques and the feedback speeds and torques shall be recorded with a minimum frequency of 1 Hz, but preferably of 5 Hz or even 10 Hz. This larger recording frequency is important as it helps to minimize the biasing effect of the time lag between the reference and the measured feedback speed and torque values. The reference and feedback speeds and torques maybe recorded at lower frequencies (as low as 1 Hz), if the average values over the time interval between recorded values are recorded. The average values shall be calculated based on feedback values updated at a frequency of at least 5 Hz. These recorded values shall be used to calculate cycle-validation statistics and total work. 7.8.3.1. Engine preconditioning To meet stable conditions for the following emission test, the sampling system and the engine shall be preconditioned either by driving a full pre-NRTC cycle or driving the engine and the measuring systems under similar conditions as in the test cycle itself. If the test before was also a NRTC hot test, no additional conditioning is needed. A natural or forced cool-down procedure may be applied. For forced cool-down, good engineering judgment shall be used to set up systems to send cooling air across the engine, to send cool oil through the engine lubrication system, to remove heat from the coolant through the engine cooling system, and to remove heat from an exhaust after-treatment system. In the case of a forced after-treatment cool down, cooling air shall not be applied until the after-treatment system has cooled below its catalytic activation temperature. Any cooling procedure that results in unrepresentative emissions is not permitted. Pre-test procedures according to paragraph 7.3.1. have to be performed, including analyser calibration. 7.8.3.2. Performing an NRTC transient cycle test Testing shall be started as follows: The test sequence shall commence immediately after the engine has started from cooled down condition in case of the cold NRTC test or from hot soak condition in case of the hot NRTC test. The instructions (Annex 5) shall be followed. Data logging, sampling of exhaust gases and integrating measured values shall be initiated simultaneously at the start of the engine. The test cycle shall be initiated when the engine starts and shall be executed according to the schedule of Annex 5. At the end of the cycle, sampling shall be continued, operating all systems to allow system response time to elapse. Then all sampling and recording shall be stopped, including the recording of background samples. Finally, any integrating devices shall be stopped and the end of the test cycle shall be indicated in the recorded data. Post-test procedures according to paragraph 7.3.2. have to be performed. 7.8.3.3. Cycle validation criteria for transient test cycle In order to check the validity of a test, the cycle-validation criteria in this paragraph shall be applied to the reference and feedback values of speed, torque, power and overall work. 7.8.3.4. Calculation of cycle work Before calculating the cycle work, any speed and torque values recorded during engine starting shall be omitted. Points with negative torque values have to be accounted for as zero work. The actual cycle work W act (kWh) shall be calculated based on engine feedback speed and torque values. The reference cycle work W ref (kWh) shall be calculated based on engine reference speed and torque values. The actual cycle work W act is used for comparison to the reference cycle work W ref and for calculating the brake specific emissions (see paragraph 7.2.) W act shall be between 85 per cent and 105 per cent of W ref . 7.8.3.5. Validation statistics (see Annex 4B Appendix A.2.) Linear regression between the reference and the feedback values shall be calculated for speed, torque and power. To minimize the biasing effect of the time lag between the reference and feedback cycle values, the entire engine speed and torque feedback signal sequence may be advanced or delayed in time with respect to the reference speed and torque sequence. If the feedback signals are shifted, both speed and torque shall be shifted by the same amount in the same direction. The method of least squares shall be used, with the best-fit equation having the form: where: The standard error of estimate (SEE) of y on x and the coefficient of determination ( r 2 ) shall be calculated for each regression line (Annex 4B Appendix A.2.). It is recommended that this analysis be performed at 1 Hz. For a test to be considered valid, the criteria of Table 7.2 of this paragraph shall be met. Table 7.2 Regression line tolerances For regression purposes only, point deletions are permitted where noted in Table 7.3 of this paragraph before doing the regression calculation. However, those points shall not be deleted for the calculation of cycle work and emissions. An idle point is defined as a point having a normalised reference torque of 0 per cent and a normalized reference speed of 0 per cent. Point deletion may be applied to the whole or to any part of the cycle; points to which the point deletion is applied have to be specified. Table 7.3 Permitted point deletions from regression analysis 8. MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES 8.1. Calibration and performance checks 8.1.1. Introduction This paragraph describes required calibrations and verifications of measurement systems. See paragraph 9.4. for specifications that apply to individual instruments. Calibrations or verifications shall be generally performed over the complete measurement chain. If a calibration or verification for a portion of a measurement system is not specified, that portion of the system shall be calibrated and its performance verified at a frequency consistent with any recommendations from the measurement system manufacturer and consistent with good engineering judgment. Internationally recognized-traceable standards shall be used to meet the tolerances specified for calibrations and verifications. 8.1.2. Summary of calibration and verification The Table 8.1 summarizes the calibrations and verifications described in paragraph 8. and indicates when these have to be performed. Table 8.1 Summary of Calibration and Verifications 8.1.3. Verifications for accuracy, repeatability, and noise The performance values for individual instruments specified in Table 9.3 are the basis for the determination of the accuracy, repeatability, and noise of an instrument. It is not required to verify instrument accuracy, repeatability, or noise. However, it may be useful to consider these verifications to define a specification for a new instrument, to verify the performance of a new instrument upon delivery, or to troubleshoot an existing instrument. 8.1.4. Linearity check 8.1.4.1. Scope and frequency A linearity verification shall be performed on each measurement system listed in Table 8.2 at least as frequently as indicated in the table, consistent with measurement system manufacturer recommendations and good engineering judgment. The intent of a linearity verification is to determine that a measurement system responds proportionally over the measurement range of interest. A linearity verification shall consist of introducing a series of at least 10 reference values to a measurement system, unless otherwise specified. The measurement system quantifies each reference value. The measured values shall be collectively compared to the reference values by using a least squares linear regression and the linearity criteria specified in Table 8.2 of this paragraph. 8.1.4.2. Performance requirements If a measurement system does not meet the applicable linearity criteria in Table 8.2, the deficiency shall be corrected by re-calibrating, servicing, or replacing components as needed. The linearity verification shall be repeated after correcting the deficiency to ensure that the measurement system meets the linearity criteria. 8.1.4.3. Procedure The following linearity verification protocol shall be used: 8.1.4.4. Reference signals This paragraph describes recommended methods for generating reference values for the linearity-verification protocol in paragraph 8.1.4.3. of this section. Reference values shall be used that simulate actual values, or an actual value shall be introduced and measured with a reference-measurement system. In the latter case, the reference value is the value reported by the reference-measurement system. Reference values and reference-measurement systems shall be internationally traceable. For temperature measurement systems with sensors like thermocouples, RTDs, and thermistors, the linearity verification may be performed by removing the sensor from the system and using a simulator in its place. A simulator that is independently calibrated and cold junction compensated, as necessary shall be used. The internationally traceable simulator uncertainty scaled to temperature shall be less than 0,5 per cent of maximum operating temperature T max . If this option is used, it is necessary to use sensors that the supplier states are accurate to better than 0,5 per cent of T max compared to their standard calibration curve. 8.1.4.5. Measurement systems that require linearity verification Table 8.2 indicates measurement systems that require linearity verifications. For this table the following provisions apply. 8.1.5. Continuous gas analyser system-response and updating-recording verification This section describes a general verification procedure for continuous gas analyser system response and update recording. See paragraph 8.1.6. for verification procedures for compensation type analysers. 8.1.5.1. Scope and frequency This verification shall be performed after installing or replacing a gas analyser that is used for continuous sampling. Also this verification shall be performed if the system is reconfigured in a way that would change system response. This verification is needed for continuous gas analysers used for transient or ramped-modal testing but is not needed for batch gas analyser systems or for continuous gas analyser systems used only for discrete-mode testing. 8.1.5.2. Measurement principles This test verifies that the updating and recording frequencies match the overall system response to a rapid change in the value of concentrations at the sample probe. Gas analyser systems shall be optimized such that their overall response to a rapid change in concentration is updated and recorded at an appropriate frequency to prevent loss of information. This test also verifies that continuous gas analyser systems meet a minimum response time. The system settings for the response time evaluation shall be exactly the same as during measurement of the test run (i.e. pressure, flow rates, filter settings on the analysers and all other response time influences). The response time determination shall be done with gas switching directly at the inlet of the sample probe. The devices for gas switching shall have a specification to perform the switching in less than 0,1 s. The gases used for the test shall cause a concentration change of at least 60 per cent full scale (FS). The concentration trace of each single gas component shall be recorded. 8.1.5.3. System requirements 8.1.5.4. Procedure The following procedure shall be used to verify the response of each continuous gas analyser system: 8.1.5.5. Performance evaluation The data from sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph 8.1.5.4. of this section shall be used to calculate the mean rise time, T 10–90 for each of the analysers. 8.1.6. Response time verification for compensation type analysers 8.1.6.1. Scope and frequency This verification shall be performed to determine a continuous gas analyser's response, where one analyser's response is compensated by another's to quantify a gaseous emission. For this check water vapour shall be considered to be a gaseous constituent. This verification is required for continuous gas analysers used for transient or ramped-modal testing. This verification is not needed for batch gas analysers or for continuous gas analysers that are used only for discrete-mode testing. This verification does not apply to correction for water removed from the sample done in post-processing and it does not apply to NMHC determination from THC and CH 4 quoted in Appendices A.7 and A.8 concerning the emission calculations. This verification shall be performed after initial installation (i.e. test cell commissioning). After major maintenance, paragraph 8.1.5. may be used to verify uniform response provided that any replaced components have gone through a humidified uniform response verification at some point. 8.1.6.2. Measurement principles This procedure verifies the time-alignment and uniform response of continuously combined gas measurements. For this procedure, it is necessary to ensure that all compensation algorithms and humidity corrections are turned on. 8.1.6.3. System requirements The general response time and rise time requirement given in sub-paragraph (a) of 8.1.5.3. is also valid for compensation type analysers. Additionally, if the recording frequency is different than the update frequency of the continuously combined/compensated signal, the lower of these two frequencies shall be used for the verification required by sub-paragraphs (b) (i) of paragraph 8.1.5.3. 8.1.6.4. Procedure All procedures given in sub-paragraphs (a) - (c) of paragraph 8.1.5.4. have to be used. Additionally also the response and rise time of water vapour has to be measured, if a compensation algorithm based on measured water vapour is used. In this case at least one of the used calibration gases (but not NO 2 ) has to be humidified as follows: If the system does not use a sample dryer to remove water from the sample gas, the span gas shall be humidified by flowing the gas mixture through a sealed vessel that humidifies the gas to the highest sample dew point that is estimated during emission sampling by bubbling it through distilled water. If the system uses a sample dryer during testing that has passed the sample dryer verification check, the humidified gas mixture may be introduced downstream of the sample dryer by bubbling it through distilled water in a sealed vessel at (25 ± 10 °C), or a temperature greater than the dew point. In all cases, downstream of the vessel, the humidified gas shall be maintained at a temperature of at least 5 °C above its local dew point in the line. Note that it is possible to omit any of these gas constituents if they are not relevant to the analysers for this verification. If any of the gas constituents are not susceptible to water compensation, the response check for these analysers may be performed without humidification. 8.1.7. Measurement of engine parameters and ambient conditions The engine manufacturer shall apply internal quality procedures traceable to recognised national or international standards. Otherwise the following procedures apply. 8.1.7.1. Torque calibration 8.1.7.1.1. Scope and frequency All torque-measurement systems including dynamometer torque measurement transducers and systems shall be calibrated upon initial installation and after major maintenance using, among others, reference force or lever-arm length coupled with dead weight. Good engineering judgment shall be used to repeat the calibration. The torque transducer manufacturer's instructions shall be followed for linearizing the torque sensor's output. Other calibration methods are permitted. 8.1.7.1.2. Dead-weight calibration This technique applies a known force by hanging known weights at a known distance along a lever arm. It shall be made sure that the weights' lever arm is perpendicular to gravity (i.e., horizontal) and perpendicular to the dynamometer's rotational axis. At least six calibration-weight combinations shall be applied for each applicable torque-measuring range, spacing the weight quantities about equally over the range. The dynamometer shall be oscillated or rotated during calibration to reduce frictional static hysteresis. Each weight's force shall be determined by multiplying its internationally-traceable mass by the local acceleration of Earth's gravity. 8.1.7.1.3. Strain gage or proving ring calibration This technique applies force either by hanging weights on a lever arm (these weights and their lever arm length are not used as part of the reference torque determination) or by operating the dynamometer at different torques. At least six force combinations shall be applied for each applicable torque-measuring range, spacing the force quantities about equally over the range. The dynamometer shall be oscillated or rotated during calibration to reduce frictional static hysteresis. In this case, the reference torque is determined by multiplying the force output from the reference meter (such as a strain gage or proving ring) by its effective lever-arm length, which is measured from the point where the force measurement is made to the dynamometer's rotational axis. It shall be made sure that this length is measured perpendicular to the reference meter's measurement axis and perpendicular to the dynamometer's rotational axis. 8.1.7.2. Pressure, temperature, and dew point calibration Instruments shall be calibrated for measuring pressure, temperature, and dew point upon initial installation. The instrument manufacturer's instructions shall be followed and good engineering judgment shall be used to repeat the calibration. For temperature measurement systems with thermocouple, RTD, or thermistor sensors, the calibration of the system shall be performed as described in paragraph 8.1.4.4. for linearity verification. 8.1.8. Flow-related measurements 8.1.8.1. Fuel flow calibration Fuel flow-meters shall be calibrated upon initial installation. The instrument manufacturer's instructions shall be followed and good engineering judgment shall be used to repeat the calibration. 8.1.8.2. Intake air flow calibration Intake air flow-meters shall be calibrated upon initial installation. The instrument manufacturer's instructions shall be followed and good engineering judgment shall be used to repeat the calibration. 8.1.8.3. Exhaust flow calibration Exhaust flow-meters shall be calibrated upon initial installation. The instrument manufacturer's instructions shall be followed and good engineering judgment shall be used to repeat the calibration. 8.1.8.4. Diluted exhaust flow (CVS) calibration 8.1.8.4.1. Overview 8.1.8.4.2. PDP calibration A positive-displacement pump (PDP) shall be calibrated to determine a flow-versus-PDP speed equation that accounts for flow leakage across sealing surfaces in the PDP as a function of PDP inlet pressure. Unique equation coefficients shall be determined for each speed at which the PDP is operated. A PDP flow-meter shall be calibrated as follows: 8.1.8.4.3. CFV calibration A critical-flow venturi (CFV) shall be calibrated to verify its discharge coefficient, C d , at the lowest expected static differential pressure between the CFV inlet and outlet. A CFV flow-meter shall be calibrated as follows: 8.1.8.4.4. SSV calibration A subsonic venturi (SSV) shall be calibrated to determine its calibration coefficient, C d , for the expected range of inlet pressures. An SSV flow-meter shall be calibrated as follows: 8.1.8.4.5. Ultrasonic calibration (reserved) Figure 8.1 Schematic diagrams for diluted exhaust flow CVS calibration 8.1.8.5. CVS and batch sampler verification (propane check) 8.1.8.5.1. Introduction 8.1.8.5.2. Method of introducing a known amount of propane into the CVS system The total accuracy of the CVS sampling system and analytical system shall be determined by introducing a known mass of a pollutant gas into the system while it is being operated in the normal manner. The pollutant is analysed, and the mass calculated according to Appendices A.7-A.8. Either of the following two techniques shall be used. 8.1.8.5.3. Preparation of the propane check The propane check shall be prepared as follows: 8.1.8.5.4. Preparation of the HC sampling system for the propane check Vacuum side leak check verification of the HC sampling system may be performed according to sub-paragraph (g) of this paragraph. If this procedure is used, the HC contamination procedure in paragraph 7.3.1.2. may be used. If the vacuum side leak check is not performed according to sub-paragraph (g), then the HC sampling system shall be zeroed, spanned, and verified for contamination, as follows: 8.1.8.5.5. Propane check performance 8.1.8.5.6. Evaluation of the propane check Post-test procedure shall be performed as follows: 8.1.8.5.7. PM secondary dilution system verification When the propane check is to be repeated to verify the PM secondary dilution system, the following procedure from sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) shall be used for this verification: 8.1.8.5.8. Sample dryer verification If a humidity sensor for continuous monitoring of dew point at the sample dryer outlet is used this check does not apply, as long as it is ensured that the dryer outlet humidity is below the minimum values used for quench, interference, and compensation checks. 8.1.8.6. Periodic calibration of the partial flow PM and associated raw exhaust gas measurement systems 8.1.8.6.1. Specifications for differential flow measurement For partial flow dilution systems to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample, the accuracy of the sample flow q m p is of special concern, if not measured directly, but determined by differential flow measurement: where: In this case, the maximum error of the difference shall be such that the accuracy of q m p is within ±5 per cent when the dilution ratio is less than 15. It can be calculated by taking root-mean-square of the errors of each instrument. Acceptable accuracies of q m p can be obtained by either of the following methods: 8.1.8.6.2. Calibration of differential flow measurement The partial flow dilution system to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample shall be periodically calibrated with an accurate flow-meter traceable to international and/or national standards. The flow-meter or the flow measurement instrumentation shall be calibrated in one of the following procedures, such that the probe flow q m p into the tunnel shall fulfil the accuracy requirements of paragraph 8.1.8.6.1. The accuracies of the gas analysers shall be taken into account to guarantee the accuracy of q m p . 8.1.8.6.3. Special requirements for differential flow measurement A carbon flow check using actual exhaust is strongly recommended for detecting measurement and control problems and verifying the proper operation of the partial flow system. The carbon flow check should be run at least each time a new engine is installed, or something significant is changed in the test cell configuration. The engine shall be operated at peak torque load and speed or any other steady state mode that produces 5 per cent or more of CO 2 . The partial flow sampling system shall be operated with a dilution factor of about 15 to 1. If a carbon flow check is conducted, the procedure given in Annex 4B Appendix A.4 shall be applied. The carbon flow rates shall be calculated according to equations of Annex 4B Appendix A.4. All carbon flow rates shall agree to within 5 per cent. 8.1.8.6.3.1. Pre-test check A pre-test check shall be performed within 2 hours before the test run in the following way. The accuracy of the flow-meters shall be checked by the same method as used for calibration (see paragraph 8.1.8.6.2.) for at least two points, including flow values of q mdw that correspond to dilution ratios between 5 and 15 for the q mdew value used during the test. If it can be demonstrated by records of the calibration procedure under paragraph 8.1.8.6.2. that the flow-meter calibration is stable over a longer period of time, the pre-test check may be omitted. 8.1.8.6.3.2. Determination of the transformation time The system settings for the transformation time evaluation shall be the same as during measurement of the test run. The transformation time, defined in Figure 3.1, shall be determined by the following method: An independent reference flow-meter with a measurement range appropriate for the probe flow shall be put in series with and closely coupled to the probe. This flow-meter shall have a transformation time of less than 100 ms for the flow step size used in the response time measurement, with flow restriction sufficiently low as to not affect the dynamic performance of the partial flow dilution system according to good engineering judgment. A step change shall be introduced to the exhaust flow (or air flow if exhaust flow is calculated) input of the partial flow dilution system, from a low flow to at least 90 per cent of full scale. The trigger for the step change shall be the same one used to start the look-ahead control in actual testing. The exhaust flow step stimulus and the flow-meter response shall be recorded at a sample rate of at least 10 Hz. From this data, the transformation time shall be determined for the partial flow dilution system, which is the time from the initiation of the step stimulus to the 50 per cent point of the flow-meter response. In a similar manner, the transformation times of the q mp signal (i.e. sample flow of exhaust gas into partial flow dilution system) and of the q mew,i signal (i.e. the exhaust gas mass flow rate on wet basis supplied by the exhaust flow-meter) shall be determined. These signals are used in the regression checks performed after each test (see paragraph 8.2.1.2.). The calculation shall be repeated for at least 5 rise and fall stimuli, and the results shall be averaged. The internal transformation time (<100 ms) of the reference flow-meter shall be subtracted from this value. In the case that the system in accordance with paragraph 8.2.1.2. requires the "look-ahead" method, this is the "look-ahead" value of the partial flow dilution system to be applied in accordance with paragraph 8.2.1.2. 8.1.8.7. Vacuum-side leak verification 8.1.8.7.1. Scope and frequency Upon initial sampling system installation, after major maintenance such as pre-filter changes, and within 8 hours prior to each duty-cycle sequence, it shall be verified that there are no significant vacuum-side leaks using one of the leak tests described in this section. This verification does not apply to any full-flow portion of a CVS dilution system. 8.1.8.7.2. Measurement principles A leak may be detected either by measuring a small amount of flow when there shall be zero flow, by detecting the dilution of a known concentration of span gas when it flows through the vacuum side of a sampling system or by measuring the pressure increase of an evacuated system. 8.1.8.7.3. Low-flow leak test A sampling system shall be tested for low-flow leaks as follows: 8.1.8.7.4. Dilution-of-span-gas leak test Any gas analyser may be used for this test. If a FID is used for this test, any HC contamination in the sampling system shall be corrected according to Appendices A.7 and A.8 on HC and NMHC determination. Misleading results shall be avoided by using only analysers that have a repeatability of 0,5 per cent or better at the span gas concentration used for this test. The vacuum side leak check shall be performed as follows: 8.1.8.7.5. Vacuum-decay leak test To perform this test a vacuum shall be applied to the vacuum-side volume of the sampling system and the leak rate of the system shall be observed as a decay in the applied vacuum. To perform this test the vacuum-side volume of the sampling system shall be known to within ± 10 per cent of its true volume. For this test measurement instruments that meet the specifications of paragraphs 8.1. and 9.4. shall also be used. A vacuum-decay leak test shall be performed as follows: 8.1.9. CO and CO 2 measurements 8.1.9.1. H 2 O interference verification for CO 2 NDIR analysers 8.1.9.1.1. Scope and frequency If CO 2 is measured using an NDIR analyser, the amount of H 2 O interference shall be verified after initial analyser installation and after major maintenance. 8.1.9.1.2. Measurement principles H 2 O can interfere with an NDIR analyser's response to CO 2 . If the NDIR analyser uses compensation algorithms that utilize measurements of other gases to meet this interference verification, simultaneously these other measurements shall be conducted to test the compensation algorithms during the analyser interference verification. 8.1.9.1.3. System requirements A CO 2 NDIR analyser shall have an H 2 O interference that is within (0,0 ± 0,4) mmol/mol (of the expected mean CO 2 concentration). 8.1.9.1.4. Procedure The interference verification shall be performed as follows: 8.1.9.2. H 2 O and CO 2 interference verification for CO NDIR analysers 8.1.9.2.1. Scope and frequency If CO is measured using an NDIR analyser, the amount of H2O and CO2 interference shall be verified after initial analyser installation and after major maintenance. 8.1.9.2.2. Measurement principles H 2 O and CO 2 can positively interfere with an NDIR analyser by causing a response similar to CO. If the NDIR analyser uses compensation algorithms that utilize measurements of other gases to meet this interference verification, simultaneously these other measurements shall be conducted to test the compensation algorithms during the analyser interference verification. 8.1.9.2.3. System requirements A CO NDIR analyser shall have combined H 2 O and CO 2 interference that is within ±2 per cent of the expected mean concentration of CO. 8.1.9.2.4. Procedure The interference verification shall be performed as follows: 8.1.10. Hydrocarbon measurements 8.1.10.1. FID optimization and verification 8.1.10.1.1. Scope and frequency For all FID analysers, the FID shall be calibrated upon initial installation. The calibration shall be repeated as needed using good engineering judgment. The following steps shall be performed for a FID that measures HC: 8.1.10.1.2. Calibration Good engineering judgment shall be used to develop a calibration procedure, such as one based on the FID-analyser manufacturer's instructions and recommended frequency for calibrating the FID. For a FID that measures HC, it shall be calibrated using C 3 H 8 calibration gases that meet the specifications of paragraph 9.5.1. For a FID that measures CH 4 , it shall be calibrated using CH 4 calibration gases that meet the specifications of paragraph 9.5.1. Regardless of the calibration gas composition, it shall be calibrated on a carbon number basis of one (C 1 ). 8.1.10.1.3. HC FID response optimization This procedure is only for FID analysers that measure HC. 8.1.10.1.4. HC FID CH 4 response factor determination This procedure is only for FID analysers that measure HC. Since FID analysers generally have a different response to CH 4 versus C 3 H 8 , each THC FID analyser's CH 4 response factor, RF CH4[THC-FID] shall be determined, after FID optimization. The most recent RF CH4[THC-FID] measured according to this paragraph shall be used in the calculations for HC determination described in Annex 4B Appendix A.7 (molar based approach) or Annex 4B Appendix A.8 (mass based approach) to compensate for CH 4 response. RF CH4[THC-FID] shall be determined as follows, noting that RF CH4[THC-FID] is not determined for FIDs that are calibrated and spanned using CH 4 with a non-methane cutter: 8.1.10.1.5. HC FID methane (CH 4 ) response verification This procedure is only for FID analysers that measure HC. If the value of RF CH4[THC-FID] from paragraph 8.1.10.1.4. is within ±5,0 per cent of its most recent previously determined value, the HC FID passes the methane response verification. 8.1.10.2. Non-stoichiometric raw exhaust FID O 2 interference verification 8.1.10.2.1. Scope and frequency If FID analysers are used for raw exhaust measurements, the amount of FID O 2 interference shall be verified upon initial installation and after major maintenance. 8.1.10.2.2. Measurement principles Changes in O 2 concentration in raw exhaust can affect FID response by changing FID flame temperature. FID fuel, burner air, and sample flow shall be optimized to meet this verification. FID performance shall be verified with the compensation algorithms for FID O 2 interferences that occur during an emission test. 8.1.10.2.3. System requirements Any FID analyser used during testing shall meet the FID O 2 interference verification according to the procedure in this section. 8.1.10.2.4. Procedure FID O 2 interference shall be determined as follows, noting that one or more gas dividers may be used to create reference gas concentrations that are required to perform this verification: 8.1.10.3. Non-methane cutter penetration fractions 8.1.10.3.1. Scope and frequency If a FID analyser and a non-methane cutter (NMC) is used to measure methane (CH 4 ), the non-methane cutter's conversion efficiencies of methane, E CH4 , and ethane, E C2H6 shall be determined. As detailed in this paragraph, these conversion efficiencies may be determined as a combination of NMC conversion efficiencies and FID analyser response factors, depending on the particular NMC and FID analyser configuration. This verification shall be performed after installing the non-methane cutter. This verification shall be repeated within 185 days of testing to verify that the catalytic activity of the cutter has not deteriorated. 8.1.10.3.2. Measurement principles A non-methane cutter is a heated catalyst that removes non-methane hydrocarbons from the exhaust stream before the FID analyser measures the remaining hydrocarbon concentration. An ideal non-methane cutter would have a methane conversion efficiency E CH4 [-] of 0 (that is, a methane penetration fraction, PF CH4 , of 1,000), and the conversion efficiency for all other hydrocarbons would be 1,000, as represented by an ethane conversion efficiency E C2H6 [-] of 1 (that is, an ethane penetration fraction PF C2H6 [-] of 0). The emission calculations in Annex 4B, Appendix A.7 or Annex 4B, Appendix A.8 use this paragraph's measured values of conversion efficiencies E CH4 and E C2H6 to account for less than ideal NMC performance. 8.1.10.3.3. System requirements NMC conversion efficiencies are not limited to a certain range. However, it is recommended that a non-methane cutter is optimized by adjusting its temperature to achieve a E CH4 < 0,15 and a E C2H6 > 0,98 ( PF CH4 > 0,85 and PF C2H6 < 0,02) as determined by paragraph 8.1.10.3.4., as applicable. If adjusting NMC temperature does not result in achieving these specifications, it is recommended that the catalyst material is replaced. The most recently determined conversion values from this section shall be used to calculate HC emissions according to Appendices A.7-A.8 as applicable. 8.1.10.3.4. Procedure Any one of the procedures specified in paragraphs 8.1.10.3.4.1., 8.1.10.3.4.2. and 8.1.10.3.4.3. is recommended. An alternative method recommended by the instrument manufacturer may be used. 8.1.10.3.4.1. Procedure for a FID calibrated with the NMC If a FID is always calibrated to measure CH 4 with the NMC, then the FID shall be spanned with the NMC using a CH 4 span gas, the product of that FID's CH 4 response factor and CH 4 penetration fraction, RFPF CH4[NMC-FID] , shall be set equal to 1,0 (i.e. efficiency E CH4 [-] is set to 0) for all emission calculations, and the combined ethane (C 2 H 6 ) response factor and penetration fraction, RFPF C2H6[NMC-FID] (and efficiency E C2H6 [-]) shall be determined as follows: 8.1.10.3.4.2. Procedure for a FID calibrated with propane bypassing the NMC If a FID is used with an NMC that is calibrated with propane, C 3 H 8 , by bypassing the NMC, penetrations fractions PF C2H6[NMC-FID] and PF CH4[NMC-FID] shall be determined as follows: 8.1.10.3.4.3. Procedure for a FID calibrated with methane, bypassing the NMC If a FID is used with an NMC that is calibrated with methane, CH 4 , by bypassing the NMC, determine its combined ethane (C 2 H 6 ) response factor and penetration fraction, RFPF C2H6[NMC-FID] , as well as its CH 4 penetration fraction, PF CH4[NMC-FID] , as follows: 8.1.11. NO x measurements 8.1.11.1. CLD CO 2 and H 2 O quench verification 8.1.11.1.1. Scope and frequency If a CLD analyser is used to measure NO x , the amount of H 2 O and CO 2 quench shall be verified after installing the CLD analyser and after major maintenance. 8.1.11.1.2. Measurement principles H 2 O and CO 2 can negatively interfere with a CLD's NO x response by collisional quenching, which inhibits the chemiluminescent reaction that a CLD utilizes to detect NO x . This procedure and the calculations in paragraph 8.1.11.2.3. determine quench and scale the quench results to the maximum mole fraction of H 2 O and the maximum CO 2 concentration expected during emission testing. If the CLD analyser uses quench compensation algorithms that utilize H 2 O and/or CO 2 measurement instruments, quench shall be evaluated with these instruments active and with the compensation algorithms applied. 8.1.11.1.3. System requirements For dilute measurement a CLD analyser shall not exceed a combined H 2 O and CO 2 quench of ± 2 per cent. For raw measurement a CLD analyser shall not exceed a combined H 2 O and CO 2 quench of ± 2 per cent. Combined quench is the sum of the CO 2 quench determined as described in paragraph 8.1.11.1.4. and the H 2 O quench as determined in paragraph 8.1.11.1.5. If these requirements are not met, corrective action shall be taken by repairing or replacing the analyser. Before running emission tests, it shall be verified that the corrective action have successfully restored the analyser to proper functioning. 8.1.11.1.4. CO 2 quench verification procedure The following method or the method prescribed by the instrument manufacturer may be used to determine CO 2 quench by using a gas divider that blends binary span gases with zero gas as the diluent and meets the specifications in paragraph 9.4.5.6., or good engineering judgment shall be used to develop a different protocol: 8.1.11.1.5. H 2 O quench verification procedure The following method or the method prescribed by the instrument manufacturer may be used to determine H 2 O quench, or good engineering judgment shall be used to develop a different protocol: 8.1.11.2. CLD quench verification calculations CLD quench-check calculations shall be performed as described in this paragraph. 8.1.11.2.1. Amount of water expected during testing The maximum expected mole fraction of water during emission testing, x H2Oexp shall be estimated. This estimate shall be made where the humidified NO span gas was introduced in sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 8.1.11.1.5. When estimating the maximum expected mole fraction of water, the maximum expected water content in combustion air, fuel combustion products, and dilution air (if applicable) shall be considered. If the humidified NO span gas is introduced into the sample system upstream of a sample dryer during the verification test, it is not needed to estimate the maximum expected mole fraction of water and x H2Oexp shall be set equal to x H2Omeas . 8.1.11.2.2. Amount of CO 2 expected during testing The maximum expected CO 2 concentration during emission testing, x CO2exp shall be estimated. This estimate shall be made at the sample system location where the blended NO and CO 2 span gases are introduced according to sub-paragraph (j) of paragraph 8.1.11.1.4. When estimating the maximum expected CO 2 concentration, the maximum expected CO 2 content in fuel combustion products and dilution air shall be considered. 8.1.11.2.3. Combined H 2 O and CO 2 quench calculations Combined H 2 O and CO 2 quench shall be calculated as follows: where: where: 8.1.11.3. NDUV analyser HC and H 2 O interference verification 8.1.11.3.1. Scope and frequency If NO x is measured using an NDUV analyser, the amount of H 2 O and hydrocarbon interference shall be verified after initial analyser installation and after major maintenance. 8.1.11.3.2. Measurement principles Hydrocarbons and H 2 O can positively interfere with a NDUV analyser by causing a response similar to NO x . If the NDUV analyser uses compensation algorithms that utilize measurements of other gases to meet this interference verification, simultaneously such measurements shall be conducted to test the algorithms during the analyser interference verification. 8.1.11.3.3. System requirements A NO x NDUV analyser shall have combined H 2 O and HC interference within ±2 per cent of the mean concentration of NO x . 8.1.11.3.4. Procedure The interference verification shall be performed as follows: 8.1.11.3.5. Cooling bath (chiller) requirements It shall be demonstrated that for the highest expected water vapour concentration H m , the water removal technique maintains CLD humidity at ≤ 5 g water/kg dry air (or about 0,8 volume per cent H 2 O), which is 100 per cent relative humidity at 3,9 °C and 101,3 kPa. This humidity specification is also equivalent to about 25 per cent relative humidity at 25 °C and 101,3 kPa. This may be demonstrated by measuring the temperature at the outlet of a thermal dehumidifier, or by measuring humidity at a point just upstream of the CLD. 8.1.11.4. Cooling bath (chiller) NO 2 penetration 8.1.11.4.1. Scope and frequency If a cooling bath (chiller) is used to dry a sample upstream of a NO x measurement instrument, but no NO 2 -to-NO converter is used upstream of the cooling bath, this verification shall be performed for cooling bath NO 2 penetration. This verification shall be performed after initial installation and after major maintenance. 8.1.11.4.2. Measurement principles A cooling bath (chiller) removes water, which can otherwise interfere with a NO x measurement. However, liquid water remaining in an improperly designed cooling bath can remove NO 2 from the sample. If a cooling bath is used without an NO 2 -to-NO converter upstream, it could therefore remove NO 2 from the sample prior NO x measurement. 8.1.11.4.3. System requirements The chiller shall allow for measuring at least 95 per cent of the total NO 2 at the maximum expected concentration of NO 2 . 8.1.11.4.4. Procedure The following procedure shall be used to verify chiller performance: 8.1.11.5. NO 2 -to-NO converter conversion verification 8.1.11.5.1. Scope and frequency If an analyser is used that measures only NO to determine NO x , an NO 2 -to-NO converter shall be used upstream of the analyser. This verification shall be performed after installing the converter, after major maintenance and within 35 days before an emission test. This verification shall be repeated at this frequency to verify that the catalytic activity of the NO 2 -to-NO converter has not deteriorated. 8.1.11.5.2. Measurement principles An NO 2 -to-NO converter allows an analyser that measures only NO to determine total NO x by converting the NO 2 in exhaust to NO. 8.1.11.5.3. System requirements An NO 2 -to-NO converter shall allow for measuring at least 95 per cent of the total NO 2 at the maximum expected concentration of NO 2 . 8.1.11.5.4. Procedure The following procedure shall be used to verify the performance of a NO 2 -to-NO converter: 8.1.12. PM measurements 8.1.12.1. PM balance verifications and weighing process verification 8.1.12.1.1. Scope and frequency This paragraph describes three verifications. 8.1.12.1.2. Independent verification The balance manufacturer (or a representative approved by the balance manufacturer) shall verify the balance performance within 370 days of testing in accordance with internal audit procedures. 8.1.12.1.3. Zeroing and spanning Balance performance shall be verified by zeroing and spanning it with at least one calibration weight, and any weights that are used shall meet the specifications in paragraph 9.5.2. to perform this verification. A manual or automated procedure shall be used: 8.1.12.1.4. Reference sample weighing All mass readings during a weighing session shall be verified by weighing reference PM sample media (e.g. filters) before and after a weighing session. A weighing session may be as short as desired, but no longer than 80 hours, and may include both pre- and post-test mass readings. Successive mass determinations of each reference PM sample media shall return the same value within ± 10 μg or ± 10 per cent of the expected total PM mass, whichever is higher. Should successive PM sample filter weighing events fail this criterion, all individual test filter mass readings occurring between the successive reference filter mass determinations shall be invalidated. These filters may be re-weighed in another weighing session. Should a post-test filter be invalidated then the test interval is void. This verification shall be performed as follows: 8.1.12.2. PM sample filter buoyancy correction 8.1.12.2.1. General PM sample filter shall be corrected for their buoyancy in air. The buoyancy correction depends on the sample media density, the density of air, and the density of the calibration weight used to calibrate the balance. The buoyancy correction does not account for the buoyancy of the PM itself, because the mass of PM typically accounts for only (0,01 to 0,10) per cent of the total weight. A correction to this small fraction of mass would be at the most 0,010 per cent. The buoyancy-corrected values are the tare masses of the PM samples. These buoyancy-corrected values of the pre-test filter weighing are subsequently subtracted from the buoyancy-corrected values of the post-test weighing of the corresponding filter to determine the mass of PM emitted during the test. 8.1.12.2.2. PM sample filter density Different PM sample filter have different densities. The known density of the sample media shall be used, or one of the densities for some common sampling media shall be used, as follows: 8.1.12.2.3. Air density Because a PM balance environment shall be tightly controlled to an ambient temperature of (22 ± 1) °C and a dew point of (9,5 ± 1) °C, air density is primarily function of atmospheric pressure. Therefore a buoyancy correction is specified that is only a function of atmospheric pressure. 8.1.12.2.4. Calibration weight density The stated density of the material of the metal calibration weight shall be used. 8.1.12.2.5. Correction calculation The PM sample filter shall be corrected for buoyancy using the following equations: where: where: 8.2. Instrument validation for test 8.2.1. Validation of proportional flow control for batch sampling and minimum dilution ratio for PM batch sampling 8.2.1.1. Proportionality criteria for CVS 8.2.1.1.1. Proportional flows For any pair of flow-meters, the recorded sample and total flow rates or their 1 Hz means shall be used with the statistical calculations in Annex 4B, Appendix A.2, paragraph A.2.9. The standard error of the estimate, SEE, of the sample flow rate versus the total flow rate shall be determined. For each test interval, it shall be demonstrated that SEE was less than or equal to 3,5 per cent of the mean sample flow rate. 8.2.1.1.2. Constant flows For any pair of flow-meters, the recorded sample and total flow rates or their 1 Hz means shall be used to demonstrate that each flow rate was constant within ± 2,5 per cent of its respective mean or target flow rate. The following options may be used instead of recording the respective flow rate of each type of meter: 8.2.1.1.3. Demonstration of proportional sampling For any proportional batch sample such as a bag or PM filter, it shall be demonstrated that proportional sampling was maintained using one of the following, noting that up to 5 per cent of the total number of data points may be omitted as outliers. Using good engineering judgment, it shall be demonstrated with an engineering analysis that the proportional-flow control system inherently ensures proportional sampling under all circumstances expected during testing. For example, CFVs may be used for both sample flow and total flow if it is demonstrated that they always have the same inlet pressures and temperatures and that they always operate under critical-flow conditions. Measured or calculated flows and/or tracer gas concentrations (e.g. CO 2 ) shall be used to determine the minimum dilution ratio for PM batch sampling over the test interval. 8.2.1.2. Partial flow dilution system validation For the control of a partial flow dilution system to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample, a fast system response is required; this is identified by the promptness of the partial flow dilution system. The transformation time for the system shall be determined by the procedure in paragraph 8.1.8.6. and the related Figure 3.1. The actual control of the partial flow dilution system shall be based on the current measured conditions. If the combined transformation time of the exhaust flow measurement and the partial flow system is ≤ 0,3 s, online control shall be used. If the transformation time exceeds 0,3 s, look-ahead control based on a pre-recorded test run shall be used. In this case, the combined rise time shall be ≤ 1 s and the combined delay time ≤ 10 s. The total system response shall be designed as to ensure a representative sample of the particulates, q mp, i (sample flow of exhaust gas into partial flow dilution system), proportional to the exhaust mass flow. To determine the proportionality, a regression analysis of q mp, i versus q mew, i (exhaust gas mass flow rate on wet basis) shall be conducted on a minimum 5 Hz data acquisition rate, and the following criteria shall be met: Look-ahead control is required if the combined transformation times of the particulate system, t 50,P and of the exhaust mass flow signal, t 50,F are > 0,3 s. In this case, a pre-test shall be run and the exhaust mass flow signal of the pre-test be used for controlling the sample flow into the particulate system. A correct control of the partial dilution system is obtained, if the time trace of q mew,pre of the pre-test, which controls q mp , is shifted by a "look-ahead" time of t 50,P + t 50,F . For establishing the correlation between q mp, i and q mew, i the data taken during the actual test shall be used, with q mew,i time aligned by t 50,F relative to q mp, i (no contribution from t 50,P to the time alignment). The time shift between q mew and q mp is the difference between their transformation times that were determined in paragraph 8.1.8.6.3.2. 8.2.2. Gas analyser range validation, drift validation and drift correction 8.2.2.1. Range validation If an analyser operated above 100 per cent of its range at any time during the test, the following steps shall be performed: 8.2.2.1.1. Batch sampling For batch sampling, the sample shall be re-analysed using the lowest analyser range that results in a maximum instrument response below 100 per cent. The result shall be reported from the lowest range from which the analyser operates below 100 per cent of its range for the entire test. 8.2.2.1.2. Continuous sampling For continuous sampling, the entire test shall be repeated using the next higher analyser range. If the analyser again operates above 100 per cent of its range, the test shall be repeated using the next higher range. The test shall be continued to be repeated until the analyser always operates at less than 100 per cent of its range for the entire test. 8.2.2.2. Drift validation and drift correction If the drift is within ±1 per cent, the data can be either accepted without any correction or accepted after correction. If the drift is greater than ±1 per cent, two sets of brake specific emission results shall be calculated for each pollutant, or the test shall be voided. One set shall be calculated using data before drift correction and another set of data calculated after correcting all the data for drift according to Appendices A.7.2 and A.8.2 of Annex 4B. The comparison shall be made as a percentage of the uncorrected results. The difference between the uncorrected and the corrected brake-specific emission values shall be within ±4 per cent of the uncorrected brake-specific emission values. If not, the entire test is void. 8.2.3. PM sampling media (e.g. filters) preconditioning and tare weighing Before an emission test, the following steps shall be taken to prepare PM sample filter media and equipment for PM measurements: 8.2.3.1. Periodic verifications It shall be made sure that the balance and PM-stabilization environments meet the periodic verifications in paragraph 8.1.12. The reference filter shall be weighed just before weighing test filters to establish an appropriate reference point (see section details of the procedure in paragraph 8.1.12.1.). The verification of the stability of the reference filters shall occur after the post-test stabilization period, immediately before the post-test weighing. 8.2.3.2. Visual Inspection The unused sample filter media shall be visually inspected for defects, defective filters shall be discarded. 8.2.3.3. Grounding Electrically grounded tweezers or a grounding strap shall be used to handle PM filters as described in paragraph 9.3.4. 8.2.3.4. Unused sample media Unused sample media shall be placed in one or more containers that are open to the PM-stabilization environment. If filters are used, they may be placed in the bottom half of a filter cassette. 8.2.3.5. Stabilization Sample media shall be stabilized in the PM-stabilization environment. An unused sample medium can be considered stabilized as long as it has been in the PM-stabilization environment for a minimum of 30 min, during which the PM-stabilization environment has been within the specifications of paragraph 9.3.4. 8.2.3.6. Weighing The sample media shall be weighed automatically or manually, as follows: 8.2.3.7. Buoyancy correction The measured weight shall be corrected for buoyancy as described in paragraph 8.1.12.2. 8.2.3.8. Repetition The filter mass measurements may be repeated to determine the average mass of the filter using good engineering judgement and to exclude outliers from the calculation of the average. 8.2.3.9. Tare-weighing Unused filters that have been tare-weighed shall be loaded into clean filter cassettes and the loaded cassettes shall be placed in a covered or sealed container before they are taken to the test cell for sampling. 8.2.3.10. Substitution weighing Substitution weighing is an option and, if used, involves measurement of a reference weight before and after each weighing of a PM sampling medium (e.g. filter). While substitution weighing requires more measurements, it corrects for a balance's zero-drift and it relies on balance linearity only over a small range. This is most appropriate when quantifying total PM masses that are less than 0,1 per cent of the sample medium's mass. However, it may not be appropriate when total PM masses exceed 1 per cent of the sample medium's mass. If substitution weighing is used, it shall be used for both pre-test and post-test weighing. The same substitution weight shall be used for both pre-test and post-test weighing. The mass of the substitution weight shall be corrected for buoyancy if the density of the substitution weight is less than 2,0 g/cm 3 . The following steps are an example of substitution weighing: 8.2.4. PM sample post-conditioning and total weighing 8.2.4.1. Periodic verification It shall be assured that the weighing and PM-stabilization environments have met the periodic verifications in paragraph 8.1.12.1. After testing is complete, the filters shall be returned to the weighing and PM-stabilization environment. The weighing and PM-stabilization environment shall meet the ambient conditions requirements in paragraph 9.3.4.4., otherwise the test filters shall be left covered until proper conditions have been met. 8.2.4.2. Removal from sealed containers In the PM-stabilization environment, the PM samples shall be removed from the sealed containers. Filters may be removed from their cassettes before or after stabilization. When a filter is removed from a cassette, the top half of the cassette shall be separated from the bottom half using a cassette separator designed for this purpose. 8.2.4.3. Electrical grounding To handle PM samples, electrically grounded tweezers or a grounding strap shall be used, as described in paragraph 9.3.4.5. 8.2.4.4. Visual inspection The collected PM samples and the associated filter media shall be inspected visually. If the conditions of either the filter or the collected PM sample appear to have been compromised, or if the particulate matter contacts any surface other than the filter, the sample may not be used to determine particulate emissions. In the case of contact with another surface; the affected surface shall be cleaned before proceeding. 8.2.4.5. Stabilization of PM samples To stabilize PM samples, they shall be placed in one or more containers that are open to the PM-stabilization environment, which is described in paragraph 9.3.4.3. A PM sample is stabilized as long as it has been in the PM-stabilization environment for one of the following durations, during which the stabilization environment has been within the specifications of paragraph 9.3.4.3.: 8.2.4.6. Determination of post-test filter mass The procedures in paragraph 8.2.3. shall be repeated (paragraphs 8.2.3.6. through 8.2.3.9.) to determine the post-test filter mass. 8.2.4.7. Total mass Each buoyancy-corrected filter tare mass shall be subtracted from its respective buoyancy-corrected post-test filter mass. The result is the total mass, m total , which shall be used in emission calculations in Appendices A.7 and A.8. 9. MEASUREMENT EQUIPMENT 9.1. Engine dynamometer specification 9.1.1. Shaft work An engine dynamometer shall be used that has adequate characteristics to perform the applicable duty cycle including the ability to meet appropriate cycle validation criteria. The following dynamometers may be used: 9.1.2. Transient cycle Load cell or in-line torque meter may be used for torque measurements. When using a load cell, the torque signal shall be transferred to the engine axis and the inertia of the dynamometer shall be considered. The actual engine torque is the torque read on the load cell plus the moment of inertia of the brake multiplied by the angular acceleration. The control system has to perform such a calculation in real time. 9.1.3. Engine accessories The work of engine accessories required to fuel, lubricate, or heat the engine, circulate liquid coolant to the engine, or to operate after-treatment devices shall be accounted for and they shall be installed in accordance with paragraph 6.3. 9.2. Dilution procedure (if applicable) 9.2.1. Diluent conditions and background concentrations Gaseous constituents may be measured raw or dilute whereas PM measurement generally requires dilution. Dilution may be accomplished by a full flow or partial flow dilution system. When dilution is applied then the exhaust may be diluted with ambient air, synthetic air, or nitrogen. For gaseous emissions measurement the diluent shall be at least 15 °C. For PM sampling the temperature of the diluent is specified in paragraphs 9.2.2. for CVS and 9.2.3. for PFD with varying dilution ratio. The flow capacity of the dilution system shall be large enough to completely eliminate water condensation in the dilution and sampling systems. De-humidifying the dilution air before entering the dilution system is permitted, if the air humidity is high. The dilution tunnel walls may be heated or insulated as well as the bulk stream tubing downstream of the tunnel to prevent aqueous condensation. Before a diluent is mixed with exhaust, it may be preconditioned by increasing or decreasing its temperature or humidity. Constituents may be removed from the diluent to reduce their background concentrations. The following provisions apply to removing constituents or accounting for background concentrations: 9.2.2. Full flow system Full-flow dilution; constant-volume sampling (CVS). The full flow of raw exhaust is diluted in a dilution tunnel. Constant flow may be maintained by maintaining the temperature and pressure at the flow-meter within the limits. For non constant flow the flow shall be measured directly to allow for proportional sampling. The system shall be designed as follows (see Figure 9.1): To determine the mass of the particulates, a particulate sampling system, a particulate sampling filter, a gravimetric balance, and a temperature and humidity controlled weighing chamber, are required. Figure 9.1 Examples of full-flow dilution sampling configurations Note: Schematic representation only. Exact confirmation with this schematic drawing is not required. Legend Contaminant filter Particulate filter Control valve Sampling bag Cyclonic separator Flow meter Pneumatic pump Fan / Blower 9.2.3. Partial flow dilution (PFD) system 9.2.3.1. Description of partial flow system A schematic of a PFD system is shown in Figure 9.2. It is a general schematic showing principles of sample extraction, dilution and PM sampling. It is not meant to indicate that all the components described in the figure are necessary for other possible sampling systems that satisfy the intent of sample collection. Other configurations which do not match these schematics are allowed under the condition that they serve the same purpose of sample collection, dilution, and PM sampling. These need to satisfy other criteria such as in paragraphs 8.1.8.6. (periodic calibration) and 8.2.1.2. (validation) for varying dilution PFD, and paragraph 8.1.4.5. as well as Table 8.2 (linearity verification) and paragraph 8.1.8.5.7. (verification) for constant dilution PFD. As shown in Figure 9.2, the raw exhaust gas or the primary diluted flow is transferred from the exhaust pipe EP or from CVS respectively to the dilution tunnel DT through the sampling probe SP and the transfer line TL. The total flow through the tunnel is adjusted with a flow controller and the sampling pump P of the particulate sampling system (PSS). For proportional raw exhaust sampling, the dilution air flow is controlled by the flow controller FC1, which may use q mew (exhaust gas mass flow rate on wet basis) or q maw (intake air mass flow rate on wet basis) and q mf (fuel mass flow rate) as command signals, for the desired exhaust split. The sample flow into the dilution tunnel DT is the difference of the total flow and the dilution air flow. The dilution air flow rate is measured with the flow measurement device FM1, the total flow rate with the flow measurement device of the particulate sampling system. The dilution ratio is calculated from these two flow rates. For sampling with a constant dilution ratio of raw or diluted exhaust versus exhaust flow (e.g.: secondary dilution for PM sampling), the dilution air flow rate is usually constant and controlled by the flow controller FC1 or dilution air pump. Figure 9.2 Schematic of partial flow dilution system (total sampling type) Components of Figure 9.2: Mass flow rates applicable only for proportional raw exhaust sampling PFD: 9.2.3.2. Dilution The temperature of the diluents (ambient air, synthetic air, or nitrogen as quoted in paragraph 9.2.1.) shall be maintained between 293 and 325 K (20 to 52 °C) in close proximity to the entrance into the dilution tunnel. De-humidifying the dilution air before entering the dilution system is permitted. The partial flow dilution system has to be designed to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample from the engine exhaust stream, thus responding to excursions in the exhaust stream flow rate, and introduce dilution air to this sample to achieve a temperature at the test filter as prescribed by paragraph 9.3.3.4.3. For this it is essential that the dilution ratio be determined such that the accuracy requirements of paragraph 8.1.8.6.1. are fulfilled. To ensure that a flow is measured that corresponds to a measured concentration, either aqueous condensation shall be prevented between the sample probe location and the flow-meter inlet in the dilution tunnel or aqueous condensation shall be allowed to occur and humidity at the flow-meter inlet measured. The PFD system may be heated or insulated to prevent aqueous condensation. Aqueous condensation shall be prevented throughout the dilution tunnel. The minimum dilution ratio shall be within the range of 5:1 to 7:1 based on the maximum engine exhaust flow rate during the test cycle or test interval. The residence time in the system shall be between 0,5 and 5 s, as measured from the point of diluent introduction to the filter holder(s). To determine the mass of the particulates, a particulate sampling system, a particulate sampling filter, a gravimetric balance, and a temperature and humidity controlled weighing chamber, are required. 9.2.3.3. Applicability PFD may be used to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample for any batch or continuous PM and gaseous emission sampling over any transient duty cycle, any steady-state duty cycle or any ramped-modal duty cycle. The system may be used also for a previously diluted exhaust where, via a constant dilution-ratio, an already proportional flow is diluted (see Figure 9.2). This is the way of performing secondary dilution from a CVS tunnel to achieve the necessary overall dilution ratio for PM sampling. 9.2.3.4. Calibration The calibration of the PFD to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample is considered in paragraph 8.1.8.6. 9.3. Sampling procedures 9.3.1 General sampling requirements 9.3.1.1. Probe design and construction A probe is the first fitting in a sampling system. It protrudes into a raw or diluted exhaust stream to extract a sample, such that it's inside and outside surfaces are in contact with the exhaust. A sample is transported out of a probe into a transfer line. Sample probes shall be made with inside surfaces of stainless steel or, for raw exhaust sampling, with any non-reactive material capable of withstanding raw exhaust temperatures. Sample probes shall be located where constituents are mixed to their mean sample concentration and where interference with other probes is minimized. It is recommended that all probes remain free from influences of boundary layers, wakes, and eddies – especially near the outlet of a raw-exhaust tailpipe where unintended dilution might occur. Purging or back-flushing of a probe shall not influence another probe during testing. A single probe to extract a sample of more than one constituent may be used as long as the probe meets all the specifications for each constituent. 9.3.1.2. Transfer lines Transfer lines that transport an extracted sample from a probe to an analyser, storage medium, or dilution system shall be minimized in length by locating analysers, storage media, and dilution systems as close to the probes as practical. The number of bends in transfer lines shall be minimized and that the radius of any unavoidable bend shall be maximized. 9.3.1.3. Sampling methods For continuous and batch sampling, introduced in paragraph 7.2., the following conditions apply: 9.3.2. Gas sampling 9.3.2.1. Sampling probes Either single-port or multi-port probes are used for sampling gaseous emissions. The probes may be oriented in any direction relative to the raw or diluted exhaust flow. For some probes, the sample temperatures shall be controlled, as follows: 9.3.2.2. Transfer lines Transfer lines with inside surfaces of stainless steel, PTFE, Viton™, or any other material that has better properties for emission sampling shall be used. A non-reactive material capable of withstanding exhaust temperatures shall be used. In-line filters may be used if the filter and its housing meet the same temperature requirements as the transfer lines, as follows: 9.3.2.3. Sample-conditioning components 9.3.2.3.1. Sample dryers 9.3.2.3.1.1. Requirements The instrument that is used for removing moisture shall meet the minimum requirements in the following paragraph. The moisture content of 0,8 volume per cent H 2 O is used in equation (A.8-14). For the highest expected water vapour concentration H m , the water removal technique shall maintain CLD humidity at ≤ 5 g water/kg dry air (or about 0,8 volume per cent H 2 O), which is 100 per cent relative humidity at 3,9 °C and 101,3 kPa. This humidity specification is also equivalent to about 25 per cent relative humidity at 25 °C and 101,3 kPa. This may be demonstrated by measuring the temperature at the outlet of a thermal dehumidifier, or by measuring humidity at a point just upstream of the CLD. 9.3.2.3.1.2. Type of sample dryers allowed and procedure to estimate moisture content after the dryer Either type of sample dryer described in this paragraph to decrease the effects of water on gaseous emission measurements may be used. 9.3.2.3.2. Sample pumps Sample pumps upstream of an analyser or storage medium for any gas shall be used. Sample pumps with inside surfaces of stainless steel, PTFE, or any other material having better properties for emission sampling shall be used. For some sample pumps, temperatures shall be controlled, as follows: 9.3.2.4. Sample storage media In the case of bag sampling, gas volumes shall be stored in sufficiently clean containers that minimally off-gas or allow permeation of gases. Good engineering judgment shall be used to determine acceptable thresholds of storage media cleanliness and permeation. To clean a container, it may be repeatedly purged and evacuated and may be heated. A flexible container (such as a bag) within a temperature-controlled environment, or a temperature controlled rigid container that is initially evacuated or has a volume that can be displaced, such as a piston and cylinder arrangement, shall be used. Containers meeting the specifications in the following Table 9.1 shall be used. Table 9.1 Gaseous Batch Sampling Container Materials 9.3.3. PM sampling 9.3.3.1. Sampling probes PM probes with a single opening at the end shall be used. PM probes shall be oriented to face directly upstream. The PM probe may be shielded with a hat that conforms with the requirements in Figure 9.3. In this case the pre-classifier described in paragraph 9.3.3.3. shall not be used. Figure 9.3 Scheme of a sampling probe with a hat-shaped pre-classifier Cross-section 9.3.3.2. Transfer lines Insulated or heated transfer lines or a heated enclosure are recommended to minimize temperature differences between transfer lines and exhaust constituents. Transfer lines that are inert with respect to PM and are electrically conductive on the inside surfaces shall be used. It is recommended using PM transfer lines made of stainless steel; any material other than stainless steel will be required to meet the same sampling performance as stainless steel. The inside surface of PM transfer lines shall be electrically grounded. 9.3.3.3. Pre-classifier The use of a PM pre-classifier to remove large-diameter particles is permitted that is installed in the dilution system directly before the filter holder. Only one pre-classifier is permitted. If a hat shaped probe is used (see Figure 9.3), the use of a pre-classifier is prohibited. The PM pre-classifier may be either an inertial impactor or a cyclonic separator. It shall be constructed of stainless steel. The pre-classifier shall be rated to remove at least 50 per cent of PM at an aerodynamic diameter of 10 μm and no more than 1 per cent of PM at an aerodynamic diameter of 1 μm over the range of flow rates for which it is used. The pre-classifier outlet shall be configured with a means of bypassing any PM sample filter so that the pre-classifier flow can be stabilized before starting a test. PM sample filter shall be located within 75 cm downstream of the pre-classifier's exit. 9.3.3.4. Sample filter The diluted exhaust shall be sampled by a filter that meets the requirements of paragraphs 9.3.3.4.1. to 9.3.3.4.4. during the test sequence. 9.3.3.4.1. Filter specification All filter types shall have a 0,3 μm DOP (di-octylphthalate) collection efficiency of at least 99,7 per cent. The sample filter manufacturer's measurements reflected in their product ratings may be used to show this requirement. The filter material shall be either: If the expected net PM mass on the filter exceeds 400 μg, a filter with a minimum initial collection efficiency of 98 per cent may be used. 9.3.3.4.2. Filter size The nominal filter size shall be 46,50 mm ± 0,6 mm diameter. 9.3.3.4.3. Dilution and temperature control of PM samples PM samples shall be diluted at least once upstream of transfer lines in case of a CVS system and downstream in case of PFD system (see paragraph 9.3.3.2. relating to transfer lines). Sample temperature is to be controlled to a (47 ± 5) °C tolerance, as measured anywhere within 200 mm upstream or 200 mm downstream of the PM storage media. The PM sample is intended to be heated or cooled primarily by dilution conditions as specified in sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 9.2.1. 9.3.3.4.4. Filter face velocity A filter face velocity shall be between 0,90 and 1,00 m/s with less than 5 per cent of the recorded flow values exceeding this range. If the total PM mass exceeds 400 μg, the filter face velocity may be reduced. The face velocity shall be measured as the volumetric flow rate of the sample at the pressure upstream of the filter and temperature of the filter face, divided by the filter's exposed area. The exhaust stack or CVS tunnel pressure shall be used for the upstream pressure if the pressure drop through the PM sampler up to the filter is less than 2 kPa. 9.3.3.4.5 Filter holder To minimize turbulent deposition and to deposit PM evenly on a filter, a 12,5° (from centre) divergent cone angle to transition from the transfer-line inside diameter to the exposed diameter of the filter face shall be used. Stainless steel for this transition shall be used. 9.3.4. PM-stabilization and weighing environments for gravimetric analysis 9.3.4.1. Environment for gravimetric analysis This section describes the two environments required to stabilize and weigh PM for gravimetric analysis: the PM stabilization environment, where filters are stored before weighing; and the weighing environment, where the balance is located. The two environments may share a common space. Both the stabilization and the weighing environments shall be kept free of ambient contaminants, such as dust, aerosols, or semi-volatile material that could contaminate PM samples. 9.3.4.2. Cleanliness The cleanliness of the PM-stabilization environment using reference filters shall be verified, as described in paragraph 8.1.12.1.4. 9.3.4.3. Temperature of the chamber The temperature of the chamber (or room) in which the particulate filters are conditioned and weighed shall be maintained to within 22 °C ± 1 °C during all filter conditioning and weighing. The humidity shall be maintained to a dew point of 9,5 °C ± 1 °C and a relative humidity of 45 per cent ± 8 per cent. If the stabilization and weighing environments are separate, the stabilization environment shall be maintained at a tolerance of 22 °C ± 3 °C. 9.3.4.4. Verification of ambient conditions When using measurement instruments that meet the specifications in paragraph 9.4 the following ambient conditions shall be verified: 9.3.4.5. Installation of balance The balance shall be installed as follows: 9.3.4.6. Static electric charge Static electric charge shall be minimized in the balance environment, as follows: 9.4. Measurement instruments 9.4.1. Introduction 9.4.1.1. Scope This paragraph specifies measurement instruments and associated system requirements related to emission testing. This includes laboratory instruments for measuring engine parameters, ambient conditions, flow-related parameters, and emission concentrations (raw or diluted). 9.4.1.2. Instrument types Any instrument mentioned in this annex shall be used as described in the annex itself (see Table 8.2 for measurement quantities provided by these instruments). Whenever an instrument mentioned in this annex is used in a way that is not specified, or another instrument is used in its place, the requirements for equivalency provisions shall apply as specified in paragraph 5.1.3. Where more than one instrument for a particular measurement is specified, one of them will be identified by the Type Approval Authority upon application as the reference for showing that an alternative procedure is equivalent to the specified procedure. 9.4.1.3. Redundant systems Data from multiple instruments to calculate test results for a single test may be used for all measurement instruments described in this paragraph, with prior approval of the Type Approval Authority. Results from all measurements shall be recorded and the raw data shall be retained, as described in paragraph 5.3 of this annex. This requirement applies whether or not the measurements are actually used in the calculations. 9.4.2. Data recording and control The test system shall be able to update data, record data and control systems related to operator demand, the dynamometer, sampling equipment, and measurement instruments. Data acquisition and control systems shall be used that can record at the specified minimum frequencies, as shown in Table 9.2 (this table does not apply to discrete mode testing). Table 9.2 Data recording and control minimum frequencies 9.4.3. Performance specifications for measurement instruments 9.4.3.1. Overview The test system as a whole shall meet all the applicable calibrations, verifications, and test-validation criteria specified in paragraph 8.1., including the requirements of the linearity check of paragraphs 8.1.4. and 8.2. Instruments shall meet the specifications in Table 9.2 for all ranges to be used for testing. Furthermore, any documentation received from instrument manufacturers showing that instruments meet the specifications in Table 9.2 shall be kept. 9.4.3.2. Component requirements Table 9.3 shows the specifications of transducers of torque, speed, and pressure, sensors of temperature and dew point, and other instruments. The overall system for measuring the given physical and/or chemical quantity shall meet the linearity verification in paragraph 8.1.4. For gaseous emissions measurements, analysers may be used, that have compensation algorithms that are functions of other measured gaseous components, and of the fuel properties for the specific engine test. Any compensation algorithm shall only provide offset compensation without affecting any gain (that is no bias). Table 9.3 Recommended performance specifications for measurement instruments 9.4.4. Measurement of engine parameters & ambient conditions 9.4.4.1. Speed and torque sensors 9.4.4.1.1. Application Measurement instruments for work inputs and outputs during engine operation shall meet the specifications in this paragraph. Sensors, transducers, and meters meeting the specifications in Table 9.3 are recommended. Overall systems for measuring work inputs and outputs shall meet the linearity verifications in paragraph 8.1.4. 9.4.4.1.2. Shaft work Work and power shall be calculated from outputs of speed and torque transducers according to paragraph 9.4.4.1. Overall systems for measuring speed and torque shall meet the calibration and verifications in paragraphs 8.1.7. and 8.1.4. Torque induced by the inertia of accelerating and decelerating components connected to the flywheel, such as the drive shaft and dynamometer rotor, shall be compensated for as needed, based on good engineering judgment. 9.4.4.2. Pressure transducers, temperature sensors, and dew point sensors Overall systems for measuring pressure, temperature, and dew point shall meet the calibration in paragraph 8.1.7. Pressure transducers shall be located in a temperature-controlled environment, or they shall compensate for temperature changes over their expected operating range. Transducer materials shall be compatible with the fluid being measured. 9.4.5. Flow-related measurements For any type of flow-meter (of fuel, intake-air, raw exhaust, diluted exhaust, sample), the flow shall be conditioned as needed to prevent wakes, eddies, circulating flows, or flow pulsations from affecting the accuracy or repeatability of the meter. For some meters, this may be accomplished by using a sufficient length of straight tubing (such as a length equal to at least 10 pipe diameters) or by using specially designed tubing bends, straightening fins, orifice plates (or pneumatic pulsation dampeners for the fuel flow-meter) to establish a steady and predictable velocity profile upstream of the meter. 9.4.5.1. Fuel flow-meter Overall system for measuring fuel flow shall meet the calibration in paragraph 8.1.8.1. In any fuel flow measurement it shall be accounted for any fuel that bypasses the engine or returns from the engine to the fuel storage tank. 9.4.5.2. Intake-air flow-meter Overall system for measuring intake-air flow shall meet the calibration in paragraph 8.1.8.2. 9.4.5.3. Raw exhaust flow-meter 9.4.5.3.1. Component requirements The overall system for measuring raw exhaust flow shall meet the linearity requirements in paragraph 8.1.4. Any raw-exhaust meter shall be designed to appropriately compensate for changes in the raw exhaust's thermodynamic, fluid, and compositional states. 9.4.5.3.2. Flow-meter response time For the purpose of controlling of a partial flow dilution system to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample, a flow-meter response time faster than indicated in Table 9.3 is required. For partial flow dilution systems with online control, the flow-meter response time shall meet the specifications of paragraph 8.2.1.2. 9.4.5.3.3. Exhaust cooling Exhaust cooling upstream of the flow-meter is permitted with the following restrictions: 9.4.5.4. Dilution air and diluted exhaust flow-meters 9.4.5.4.1. Application Instantaneous diluted exhaust flow rates or total diluted exhaust flow over a test interval shall be determined by using a diluted exhaust flow-meter. Raw exhaust flow rates or total raw exhaust flow over a test interval may be calculated from the difference between a diluted exhaust flow-meter and a dilution air meter. 9.4.5.4.2. Component requirements The overall system for measuring diluted exhaust flow shall meet the calibration and verifications in paragraphs 8.1.8.4. and 8.1.8.5. The following meters may be used: For any other dilution system, a laminar flow element, an ultrasonic flow-meter, a subsonic venturi, a critical-flow venturi or multiple critical-flow venturis arranged in parallel, a positive-displacement meter, a thermal-mass meter, an averaging Pitot tube, or a hot-wire anemometer may be used. 9.4.5.4.3. Exhaust cooling Diluted exhaust upstream of a dilute flow-meter may be cooled, as long as all the following provisions are observed: 9.4.5.5. Sample flow-meter for batch sampling A sample flow-meter shall be used to determine sample flow rates or total flow sampled into a batch sampling system over a test interval. The difference between two flow-meters may be used to calculate sample flow into a dilution tunnel e.g. for partial flow dilution PM measurement and secondary dilution flow PM measurement. Specifications for differential flow measurement to extract a proportional raw exhaust sample is given in paragraph 8.1.8.6.1. and the calibration of differential flow measurement is given in paragraph 8.1.8.6.2. Overall system for the sample flow-meter shall meet the calibration in paragraph 8.1.8. 9.4.5.6. Gas divider A gas divider may be used to blend calibration gases. A gas divider shall be used that blends gases to the specifications of paragraph 9.5.1. and to the concentrations expected during testing. Critical-flow gas dividers, capillary-tube gas dividers, or thermal-mass-meter gas dividers may be used. Viscosity corrections shall be applied as necessary (if not done by gas divider internal software) to appropriately ensure correct gas division. The gas-divider system shall meet the linearity verification in paragraph 8.1.4.5. Optionally, the blending device may be checked with an instrument which by nature is linear, e.g. using NO gas with a CLD. The span value of the instrument shall be adjusted with the span gas directly connected to the instrument. The gas divider shall be checked at the settings used and the nominal value shall be compared to the measured concentration of the instrument. 9.4.6. CO and CO 2 measurements A non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) analyser shall be used to measure CO and CO 2 concentrations in raw or diluted exhaust for either batch or continuous sampling. The NDIR-based system shall meet the calibration and verifications in paragraph 8.1.9.1. 9.4.7. Hydrocarbon measurements 9.4.7.1. Flame-ionization detector 9.4.7.1.1. Application A heated flame-ionization detector (FID) analyser shall be used to measure hydrocarbon concentrations in raw or diluted exhaust for either batch or continuous sampling. Hydrocarbon concentrations shall be determined on a carbon number basis of one, C 1 . Methane and non-methane hydrocarbon values shall be determined as described in paragraph 9.4.7.1.4. Heated FID analysers shall maintain all surfaces that are exposed to emissions at a temperature of 191 ± 11 °C. 9.4.7.1.2. Component requirements The FID-based system for measuring THC or CH 4 shall meet all of the verifications for hydrocarbon measurement in paragraph 8.1.10. 9.4.7.1.3. FID fuel and burner air FID fuel and burner air shall meet the specifications of paragraph 9.5.1. The FID fuel and burner air shall not mix before entering the FID analyser to ensure that the FID analyser operates with a diffusion flame and not a premixed flame. 9.4.7.1.4. Methane FID analysers measure total hydrocarbons (THC). To determine non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHC), methane, CH 4 , shall be quantified either with a non-methane cutter and a FID analyser as described in paragraph 9.4.7.2., or with a gas chromatograph as described in paragraph 9.4.7.3. For a FID analyser used to determine NMHC, its response factor to CH 4 , RF CH4 , shall be determined as described in paragraph 8.1.10.1. NMHC-related calculations are described in Appendices A.7-A.8. 9.4.7.1.5. Assumption on methane Instead of measuring methane, it is allowed to assume that 2 per cent of measured total hydrocarbons is methane, as described in Appendices A.7-A.8. 9.4.7.2. Non-methane cutter 9.4.7.2.1. Application A non-methane cutter may be used to measure CH 4 with a FID analyser. A non-methane cutter oxidizes all non-methane hydrocarbons to CO 2 and H 2 O. A non-methane cutter may be used for raw or diluted exhaust for batch or continuous sampling. 9.4.7.2.2. System performance Non-methane-cutter performance shall be determined as described in paragraph 8.1.10.3. and the results shall be used to calculate NMHC emission in A.7 and A.8. 9.4.7.2.3. Configuration The non-methane cutter shall be configured with a bypass line for the verification described in paragraph 8.1.10.3. 9.4.7.2.4. Optimization A non-methane cutter may be optimised to maximize the penetration of CH 4 and the oxidation of all other hydrocarbons. A sample may be humidified and a sample may be diluted with purified air or oxygen (O 2 ) upstream of non-methane cutter to optimize its performance. Any sample humidification and dilution shall be accounted for in emission calculations. 9.4.7.3. Gas chromatograph Application: A gas chromatograph may be used to measure CH 4 concentrations of diluted exhaust for batch sampling. While also a non-methane cutter may be used to measure CH 4 , as described in paragraph 9.4.7.2. a reference procedure based on a gas chromatograph shall be used for comparison with any proposed alternate measurement procedure under paragraph 5.1.3. 9.4.8. NO x measurements Two measurement instruments are specified for NO x measurement and either instrument may be used provided it meets the criteria specified in paragraph 9.4.8.1. or 9.4.8.2., respectively. The chemiluminescent detector shall be used as the reference procedure for comparison with any proposed alternate measurement procedure under paragraph 5.1.3. of this annex. 9.4.8.1. Chemiluminescent detector 9.4.8.1.1. Application A chemiluminescent detector (CLD) coupled with an NO 2 -to-NO converter is used to measure NO x concentration in raw or diluted exhaust for batch or continuous sampling. 9.4.8.1.2. Component requirements The CLD-based system shall meet the quench verification in paragraph 8.1.11.1. A heated or unheated CLD may be used, and a CLD that operates at atmospheric pressure or under a vacuum may be used. 9.4.8.1.3. NO 2 -to-NO converter An internal or external NO 2 -to-NO converter that meets the verification in paragraph 8.1.11.5. shall be placed upstream of the CLD, while the converter shall be configured with a bypass to facilitate this verification. 9.4.8.1.4. Humidity effects All CLD temperatures shall be maintained to prevent aqueous condensation. To remove humidity from a sample upstream of a CLD, one of the following configurations shall be used: 9.4.8.1.5. Response time A heated CLD may be used to improve CLD response time. 9.4.8.2. Non-dispersive ultraviolet analyser 9.4.8.2.1. Application A non-dispersive ultraviolet (NDUV) analyser is used to measure NO x concentration in raw or diluted exhaust for batch or continuous sampling. 9.4.8.2.2. Component requirements The NDUV-based system shall meet the verifications in paragraph 8.1.11.3. 9.4.8.2.3. NO 2 -to-NO converter If the NDUV analyser measures only NO, an internal or external NO 2 -to-NO converter that meets the verification in paragraph 8.1.11.5. shall be placed upstream of the NDUV analyser. The converter shall be configured with a bypass to facilitate this verification. 9.4.8.2.4. Humidity effects The NDUV temperature shall be maintained to prevent aqueous condensation, unless one of the following configurations is used: 9.4.9. O 2 measurements A paramagnetic detection (PMD) or magneto pneumatic detection (MPD) analyser shall be used to measure O 2 concentration in raw or diluted exhaust for batch or continuous sampling. 9.4.10. Air-to-fuel ratio measurements A Zirconia (ZrO 2 ) analyser may be used to measure air-to-fuel ratio in raw exhaust for continuous sampling. O 2 measurements with intake air or fuel flow measurements may be used to calculate exhaust flow rate according to Appendices A.7-A.8. 9.4.11. PM measurements with gravimetric balance A balance shall be used to weigh net PM collected on sample filter media. The minimum requirement on the balance resolution shall be equal or lower than the repeatability of 0,5 microgram recommended in Table 9.3. If the balance uses internal calibration weights for routine spanning and linearity verifications, the calibration weights shall meet the specifications in paragraph 9.5.2. The balance shall be configured for optimum settling time and stability at its location. 9.5. Analytical gases and mass standards 9.5.1. Analytical gases Analytical gases shall meet the accuracy and purity specifications of this section. 9.5.1.1. Gas specifications The following gas specifications shall be considered: 9.5.1.2. Concentration and expiration date The concentration of any calibration gas standard and its expiration date specified by the gas supplier shall be recorded. 9.5.1.3. Gas transfer Gases shall be transferred from their source to analysers using components that are dedicated to controlling and transferring only those gases. The shelf life of all calibration gases shall be respected. The expiration date of the calibration gases stated by the manufacturer shall be recorded. 9.5.2. Mass standards PM balance calibration weights that are certified as international and/or national recognized standards-traceable within 0,1 per cent uncertainty shall be used. Calibration weights may be certified by any calibration lab that maintains international and/or national recognized standards-traceability. It shall be made sure that the lowest calibration weight has no greater than ten times the mass of an unused PM-sample medium. The calibration report shall also state the density of the weights. ( 1 ) Specific symbols are found in annexes. ( 2 ) The numbering of this annex is consistent with the numbering of the NRMM gtr 11. However, some sections of the NRMM gtr are not needed in this annex. ( 3 ) For further understanding of the prime power definition, see figure 2 of ISO 8528 1:2005. ( 1 ) Perform calibrations and verifications more frequently, according to measurement system manufacturer instructions and good engineering judgment. ( 2 ) The CVS verification is not required for systems that agree within ±2 per cent based on a chemical balance of carbon or oxygen of the intake air, fuel, and diluted exhaust. ( 4 ) As long as aqueous condensation in storage container is prevented. ( 5 ) Up to 40 °C. ( 6 ) Up to 202 °C. ( 7 ) At (191 ± 11) °C. ( 3 ) Accuracy and repeatability are all determined with the same collected data, as described in 9.4.3., and based on absolute values. "pt." refers to the overall mean value expected at the emission limit; "max." refers to the peak value expected at the emission limit over the duty cycle, not the maximum of the instrument's range; "meas." refers to the actual mean measured over the duty cycle. ( 4 ) It is not required that these levels of purity are international and/or national recognized standards-traceable. ( 5 ) It is not required that these levels of purity are international and/or national recognized standards-traceable. Appendix A.1 (Reserved) Appendix A.2 Statistics A.2.1. Arithmetic mean The arithmetic mean, A.2.2. Standard deviation The standard deviation for a non-biased ( e.g. , N –1) sample, σ, shall be calculated as follows: A.2.3. Root mean square The root mean square, rms y , shall be calculated as follows: A.2.4. t -test It shall be determined if the data passes a t -test by using the following equations and tables: A.2.5. F-test The F statistic shall be calculated as follows: Table A.2.2 Critical F values, F crit90 , versus N -1 and N ref -1 at 90 per cent confidence Table A.2.3 Critical F values, F crit95 , versus N -1 and N ref -1 at 95 per cent confidence A.2.6. Slope The least-squares regression slope, a 1y , shall be calculated as follows: A.2.7. Intercept The least-squares regression intercept, a 0y , shall be calculated as follows: A.2.8. Standard estimate of error The standard estimate of error, SEE , shall be calculated as follows: A.2.9. Coefficient of determination The coefficient of determination, r 2 , shall be calculated as follows: Appendix A.3 1980 international gravity formula The acceleration of Earth's gravity, a g , varies depending on the location and a g is calculated for a respective latitude, as follows: where: θ = Degrees north or south latitude Appendix A.4 Carbon flow check A.4.1. Introduction All but a tiny part of the carbon in the exhaust comes from the fuel, and all but a minimal part of this is manifest in the exhaust gas as CO 2 . This is the basis for a system verification check based on CO 2 measurements. The flow of carbon into the exhaust measurement systems is determined from the fuel flow rate. The flow of carbon at various sampling points in the emissions and particulate sampling systems is determined from the CO 2 concentrations and gas flow rates at those points. In this sense, the engine provides a known source of carbon flow, and observing the same carbon flow in the exhaust pipe and at the outlet of the partial flow PM sampling system verifies leak integrity and flow measurement accuracy. This check has the advantage that the components are operating under actual engine test conditions of temperature and flow. Figure A.4.1 shows the sampling points at which the carbon flows shall be checked. The specific equations for the carbon flows at each of the sample points are given in the following paragraphs. Figure A.4.1 Measuring points for carbon flow check A.4.2. Carbon flow rate into the engine (location 1) The carbon mass flow rate into the engine q m Cf [kg/s] for a fuel CH α O ε is given by: where: q m f = fuel mass flow rate [kg/s] A.4.3. Carbon flow rate in the raw exhaust (location 2) The carbon mass flow rate in the exhaust pipe of the engine q m Ce [kg/s] shall be determined from the raw CO 2 concentration and the exhaust gas mass flow rate: where: If CO 2 is measured on a dry basis it shall be converted to a wet basis according to paragraph A.7.3.2. or A.8.2.2. A.4.4. Carbon flow rate in the dilution system (location 3) For the partial flow dilution system, the splitting ratio also needs to be taken into account. The carbon flow rate in an equivalent dilution system q m Cp [kg/s] (with equivalent meaning equivalent to a full flow system where the total flow is diluted) shall be determined from the dilute CO 2 concentration, the exhaust gas mass flow rate and the sample flow rate; the new equation is identical to equation A.4-2, being only supplemented by the dilution factor where: If CO 2 is measured on a dry basis, it shall be converted to wet basis according to paragraph A.7.3.2. or A.8.2.2. A.4.5. Calculation of the molar mass of the exhaust gas The molar mass of the exhaust gas shall be calculated according to equation (A.8-15) (see paragraph A.8.2.4.2.) Alternatively, the following exhaust gas molar masses may be used: M e (diesel) = 28,9 g/mol Appendix A.5 (Reserved) Appendix A.6 (Reserved) Appendix A.7 Molar based emission calculations A.7.0. Symbol conversion A.7.0.1. General symbols A.7.0.2. Subscripts A.7.0.3. Symbols and abbreviations for the chemical components (used also as a subscript) A.7.0.4. Symbols and abbreviations for the fuel composition A.7.0.5. Symbols for chemical balance used in Appendix A.7 A.7.1. Basic parameters and relationships A.7.1.1. Dry air and chemical species This annex uses the following values for dry air composition: This annex uses the following molar masses or effective molar masses of chemical species: This annex uses the following molar gas constant R for ideal gases: This annex uses the following ratios of specific heats A.7.1.2. Wet air This section describes how to determine the amount of water in an ideal gas: A.7.1.2.1. Vapour pressure of water The vapour pressure of water p H2O [kPa] for a given saturation temperature condition, T sat [K], shall be calculated as follows: A.7.1.2.2. Dew point If humidity is measured as a dew point, the amount of water in an ideal gas x H2O [mol/mol] shall be obtained as follows: where: A.7.1.2.3. Relative humidity If humidity is measured as a relative humidity RH% , the amount of water of an ideal gas x H2O [mol/mol] is calculated as follows: where: A.7.1.3. Fuel properties The general chemical formula of fuel is CH α O β S γ N δ with α atomic hydrogen-to-carbon ratio (H/C), β atomic oxygen-to-carbon ratio (O/C), γ atomic sulphur-to-carbon ratio (S/C) and δ atomic nitrogen-to-carbon ratio (N/C). Based on this formula the carbon mass fraction of fuel w C can be calculated. In case of diesel fuel the simple formula CH α O β may be used. Default values for fuel composition may be used as follows: Table A.7.1 Default values of atomic hydrogen-to-carbon ratio, α , atomic oxygen-to-carbon ratio, β , and carbon mass fraction of fuel, w C for diesel fuels A.7.1.4. Total HC and non-methane HC concentration A.7.1.4.1. THC determination and THC/CH 4 initial contamination corrections A.7.1.4.2. NMHC determination To determine NMHC concentration, x NMHC , one of the following shall be used: A.7.1.4.3. Approximation of NMHC from THC NMHC (non-methane hydrocarbon) emissions can be approximated as 98 percent of THC (total hydrocarbon). A.7.1.5. Flow-weighted mean concentration In some paragraphs of this annex, it may be necessary to calculate a flow-weighted mean concentration to determine the applicability of certain provisions. A flow-weighted mean is the mean of a quantity after it is weighted proportional to a corresponding flow rate. For example, if a gas concentration is measured continuously from the raw exhaust of an engine, its flow-weighted mean concentration is the sum of the products of each recorded concentration times its respective exhaust molar flow rate, divided by the sum of the recorded flow rate values. As another example, the bag concentration from a CVS system is the same as the flow-weighted mean concentration because the CVS system itself flow-weights the bag concentration. A certain flow-weighted mean concentration of an emission might be already expected based on previous testing with similar engines or testing with similar equipment and instruments. A.7.2. Chemical balances of fuel, intake air, and exhaust A.7.2.1. General Chemical balances of fuel, intake air and exhaust may be used to calculate flows, the amount of water in their flows, and the wet concentration of constituents in their flows. With one flow rate of either fuel, intake air or exhaust, chemical balances may be used to determine the flows of the other two. For example, chemical balances along with either intake air or fuel flow to determine raw exhaust flow may be used. A.7.2.2. Procedures that require chemical balances Chemical balances are required to determine the following: A.7.2.3. Chemical balance procedure The calculations for a chemical balance involve a system of equations that require iteration. The initial values of up to three quantities shall be guessed: the amount of water in the measured flow, x H2Oexh , fraction of dilution air in diluted exhaust (or excess air in the raw exhaust), x dil/exh , and the amount of products on a C1 basis per dry mole of dry measured flow, x Ccombdry . Time-weighted mean values of combustion air humidity and dilution air humidity in the chemical balance may be used; as long as combustion air and dilution air humidity remain within tolerances of ± 0,0025 mol/mol of their respective mean values over the test interval. For each emission concentration, x , and amount of water x H2Oexh , it shall be determined their completely dry concentrations, α dry and x H2Oexhdry . It shall also be used fuel's atomic hydrogen-to-carbon ratio, a, oxygen-to-carbon ratio, β and carbon mass fraction of fuel, w C . For the test fuel, α and β or the default values in Table 7.1 may be used. Use the following steps to complete a chemical balance: At the end of the chemical balance, the molar flow rate A.7.2.4. NO x correction for humidity All the NO x concentrations, including dilution air background concentrations, shall be corrected for intake-air humidity using the following equation: where: A.7.3. Raw gaseous emissions A.7.3.1. Mass of gaseous emissions To calculate the total mass per test of gaseous emission m gas [g/test], its molar concentration shall be multiplied by its respective molar flow and by exhaust gas molar mass; then integration over test cycle shall be performed: where: Since equation (A.7-28) has to be solved by numerical integration, it is transformed in: where: General equation may be modified according to which measurement system is used, batch or continuous sampling, and if a varying rather than a constant flow rate is sampled. A.7.3.2. Dry-to-wet concentration conversion Parameters of this paragraph are obtained from the results of the chemical balance calculated in paragraph A.7.2. The following relation exists between gas molar concentrations in the measured flow x gasdry and x gas [mol/mol] expressed on a dry and wet basis respectively: where: For gaseous emissions a removed water correction shall be performed for the generic concentration x [mol/mol] as follows: where: A.7.3.3. Exhaust gas molar flow rate The flow rate of the raw exhaust gases can be directly measured or can be calculated based on the chemical balance of paragraph A.7.2.3. Calculation of raw exhaust molar flow rate is performed from measured intake air molar flow rate or fuel mass flow rate. The raw exhaust molar flow rate can be calculated from the sampled emissions, A.7.4. Diluted gaseous emissions A.7.4.1. Emission mass calculation and background correction Equations for the calculation of gaseous emissions mass m gas [g/test] as a function of molar emissions flow rates are as follows: A.7.4.2. Dry-to wet concentration conversion The same relations for raw gases (paragraph A.7.3.2.) shall be used for dry-to-wet conversion on diluted samples. For dilution air a humidity measurement shall be performed with the aim to calculate its water vapour fraction x H2Odildry [mol/mol]: where: x H2Odil = water molar fraction in the dilution air flow [mol/mol] A.7.4.3. Exhaust molar flow rate A.7.4.4. Determination of particulates A.7.4.4.1. Sampling A.7.4.4.2. Background correction The same approach as that of paragraph A.7.4.1. shall be applied to correct the mass of PM for the background. Multiplying where: A.7.5. Cycle work and specific emissions A.7.5.1. Gaseous emissions A.7.5.1.1. Transient and ramped modal cycle Reference is made to paragraphs A.7.3.1. and A.7.4.1. for raw and diluted exhaust respectively. The resulting values for power P i [kW] shall be integrated over a test interval. The total work W act [kWh] is calculated as follows: where: The specific emissions e gas [g/kWh] shall be calculated in the following ways depending on the type of test cycle. where: In case of the transient cycle, the final test result e gas [g/kWh] shall be a weighted average from cold start test and hot start test by using: In case of an infrequent (periodic) exhaust regeneration (paragraph 6.6.2.), the specific emissions shall be corrected with the multiplicative adjustment factor k r (equation (6-4)) or with the two separate pairs of adjustment additive factors k Ur (upward factor of equation (6-5)) and k Dr (downward factor of equation (6-6)). A.7.5.1.2. Steady-state discrete-mode cycle The specific emissions e gas [g/kWh] are calculated as follows: where: A.7.5.2. Particulate emissions A.7.5.2.1. Transient and ramped modal cycles The particulate specific emissions shall be calculated with equation (A.7-50) where e gas [g/kWh] and m gas [g/test] are substituted by e PM [g/kWh] and m PM [g/test] respectively: where: The emissions on the transient composite cycle (i.e. cold phase and hot phase) shall be calculated as shown in paragraph A.7.5.1. A.7.5.2.2. Steady state discrete-mode cycle The particulate specific emission e P M [g/kWh] shall be calculated in the following way: A.7.5.2.2.1. For the single-filter method where: A.7.5.2.2.2. For the multiple-filter method where: For the single-filter method, the effective weighing factor, WF effi , for each mode shall be calculated in the following way: where: The value of the effective weighing factors shall be within ± 0,005 (absolute value) of the weighing factors listed in Annex 5. ( 1 ) See subscripts; e.g.: ( 2 ) Dilution ratio r d in Appendix A.8 and DR in Appendix A.7: different symbols but same meaning and same equations. Dilution factor D in Appendix A.8 and x dil/exh in Appendix A.7: different symbols but same physical meaning; equation (A.7-47) shows the relationship between x dil/exh and DR. ( 3 ) See paragraph A.7.1.1. of this section for the values to use for molar masses. In the cases of NO x and HC, the Regulations specify effective molar masses based on assumed speciation rather than actual speciation. ( 4 ) See symbols and abbreviations for the chemical components. ( 5 ) See specific symbols in the table of chemical balance. ( 6 ) The mole fractions for THC and NMHC are expressed on a C1 equivalent basis. t.b.d. = to be defined. ( 8 ) In Appendix A.8 the meaning of subscript is determined by the associated quantity; for example, the subscript "d" can indicate a dry basis as in " c d = concentration on dry basis", dilution air as in " p d = saturation vapour pressure of the dilution air" or " k w,d = dry to wet correction factor for the dilution air", dilution ratio as in " r d ". This is the reason why the column of Appendix A.8 is nearly empty. ( 9 ) Referred to a fuel with chemical formula CH α O β S γ N δ ( 10 ) Referred to a fuel with chemical formula CH α O ε N δ S γ ( 11 ) Attention should be paid to the different meaning of symbol β in the two emissions calculation appendices: in Appendix A.8 it refers to a fuel having the chemical formula CH α S γ N δ O ε (i.e. the formula C β H α S γ N δ O ε where β = 1, assuming one carbon atom per molecule), while in Appendix A.7 it refers to the oxygen-to-carbon ratio with CH α O β S γ N δ . Then β of Appendix A.7 corresponds to ε of Appendix A.8. ( 12 ) Mass fraction w accompanied by the symbol of the chemical component as a subscript. ( 1 ) The effective molar masses of THC and NMHC are defined by an atomic hydrogen-to-carbon ratio, α , of 1,85; ( 2 ) The effective molar mass of NO x is defined by the molar mass of nitrogen dioxide, NO 2 . Appendix A.7.1 Diluted exhaust flow (CVS) calibration This Appendix 1 describes the calculations for calibrating various flow-meters. Paragraph A.7.6.1. of this Appendix 1 first describes how to convert reference flow-meter outputs for use in the calibration equations, which are presented on a molar basis. The remaining paragraphs describe the calibration calculations that are specific to certain types of flow-meters. A.7.6.1. Reference meter conversions The calibration equations in this section use molar flow rate, where: A.7.6.2. PDP calibration calculations For each restrictor position, the following values shall be calculated from the mean values determined in paragraph 8.1.8.4., as follows: A.7.6.3. Venturi governing equations and permissible assumptions This section describes the governing equations and permissible assumptions for calibrating a venturi and calculating flow using a venturi. Because a subsonic venturi (SSV) and a critical-flow venturi (CFV) both operate similarly, their governing equations are nearly the same, except for the equation describing their pressure ratio, r (i.e., r SSV versus r CFV ). These governing equations assume one-dimensional isentropic inviscid compressible flow of an ideal gas. In paragraph A.7.6.3.(d), other assumptions that may be made are described. If the assumption of an ideal gas for the measured flow is not allowed, the governing equations include a first-order correction for the behaviour of a real gas; namely, the compressibility factor, Z. If good engineering judgment dictates using a value other than Z = 1, an appropriate equation of state to determine values of Z as a function of measured pressures and temperatures may be used, or specific calibration equations may be developed based on good engineering judgment. It shall be noted that the equation for the flow coefficient, C f , is based on the ideal gas assumption that the isentropic exponent, γ , is equal to the ratio of specific heats, c p /c V . If good engineering judgment dictates using a real gas isentropic exponent, an appropriate equation of state to determine values of γ as a function of measured pressures and temperatures may be used, or specific calibration equations may be developed. Molar flow rate, where: A.7.6.4 SSV calibration A.7.6.5. CFV calibration ( 1 ) Range valid for all calibration and emission testing over the atmospheric pressure range (80 000 to 103 325) kPa. ( 2 ) Tabulated parameters only for the pure gases, as listed, shall be used. Parameters to calculate viscosities of gas mixtures shall not be combined. Appendix A.7.2 Drift correction A.7.7.1. Scope and frequency The calculations in this Appendix 2 are performed to determine if gas analyser drift invalidates the results of a test interval. If drift does not invalidate the results of a test interval, the test interval's gas analyser responses shall be corrected for drift according to this Appendix 2. The drift-corrected gas analyser responses shall be used in all subsequent emission calculations. The acceptable threshold for gas analyser drift over a test interval is specified in paragraph 8.2.2.2. A.7.7.2. Correction principles The calculations in this Appendix 2 utilize a gas analyser's responses to reference zero and span concentrations of analytical gases, as determined sometime before and after a test interval. The calculations correct the gas analyser's responses that were recorded during a test interval. The correction is based on an analyser's mean responses to reference zero and span gases, and it is based on the reference concentrations of the zero and span gases themselves. Validation and correction for drift shall be performed as follows: A.7.7.3. Drift validation After applying all the other corrections–except drift correction–to all the gas analyser signals, brake-specific emissions shall be calculated according to paragraph A.7.5. of Annex 4B, Appendix A.7. Then all gas analyser signals shall be corrected for drift according to this appendix. Brake-specific emissions shall be recalculated using all of the drift-corrected gas analyser signals. The brake-specific emission results shall be validated and reported before and after drift correction according to paragraph 8.2.2.2. A.7.7.4. Drift correction All gas analyser signals shall be corrected as follows: Appendix A.8 Mass based emission calculations A.8.0. Symbol conversion A.8.0.1. General symbols A.8.0.2. Subscripts A.8.0.3. Symbols and abbreviations for the chemical components (used also as a subscript) A.8.0.4. Symbols and abbreviations for the fuel composition A.8.1. Basic Parameters A.8.1.1. Determination of methane and non-methane HC concentration The calculation of NMHC and CH 4 depends on the calibration method used. The FID for the measurement without NMC, shall be calibrated with propane. For the calibration of the FID in series with NMC, the following methods are permitted: The concentration of NMHC ( c NMHC [-]) and CH 4 ( c CH4 [-]) shall be calculated as follows for sub-paragraph (a): The concentration of NMHC and CH 4 shall be calculated as follows for sub-paragraph (b): where: If RF CH4[THC-FID] < 1,05, it may be omitted in equations A.8-1a, A.8-1b and A.8-2b. NMHC (non-methane hydrocarbon) emissions can be approximated as 98 percent of THC (total hydrocarbon). A.8.2. Raw gaseous emissions A.8.2.1. Gaseous emissions A.8.2.1.1. Steady state tests The emission rate of a gaseous emission q mgas, i for each mode i of the steady state test shall be calculated. The concentration of the gaseous emission shall be multiplied by its respective flow: A.8.2.1.2. Transient and ramped modal cycles tests The total mass per test of a gaseous emission m gas [g/test] shall be calculated by multiplication of the time aligned instantaneous concentrations and exhaust gas flows and integration over the test cycle according to the following equation: where: The following paragraphs show how the needed quantities ( c gas, i , u gas and q mew, i ) shall be calculated. A.8.2.2. Dry-to wet concentration conversion If the emissions are measured on a dry basis, the measured concentration c d on dry basis shall be converted to the concentration c w on a wet basis according to the following general equation: where: For complete combustion, the dry-to-wet conversion factor for raw exhaust gas is written as k w,a [-] and shall be calculated as follows: where: where: In the equation (A.8-6), the ratio p r / p b may be assumed: For incomplete combustion (rich fuel air mixtures) and also for emission tests without direct air flow measurements, a second method of k w,a calculation is preferred: where: A.8.2.3. NO x correction for humidity and temperature As the NO x emission depends on ambient air conditions, the NO x concentration shall be corrected for ambient air temperature and humidity with the factors k h [-] given in the following equation. This factor is valid for a humidity range between 0 and 25 g H 2 O/kg dry air. where: H a = humidity of the intake air [g H 2 O/kg dry air] A.8.2.4. Component specific factor u A.8.2.4.1. Tabulated values Applying some simplifications (assumption on the λ value and on intake air conditions as shown in the following table) to the equations of paragraph A.8.2.4.2. figures for u gas can be calculated (see paragraph A.8.2.1.). The u gas values are given in Table A.8.1. Table A.8.1 Raw exhaust gas u and component densities (the u figures are calculated for emission concentration expressed in ppm) A.8.2.4.2. Calculated values The component specific factor, u gas,i , can be calculated by the density ratio of the component and the exhaust or alternatively by the corresponding ratio of molar masses: where: The molar mass of the exhaust, M e, i shall be derived for a general fuel composition CH α O ε N δ S γ under the assumption of complete combustion, as follows: (A.8-14) where: The instantaneous raw exhaust density ρ e,i [kg/m 3 ] shall be derived as follows: where: A.8.2.5. Mass flow rate of the exhaust gas A.8.2.5.1. Air and fuel measurement method The method involves measurement of the air flow and the fuel flow with suitable flow-meters. The calculation of the instantaneous exhaust gas flow q mew,i [kg/s] shall be as follows: where: A.8.2.5.2. Tracer measurement method This involves measurement of the concentration of a tracer gas in the exhaust. The calculation of the instantaneous exhaust gas flow q mew,i [kg/s] shall be as follows: where: The background concentration of the tracer gas c b may be determined by averaging the background concentration measured immediately before the test run and after the test run. When the background concentration is less than 1 per cent of the concentration of the tracer gas after mixing c mix, i at maximum exhaust flow, the background concentration may be neglected. A.8.2.5.3. Air flow and air to fuel ratio measurement method This involves exhaust mass calculation from the air flow and the air to fuel ratio. The calculation of the instantaneous exhaust gas mass flow q mew, i [kg/s] is as follows: (A.8-20) where: A.8.2.5.4. Carbon balance method, 1 step-procedure The following 1-step formula can be used for the calculation of the wet exhaust mass flow rate q mew,i [kg/s]: with the carbon factor f c [-] given by: where: and factor k fd [m 3 /kg fuel] that is calculated on a dry basis by subtracting the water formed by combustion from k f : where: A.8.3. Diluted gaseous emissions A.8.3.1. Mass of the gaseous emissions A.8.3.1.1. Full flow dilution measurement (CVS) The exhaust mass flow rate shall be measured with a constant volume sampling (CVS) system, which may use a positive displacement pump (PDP), a critical flow venturi (CFV) or a subsonic venturi (SSV). For systems with constant mass flow (i.e. with heat exchanger), the mass of the pollutants m gas [g/test] shall be determined from the following equation: where: For systems with flow compensation (without heat exchanger), the mass of the pollutants m gas [g/test] shall be determined by calculation of the instantaneous mass emissions, by integration and by background correction according to the following equation: where: The concentrations c gas , c e and c d can be either values measured in a batch sample (bag, but not allowed for NO x and HC) or be averaged by integration from continuous measurements. Also m ed,i has to be averaged by integration over the test cycle. The following equations show how the needed quantities ( c e , u gas and m ed ) shall be calculated. A.8.3.2. Dry-to wet concentration conversion All concentrations in paragraph A.8.3.2. shall be converted using equation (A.8-5) ( A.8.3.2.1. Diluted exhaust gas All concentrations measured dry shall be converted to wet concentrations by applying one of the following two equations: where: The dry to wet correction factor k w2 takes into consideration the water content of both intake air and dilution air: where: A.8.3.2.2. Dilution factor The dilution factor D [-] (which is necessary for the background correction and the k w2 calculation) shall be calculated as follows: where: The stoichiometric factor shall be calculated as follows: where: α = molar hydrogen to carbon ratio in the fuel [-] Alternatively, if the fuel composition is not known, the following stoichiometric factors may be used: F S (diesel) = 13.4 If a direct measurement is made of the exhaust gas flow, the dilution factor D [-] may be calculated as follows: where: A.8.3.2.3. Dilution air where: H d = dilution air humidity [g H 2 O/kg dry air] A.8.3.2.4. Determination of the background corrected concentration The average background concentration of the gaseous pollutants in the dilution air shall be subtracted from measured concentrations to get the net concentrations of the pollutants. The average values of the background concentrations can be determined by the sample bag method or by continuous measurement with integration. The following equation shall be used: where: A.8.3.3. Component specific factor u The component specific factor u gas of diluted gas can either be calculated by the following equation or be taken from Table A.8.2; in Table A.8.2 the density of the diluted exhaust gas has been assumed equal to air density. where: Table A.8.2 Diluted exhaust gas u values and component densities (the u figures are calculated for emission concentration expressed in ppm) A.8.3.4. Exhaust gas mass flow calculation A.8.3.4.1. PDP-CVS system The calculation of the mass of the diluted exhaust [kg/test] over the cycle is as follows, if the temperature of the diluted exhaust m ed is kept within ± 6 K over the cycle by using a heat exchanger: where: If a system with flow compensation is used (i.e. without heat exchanger), the mass of the diluted exhaust gas m ed,i [kg] during the time interval shall be calculated as follows: where: A.8.3.4.2. CFV-CVS system The calculation of the mass flow over the cycle m ed [g/test] is as follows, if the temperature of the diluted exhaust is kept within ± 11 K over the cycle by using a heat exchanger: where: If a system with flow compensation is used (i.e. without heat exchanger), the mass of the diluted exhaust gas m ed,i [kg] during the time interval shall be calculated as follows: where: A.8.3.4.3. SSV-CVS system The calculation of the diluted exhaust gas mass over the cycle m ed [kg/test] shall be as follows, if the temperature of the diluted exhaust is kept within ± 11K over the cycle by using a heat exchanger: where: where: If a system with flow compensation is used (i.e. without heat exchanger), the mass of the diluted exhaust gas m ed, i [kg] during the time interval shall be calculated as follows: where: A.8.3.5. Calculation of particulates emission A.8.3.5.1. Transient and ramped modal cycles The particulate mass shall be calculated after buoyancy correction of the particulate sample mass according to paragraph 8.1.12.2.5. A.8.3.5.1.1. Partial flow dilution system The calculation for double dilution system is shown in paragraph A.8.3.5.1.2. A.8.3.5.1.1.1. Calculation based on sample ratio The particulate emission over the cycle m PM [g] shall be calculated with the following equation: where: where: In case of the total sampling type system, m sep and m sed are identical. A.8.3.5.1.1.2. Calculation based on dilution ratio The particulate emission over the cycle m PM [g] shall be calculated with the following equation: where: The total mass of equivalent diluted exhaust gas mass over the cycle m edf [kg] shall be determined as follows: where: A.8.3.5.1.2. Full flow dilution system The mass emission shall be calculated as follows: where: where: A.8.3.5.1.3. Background correction The particulate mass m PM,c [g] may be background corrected as follows: where: A.8.3.5.2. Calculation for steady-state discrete-mode cycles A.8.3.5.2.1. Dilution system All calculations shall be based upon the average values of the individual modes i during the sampling period. A.8.3.5.2.2. Calculation of the particulate mass flow rate The particulate emission flow rate over the cycle q mPM [g/h] shall be calculated as follows: The PM mass is determined over the test cycle by summation of the average values of the individual modes i during the sampling period. The particulate mass flow rate q mPM [g/h] or q mPM i [g/h] may be background corrected as follows: A.8.4. Cycle work and specific emissions A.8.4.1. Gaseous emissions A.8.4.1.1. Transient and ramped modal cycles Reference is made to paragraphs A.8.2.1. and A.8.3.1. for raw and diluted exhaust respectively. The resulting values for power P [kW] shall be integrated over a test interval. The total work W act [kWh] is calculated as follows: where: The specific emissions e gas [g/kWh] shall be calculated in the following ways depending on the type of test cycle. where: In case of the transient cycle, the final test result e gas [g/kWh] shall be a weighted average from cold start test and hot start test by using: In case of an infrequent (periodic) exhaust regeneration (paragraph 6.6.2.), the specific emissions shall be corrected with the multiplicative adjustment factor k r (equation (6-4)) or with the two separate pairs of adjustment additive factors k Ur (upward factor of equation (6-5)) and k Dr (downward factor of equation (6-6)). A.8.4.1.2. Steady-state discrete-mode cycle The specific emissions e gas [g/kWh] are calculated as follows: where: A.8.4.2. Particulate emissions A.8.4.2.1. Transient and ramped modal cycles The particulate specific emissions shall be calculated with equation (A.8-61) where e gas [g/kWh] and m gas [g/test] are substituted by e PM [g/kWh] and m PM [g/test] respectively: where: The emissions on the transient composite cycle (i.e. cold phase and hot phase) shall be calculated as shown in paragraph A.8.4.1. A.8.4.2.2. Steady state discrete-mode cycle The particulate specific emission e PM [g/kWh] shall be calculated in the following way: For the single-filter method, the effective weighing factor, WF ei , for each mode shall be calculated in the following way: where: The value of the effective weighing factors shall be within ± 0,005 (absolute value) of the weighing factors listed in Annex 5. ( 1 ) See subscripts; e.g.: ( 2 ) Dilution ratio r d in Appendix A.8 and DR in Appendix A.7: different symbols but same meaning and same equations. Dilution factor D in Appendix A.8 and x dil in Appendix A.7: different symbols but same physical meaning; equation (A.7-47) shows the relationship between x dil and DR. ( 3 ) t.b.d. = to be defined ( 4 ) In Appendix A.8 the meaning of subscript is determined by the associated quantity; for example, the subscript "d" can indicate a dry basis as in " c d = concentration on dry basis", dilution air as in " p d = saturation vapour pressure of the dilution air" or " k w,d = dry to wet correction factor for the dilution air", dilution ratio as in " r d ". ( 5 ) Referred to a fuel with chemical formula CH α O ε N δ S γ ( 6 ) Referred to a fuel with chemical formula CH α O β S γ N δ ( 7 ) Attention should be paid to the different meaning of symbol β in the two emissions calculation appendices: in Appendix A.8 it refers to a fuel having the chemical formula CH α S γ N δ O ε (i.e. the formula C β H α S γ N δ O ε where β = 1, assuming one carbon atom per molecule), while in Appendix A.7 it refers to the oxygen-to-carbon ratio with CH α O β S γ N δ . Then β of Appendix A.7 corresponds to ε of Appendix A.8. ( 8 ) Mass fraction w accompanied by the symbol of the chemical component as a subscript. Appendix A.8.1 Diluted exhaust flow (CVS) calibration A.8.5. Calibration of CVS system The CVS system shall be calibrated by using an accurate flow-meter and a restricting device. The flow through the system shall be measured at different restriction settings, and the control parameters of the system shall be measured and related to the flow. Various types of flow-meters may be used, e.g. calibrated venturi, calibrated laminar flow-meter, calibrated turbine meter. A.8.5.1. Positive displacement pump (PDP) All the parameters related to the pump shall be simultaneously measured along with the parameters related to a calibration venturi which is connected in series with the pump. The calculated flow rate (in m 3 /s at pump inlet, absolute pressure and temperature) shall be plotted versus a correlation function which is the value of a specific combination of pump parameters. The linear equation which relates the pump flow and the correlation function shall be determined. If a CVS has a multiple speed drive, the calibration shall be performed for each range used. Temperature stability shall be maintained during calibration. Leaks in all the connections and ducting between the calibration venturi and the CVS pump shall be maintained lower than 0,3 per cent of the lowest flow point (highest restriction and lowest PDP speed point). The airflow rate ( q V CVS ) at each restriction setting (minimum 6 settings) shall be calculated in standard m 3 /s from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer's prescribed method. The airflow rate shall then be converted to pump flow ( V 0 ) in m 3 /rev at absolute pump inlet temperature and pressure as follows: where: To account for the interaction of pressure variations at the pump and the pump slip rate, the correlation function ( X 0 ) [s/rev] between pump speed, pressure differential from pump inlet to pump outlet and absolute pump outlet pressure shall be calculated as follows: where: A linear least-square fit shall be performed to generate the calibration equation as follows: with D 0 [m 3 /rev] and m [m 3 /s], intercept and slope respectively, describing the regression line. For a CVS system with multiple speeds, the calibration curves generated for the different pump flow ranges shall be approximately parallel, and the intercept values ( D 0 ) shall increase as the pump flow range decreases. The calculated values from the equation shall be within ± 0,5 per cent of the measured value of V 0 . Values of m will vary from one pump to another. Particulate influx over time will cause the pump slip to decrease, as reflected by lower values for m . Therefore, calibration shall be performed at pump start-up, after major maintenance, and if the total system verification indicates a change of the slip rate. A.8.5.2. Critical flow venturi (CFV) Calibration of the CFV is based upon the flow equation for a critical venturi. Gas flow is a function of venturi inlet pressure and temperature. To determine the range of critical flow, K V shall be plotted as a function of venturi inlet pressure. For critical (choked) flow, K V will have a relatively constant value. As pressure decreases (vacuum increases), the venturi becomes unchoked and K V decreases, which indicates that the CFV is operated outside the permissible range. The airflow rate ( q V CVS ) at each restriction setting (minimum 8 settings) shall be calculated in standard m 3 /s from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer's prescribed method. The calibration coefficient where: The average K V and the standard deviation shall be calculated. The standard deviation shall not exceed ± 0,3 per cent of the average K V . A.8.5.3. Subsonic venturi (SSV) Calibration of the SSV is based upon the flow equation for a subsonic venturi. Gas flow is a function of inlet pressure and temperature, pressure drop between the SSV inlet and throat, as shown in equation (A.8-41). The airflow rate ( q V SSV ) at each restriction setting (minimum 16 settings) shall be calculated in standard m 3 /s from the flow-meter data using the manufacturer's prescribed method. The discharge coefficient shall be calculated from the calibration data for each setting as follows: where: To determine the range of subsonic flow, C d shall be plotted as a function of Reynolds number Re , at the SSV throat. The Re at the SSV throat shall be calculated with the following equation: where: Because q VSSV is an input to the Re equation, the calculations shall be started with an initial guess for q VSSV or C d of the calibration venturi, and repeated until q V SSV converges. The convergence method shall be accurate to 0,1 per cent of point or better. For a minimum of sixteen points in the region of subsonic flow, the calculated values of C d from the resulting calibration curve fit equation shall be within ± 0,5 per cent of the measured C d for each calibration point. Appendix A.8.2 Drift correction A.8.6. Calculations in this appendix are performed as described in Appendix A.7.2 to Appendix A.7 to Annex 4B. where: ANNEX 5 TEST CYCLES 1. Test cycles 1.1. Steady-state discrete-mode testing 1.2. Steady-state ramped-modal testing 1.3. Transient cycle ( 1 ) Identical to C1 cycle as described in paragraph 8.3. of ISO 8178-4: 2007 (corr. 2008). ( *1 ) Denormalization speed ( n denorm ) shall be used in place of rated speed for engines tested according to Annex 4B and is defined in paragraph 7.7.1.1. of Annex 4B. In this case ( n denorm ) shall also be used in place of rated speed when determining the intermediate speed. ( *2 ) Reference speed is only optionally applicable for engines tested according to Annex 4A and is defined in paragraph 4.3.1. of Annex 4A. ( 2 ) Identical to D2 cycle as described in paragraph 8.4. of ISO 8178-4: 2007 (corr. 2008). ( 3 ) For a better illustration of the prime power definition, see figure 2 of ISO 8528-1: 2005. ( 1 ) Speed terms as per footnote of the steady-state discrete mode test. ( 2 ) The percent torque is relative to the maximum torque at the commanded engine speed. ( 3 ) Advance from one mode to the next within a 20 s transition phase. During the transition phase, command a linear progression from the torque setting of the current mode to the torque setting of the next mode, and simultaneously command a similar linear progression for engine speed if there is a change in speed setting ( 4 ) The percent torque is relative to maximum test torque. ( 5 ) Advance from one mode to the next within a 20 s transition phase. During the transition phase, command a linear progression from the torque setting of the current mode to the torque setting of the next mode. ANNEX 6 Technical characteristics of reference fuel prescribed for approval tests and to verify conformity of production ( 1 ) Table 1 For power bands D to G Table 2 For power bands H to K Table 3 For power bands L to P and Q and R ( 1 ) All fuel characteristics and limit values are to be kept under review in light of trends in the markets. ( 2 ) If it is required to calculate thermal efficiency of an engine or vehicle, the calorific value of the fuel can be calculated from: where: ( 3 ) The values quoted in the specification are "true values". In establishment of their limit values the terms of ASTM D3244 "Defining a basis for petroleum produce quality disputes" have been applied and in fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; in fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for statistical reasons, the manufacturer of fuel should nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value in the case of quotations of maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify the question as to whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ASTM D3244 should be applied. ( 4 ) The figures quoted show the evaporated quantities (percentage recovered + percentage loss). ( 5 ) The range of cetane is not in accordance with the requirement of a minimum range of 4R. However, in cases of dispute between fuel supplier and fuel user, the terms in ASTM D3244 can be used to resolve such disputes provided replicate measurements, of sufficient number to achieve the necessary precision, are made in preference to single determinations. ( 6 ) Even though oxidation stability is controlled, it is likely that shelf life will be limited. Advice should be sought from the supplier as to storage conditions and life. ( 7 ) This fuel should be based straight run and cracked hydrocarbon distillate components only; desulphurization is allowed. It shall not contain any metallic additives or cetane improver additives. ( 8 ) Lower values are permitted, in which case the cetane number of the reference fuel used is to be reported. ( 9 ) Higher values are permitted, in which case the sulphur content of the reference fuel used is to be reported. ( 10 ) To be kept under constant review in the light of trends in the markets. For the purpose of the initial approval of an engine on request of the applicant, a 0,05 per cent mass nominal sulphur level (minimum 0,03 per cent mass) is permissible, in which case the measured particulate level shall be corrected upward to the average value that is nominally specified for fuel sulphur content (0,15 per cent mass) per the equation below: where: Equation for the calculation of the weighted specific fuel consumption: For the purpose of conformity of production assessments in accordance with paragraph 7.4.2., the requirements shall be met using reference fuel which complies with the minimum/maximum level of 0,1/0,2 per cent mass. ( 11 ) Higher values are permitted up to 855 kg/m 3 , in which case the density of the reference fuel used is to be reported. For the purpose of conformity of production assessments in accordance with paragraph 7.4.2., the requirements shall be met using reference fuel which complies with the minimum/maximum level of 835/845 kg/m 3 . ( 12 ) To be replaced by EN/ISO 6245 with effect of the date of implementation. ( 13 ) The values quoted in the specifications are "true values". In establishment of their limit values the terms of ISO 4259 "Petroleum products – Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test" have been applied and in fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; in fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for technical reasons, the manufacturer of fuels should nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value in the case of quotations of maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify the questions as to whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ISO 4259 should be applied. ( 14 ) The range for the cetane number is not in accordance with the requirements of a minimum range of 4R. However, in the case of a dispute between fuel supplier and fuel user, the terms of ISO 4259 may be used to resolve such disputes provided replicate measurements, of sufficient number to archive the necessary precision, are made in preference to single determinations. ( 15 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the test shall be reported. ( 16 ) Even though oxidation stability is controlled, it is likely that shelf life will be limited. Advice should be sought from the supplier as to storage conditions and life. ( 17 ) The values quoted in the specifications are "true values". In establishment of their limit values the terms of ISO 4259 "Petroleum products – Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test" have been applied and in fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account; in fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference is 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this measure, which is necessary for technical reasons, the manufacturer of fuels should nevertheless aim at a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and at the mean value in the case of quotations of maximum and minimum limits. Should it be necessary to clarify the questions as to whether a fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the terms of ISO 4259 should be applied. ( 18 ) The range for the cetane number is not in accordance with the requirements of a minimum range of 4R. However, in the case of a dispute between fuel supplier and fuel user, the terms of ISO 4259 may be used to resolve such disputes provided replicate measurements, of sufficient number to archive the necessary precision, are made in preference to single determinations. ( 19 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the Type I test shall be reported. ( 20 ) Even though oxidation stability is controlled, it is likely that shelf life will be limited. Advice should be sought from the supplier as to storage conditions and life. ANNEX 7 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUIPMENT AND AUXILIARIES ( 1 ) The complete inlet system shall be fitted as provided for the intended application: In other cases, an equivalent system may be used and a check should be made to ascertain that the intake pressure does not differ by more than 100 Pa from the upper limit specified by the manufacturer for a clean air filter. ( 2 ) The complete exhaust system shall be fitted as provided for the intended application: In other cases, an equivalent system may be installed provided the pressure measured does not differ by more than 1 000 Pa from the upper limit specified by the manufacturer. ( 3 ) If an exhaust brake is incorporated in the engine, the throttle valve shall be fixed in the fully open position. ( 4 ) The fuel feed pressure may be adjusted, if necessary, to reproduce the pressure existing in the particular engine application (particularly when a ‘fuel return’ system is used). ( 5 ) The cooling-liquid circulation shall be operated by the engine water pump only. Cooling of the liquid may be produced by an external circuit, such that the pressure loss of this circuit and the pressure at the pump inlet remain substantially the same as those of the engine cooling system. ( 6 ) The thermostat may be fixed in the fully open position. ( 7 ) When the cooling fan or blower is fitted for the test, the power absorbed shall be added to the results, except for cooling fans of air cooled engines directly fitted on the crankshaft. The fan or blower power shall be determined at the speeds used for the test either by calculation from standard characteristics or by practical tests. ( 8 ) Minimum power of the generator: the electrical power of the generator shall be limited to that necessary for operation of accessories which are indispensable for engine operation. If the connection of a battery is necessary, a fully charged battery in good condition shall be used. ( 9 ) Charge air-cooled engines shall be tested with charge air cooling, whether liquid - or air-cooled, but if the manufacturer prefers, a test bench system may replace the air cooler. In either case, the measurement of power at each speed shall be made with the maximum pressure drop and the minimum temperature drop of the engine air across the charge air cooler on the test bench system as those specified by the manufacturer. ( 10 ) The power for electrical or other starting systems shall be provided from the test bed. ANNEX 8 DURABILITY REQUIREMENTS 1. VERIFYING THE DURABILITY OF CI ENGINES OF POWER BANDS H TO P This annex shall apply to CI engines for power bands H to P only. 1.1. Manufacturers shall determine a Deterioration Factor (DF) value for each regulated pollutant for all engine families of power bands H to P. Such DFs shall be used for type approval and production line testing. 1.1.1. Test to establish DFs shall be conducted as follows: 1.1.1.1. The manufacturer shall conduct durability tests to accumulate engine operating hours according to a test schedule that is selected on the basis of good engineering judgement to be representative of in-use engine operation in respect to characterising emission performance deterioration. The durability test period should typically represent the equivalent of at least one quarter of the emission durability period (EDP). Service accumulation operating hours may be acquired through running engines on a dynamometer test bed or from actual in-field machine operation. Accelerated durability tests can be applied whereby the service accumulation schedule is performed at a higher load factor than typically experienced in the field. The acceleration factor relating the number of engine durability test hours to the equivalent number of EDP hours shall be determined by the engine manufacturer based on good engineering judgement. During the period of the durability test, no emission sensitive components can be serviced or replaced other than to the routine service schedule recommended by the manufacturer. The test engine, subsystems, or components to be used to determine exhaust emission DFs for an engine family, or for engine families of equivalent emission control system technology, shall be selected by the engine manufacturer on the basis of good engineering judgement. The criterion is that the test engine should represent the emission deterioration characteristics of the engine families that will apply the resulting DF values for type approval. Engines of different bore and stroke, different configuration, different air management systems, different fuel systems can be considered as equivalent in respect to emissions deterioration characteristics if there is a reasonable technical basis for such determination. DF values from another manufacturer can be applied if there is a reasonable basis for considering technology equivalence with respect to emissions deterioration, and evidence that the tests have been carried according to the specified requirements. Emissions testing shall be performed according to the procedures defined in this Regulation for the test engine after initial run-in but before any service accumulation test, and at the completion of the durability test. Emission tests can also be performed at intervals during the service accumulation test period, and applied in determining the deterioration trend. 1.1.1.2. The service accumulation tests or the emissions tests performed to determine deterioration need not be witnessed by the Type Approval Authority. 1.1.1.3. Determination of DF values from durability tests An additive DF is defined as the value obtained by subtraction of the emission value determine at the beginning of the EDP, from the emissions value determined to represent the emission performance at the end of the EDP. A multiplicative DF is defined as the emission level determined for the end of the EDP divided by the emission value recorded at the beginning of the EDP. Separate DF values shall be established for each of the pollutants covered by the legislation. In the case of establishing a DF value relative to the NO x + HC standard, for an additive DF, this is determined based on the sum of the pollutants notwithstanding that a negative deterioration for one pollutant may not offset deterioration for the other. For a multiplicative NO x + HC DF, separate HC and NO x DFs shall be determined and applied separately when calculating the deteriorated emission levels from an emissions test result before combining the resultant deteriorated NO x and HC values to establish compliance with the standard. In cases where the testing is not conducted for the full EDP, the emission values at the end of the EDP is determined by extrapolation of the emission deterioration trend established for the test period, to the full EDP. When emissions test results have been recorded periodically during the service accumulation durability testing, standard statistical processing techniques based on good practice shall be applied to determine the emission levels at the end of the EDP; statistical significance testing can be applied in the determination of the final emissions values. If the calculation results in a value of less than 1,00 for a multiplicative DF, or less than 0,00 for an additive DF, then the DF shall be 1,0 or 0,00, respectively. 1.1.1.4. A manufacturer may, with the approval of the Type Approval Authority, use DF values established from results of durability tests conducted to obtain DF values for certification of on-road HD CI engines. This will be allowed if there is technological equivalency between the test on-road engine and the non-road engine families applying the DF values for certification. The DF values derived from on-road engine emission durability test results must be calculated on the basis of EDP values defined in paragraph 3. 1.1.1.5. In the case where an engine family uses established technology, an analysis based on good engineering practices may be used in lieu of testing to determine a deterioration factor for that engine family subject to approval of the Type Approval Authority. 1.2. DF information in approval applications 1.2.1. Additive DFs shall be specified for each pollutant in an engine family approval application for CI engines not using any after-treatment device. 1.2.2. Multiplicative DFs shall be specified for each pollutant in an engine family approval application for CI engines using an after-treatment device. 1.2.3. The manufacturer shall furnish the Type Approval Authority on request with information to support the DF values. This would typically include emission test results, service accumulation schedule, maintenance procedures together with information to support engineering judgements of technological equivalency, if applicable. 2. VERIFYING THE DURABILITY OF CI ENGINES OF POWER BANDS Q TO R 2.1 General 2.1.1. This paragraph shall apply to CI engines of power band Q to R. At the request of the manufacturer, it may also be applied to CI engines of power bands H to P as an alternative to the requirements in paragraph 1 of this annex. 2.1.2. This paragraph 2. details the procedures for selecting engines to be tested over a service accumulation schedule for the purpose of determining deterioration factors for stage IV engine type approval and conformity of production assessments. The deterioration factors shall be applied in accordance with paragraph 2.4.7. to the emissions measured according to Annex 4B to this Regulation. 2.1.3. The service accumulation tests or the emissions tests performed to determine deterioration need not be witnessed by the Type Approval Authority. 2.1.4. This paragraph 2. also details the emission-related and non-emission-related maintenance that should be or may be carried out on engines undergoing a service accumulation schedule. Such maintenance shall conform to the maintenance performed on in-service engines and communicated to owners of new engines. 2.1.5. At the request of the manufacturer, the Type Approval Authority may allow the use of deterioration factors that have been established using alternative procedures to those specified in paragraphs 2.4.1. to 2.4.5. In this case, the manufacturer must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Type Approval Authority that the alternative procedures that have been used are no less rigorous than those contained in paragraphs 2.4.1 to 2.4.5. 2.2. Reserved 2.3. Selection of engines for establishing emission durability period deterioration factors 2.3.1. Engines shall be selected from the engine family defined in Annex 1B of this Regulation for emission testing to establish emission durability period deterioration factors. 2.3.2. Engines from different engine families may be further combined into families based on the type of exhaust after-treatment system utilised. In order to place engines with different cylinder configuration but having similar technical specifications and installation for the exhaust after-treatment systems into the same engine after-treatment system family, the manufacturer shall provide data to the Type Approval Authority that demonstrates that the emissions reduction performance of such engine systems is similar. 2.3.3. One engine representing the engine-after-treatment system family, as determined in accordance with paragraph 2.3.2., shall be selected by the engine manufacturer for testing over the service accumulation schedule defined in paragraph 2.4.2., and shall be reported to the Type Approval Authority before any testing commences. 2.3.3.1. If the Type Approval Authority decides that the worst case emissions of the engine-after-treatment system family can be characterised better by another engine then the test engine shall be selected jointly by the Type Approval Authority and the engine manufacturer. 2.4. Establishing emission durability period deterioration factors 2.4.1. General Deterioration factors applicable to an engine-after-treatment system family are developed from the selected engines based on a service accumulation schedule that includes periodic testing for gaseous and particulate emissions over the NRSC and NRTC tests. 2.4.2. Service accumulation schedule Service accumulation schedules may be carried out at the choice of the manufacturer by running a machine equipped with the selected engine over an "in-service" accumulation schedule or by running the selected engine over a "dynamometer service" accumulation schedule. 2.4.2.1. In-service and dynamometer service accumulation 2.4.2.2. If the Type Approval Authority decides that additional measurements need to be performed between the points selected by the manufacturer it shall notify the manufacturer. The revised service accumulation schedule shall be prepared by the manufacturer and agreed by the Type Approval Authority. 2.4.3. Engine testing 2.4.3.1. Engine system stabilisation 2.4.3.2. Service accumulation testing 2.4.4. Reporting 2.4.4.1. The results of all emission tests (hot NRTC and NRSC) conducted during the service accumulation schedule shall be made available to the Type Approval Authority. If any emission test is declared to be void, the manufacturer shall provide an explanation of why the test has been declared void. In such a case, another series of emission tests shall be carried out within the following 100 hours of service accumulation. 2.4.4.2. The manufacturer shall retain records of all information concerning all the emission tests and maintenance carried out on the engine during the service accumulation schedule. This information shall be submitted to the Type Approval Authority along with the results of the emission tests conducted over the service accumulation schedule. 2.4.5. Determination of deterioration factors 2.4.5.1. For each pollutant measured over the hot NRTC and NRSC cycles at each test point during the service accumulation schedule, a "best fit" linear regression analysis shall be made on the basis of all test results. The results of each test for each pollutant shall be expressed to the same number of decimal places as the limit value for that pollutant, as applicable to the engine family, plus one additional decimal place. In accordance with paragraph 2.4.2.1.4. or paragraph 2.4.2.1.5., if only one test cycle (hot NRTC or NRSC) has been run at each test point, the regression analysis shall be made only on the basis of the test results from the test cycle run at each test point. At the request of the manufacturer and with the prior approval of the Type Approval Authority, non linear regression is permitted. 2.4.5.2. The emission values for each pollutant at the start of the service accumulation schedule and at the emission durability period end point that is applicable for the engine under test shall be calculated from the regression equation. If the service accumulation schedule is shorter than the emission durability period, the emission values at the emission durability period end point shall be determined by extrapolation of the regression equation as determined in paragraph 2.4.5.1. In the case that emission values are used for engine families in the same engine-after-treatment family but with different emission durability periods, then the emission values at the emission durability period end point shall be recalculated for each emission durability period by extrapolation or interpolation of the regression equation as determined in paragraph 2.4.5.1. 2.4.5.3. The deterioration factor (DF) for each pollutant is defined as the ratio of the applied emission values at the emission durability period end point and at the start of the service accumulation schedule (multiplicative deterioration factor). At the request of the manufacturer and with the prior approval of the Type Approval Authority, an additive DF for each pollutant may be applied. The additive DF is defined as the difference between the calculated emission values at the emission durability period end point and at the start of the service accumulation schedule. An example for determination of DF s by using linear regression is shown in figure 1 for NO x emission. Mixing of multiplicative and additive DF s within one set of pollutants is not permitted. If the calculation results in a value of less than 1,00 for a multiplicative DF, or less than 0,00 for an additive DF, then the deterioration factor shall be 1,0 or 0,00, respectively. In accordance with paragraph 2.4.2.1.4., if it has been agreed that only one test cycle (hot NRTC or NRSC) be run at each test point and the other test cycle (hot NRTC or NRSC) run only at the beginning and end of the service accumulation schedule, the deterioration factor calculated for the test cycle that has been run at each test point shall be applicable also for the other test cycle. Figure 1 Example of DF determination 2.4.6. Assigned deterioration factors 2.4.6.1. As an alternative to using a service accumulation schedule to determine DF s , engine manufacturers may select to use the following assigned multiplicative DF s : Assigned additive DF s are not given. It is not permitted to transform the assigned multiplicative DF s into additive DF s . Where assigned DF s are used, the manufacturer shall present to the Type Approval Authority robust evidence that the emission control components can reasonably be expected to have the emission durability associated with those assigned factors. This evidence may be based upon design analysis, or tests, or a combination of both. 2.4.7. Application of deterioration factors 2.4.7.1. The engines shall meet the respective emission limits for each pollutant, as applicable to the engine family, after application of the deterioration factors to the test result as measured in accordance with Annex 4B to this Regulation (cycle-weighted specific emission for particulate and each individual gas). Depending on the type of DF, the following provisions apply: 2.4.7.2. For a multiplicative NO x +HC DF, separate HC and NO x DF s shall be determined and applied separately when calculating the deteriorated emission levels from an emissions test result before combining the resultant deteriorated NO x and HC values to establish compliance with the emission limit. 2.4.7.3. The manufacturer may select to carry across the DF s determined for an engine-after-treatment system family to an engine system that does not fall into the same engine-after-treatment system family. In such cases, the manufacturer shall demonstrate to the Type Approval Authority that the engine system for which the engine-after-treatment system family was originally tested and the engine system for which the DF s are being carried across have similar technical specifications and installation requirements on the machine and that the emissions of such engine or engine system are similar. In the case that DF s are carried across to an engine system with a different emission durability period, then the DF s shall be recalculated for the applicable emission durability period by extrapolation or interpolation of the regression equation as determined in paragraph 2.4.5.1. 2.4.7.4. The DF for each pollutant for each applicable test cycle shall be recorded in the test result document set out in Appendix 1 to Annex 2 to this Regulation. 2.4.8. Checking of conformity of production 2.4.8.1. Conformity of production for emissions compliance is checked on the basis of paragraph 7. of this Regulation. 2.4.8.2. The manufacturer may select to measure the pollutant emissions before any exhaust after-treatment system at the same time as the type-approval test is being performed. In so doing, the manufacturer may develop informal DF s separately for the engine and for the after-treatment system that may be used by the manufacturer as an aid to end of production line auditing. 2.4.8.3. For the purposes of type-approval, only the DF s determined in accordance with paragraph 2.4.5. or 2.4.6. shall be recorded in the test result document set out in Appendix 1 to Annex 2 to this Regulation. 2.5. Maintenance For the purpose of the service accumulation schedule, maintenance shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer's manual for service and maintenance. 2.5.1. Emission-related scheduled maintenance 2.5.1.1. Emission-related scheduled maintenance during engine running, undertaken for the purpose of conducting a service accumulation schedule, must occur at equivalent intervals to those that shall be specified in the manufacturer's maintenance instructions to the owner of the machine or engine. This maintenance schedule may be updated as necessary throughout the service accumulation schedule provided that no maintenance operation is deleted from the maintenance schedule after the operation has been performed on the test engine. 2.5.1.2. The engine manufacturer shall specify for the service accumulation schedules any adjustment, cleaning, maintenance (where necessary) and scheduled exchange of the following items: 2.5.1.3. Critical emission-related scheduled maintenance shall only be performed if intended to be performed in-use and the requirement to perform such maintenance is to be communicated to the owner of the machine. 2.5.2. Changes to scheduled maintenance 2.5.2.1. The manufacturer shall submit a request to the Type Approval Authority for approval of any new scheduled maintenance that it wishes to perform during the service accumulation schedule and subsequently to recommend to owners of machines and engines. The request shall be accompanied by data supporting the need for the new scheduled maintenance and the maintenance interval. 2.5.3. Non-emission-related scheduled maintenance 2.5.3.1. Non-emission-related scheduled maintenance which is reasonable and technically necessary (for example oil change, oil filter change, fuel filter change, air filter change, cooling system maintenance, idle speed adjustment, governor, engine bolt torque, valve lash, injector lash, adjustment of the tension of any drive-belt, etc.) may be performed on engines or machines selected for the service accumulation schedule at the least frequent intervals recommended by the manufacturer to the owner (for example not at the intervals recommended for severe service). 2.5.4. Repair 2.5.4.1. Repairs to the components of an engine system selected for testing over a service accumulation schedule shall be performed only as a result of component failure or engine system malfunction. Repair of the engine itself, the emission control system or the fuel system is not permitted except to the extent defined in paragraph 2.5.4.2. 2.5.4.2. If the engine itself, the emission control system or the fuel system fail during the service accumulation schedule, the service accumulation shall be considered void, and a new service accumulation shall be started with a new engine system, unless the failed components are replaced with equivalent components that have been subject to a similar number of hours of service accumulation. 3. EMISSION DURABILITY PERIOD FOR ENGINES OF POWER BANDS H TO R 3.1. Manufacturers shall use the emission durability period in Table 1 of this paragraph. Table 1 Emission durability period for CI Engines (hours) of power bands H to R ANNEX 9 REQUIREMENTS TO ENSURE THE CORRECT OPERATION OF NOx CONTROL MEASURES 1. INTRODUCTION This annex sets out the requirements to ensure the correct operation of NO x control measures. It includes requirements for engines that rely on the use of a reagent in order to reduce emissions. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS The engine system shall be equipped with a NO x Control Diagnostic system (NCD) able to identify the NO x control malfunctions (NCMs) considered by this annex. Any engine system covered by this paragraph shall be designed, constructed and installed so as to be capable of meeting these requirements throughout the normal life of the engine under normal conditions of use. In achieving this objective, it is acceptable that engines which have been used in excess of the useful life period as specified in paragraph 3.1. of Annex 8 to this Regulation show some deterioration in the performance and the sensitivity of the NO x Control Diagnostic system (NCD), such that the thresholds specified in this annex may be exceeded before the warning and/or inducement systems are activated. 2.1. Required information 2.1.1. If the emission control system requires a reagent, the characteristics of that reagent, including the type of reagent, information on concentration when the reagent is in solution, operational temperature conditions and reference to international standards for composition and quality must be specified by the manufacturer, in paragraph 2.2.1.13. of Appendix 1 and in paragraph 2.2.1.13. of Appendix 3 to Annex 1A to this Regulation. 2.1.2. Detailed written information fully describing the functional operation characteristics of the operator warning system in paragraph 4. and of the operator inducement system in paragraph 5. shall be provided to the Type Approval Authority at the time of type-approval. 2.1.3. The manufacturer shall provide installation documents that, when used by the OEM, will ensure that the engine, inclusive of the emission control system that is part of the approved engine type, when installed in the machine, will operate, in conjunction with the necessary machinery parts, in a manner that will comply with the requirements of this annex. This documentation shall include the detailed technical requirements and the provisions of the engine system (software, hardware, and communication) needed for the correct installation of the engine system in the machine. 2.2. Operating conditions 2.2.1. The NO x control diagnostic system shall be operational at the following conditions: This paragraph shall not apply in the case of monitoring for reagent level in the storage tank where monitoring shall be conducted under all conditions where measurement is technically feasible (for instance, under all conditions when a liquid reagent is not frozen). 2.3. Reagent freeze protection 2.3.1. It is permitted to use a heated or a non-heated reagent tank and dosing system. A heated system shall meet the requirements of paragraph 2.3.2. A non-heated system shall meet the requirements of paragraph 2.3.3. 2.3.1.1. The use of a non-heated reagent tank and dosing system shall be indicated in the written instructions to the owner of the machine. 2.3.2. Reagent tank and dosing system 2.3.2.1. If the reagent has frozen, the reagent shall be available for use within a maximum of 70 minutes after the start of the engine at 266 K (- 7 °C) ambient temperature. 2.3.2.2. Design criteria for a heated system A heated system shall be so designed that it meets the performance requirements set out in this paragraph when tested using the procedure defined. 2.3.2.3. Evaluation of the design criteria may be performed in a cold chamber test cell using an entire machine or parts representative of those to be installed on a machine or based on field tests. 2.3.3. Activation of the operator warning and inducement system for a non-heated system 2.3.3.1. The operator warning system described in paragraph 4. shall be activated if no reagent dosing occurs at an ambient temperature ≤ 266 K (- 7 °C). 2.3.3.2. The severe inducement system described in paragraph 5.4. shall be activated if no reagent dosing occurs within a maximum of 70 minutes after engine start at an ambient temperature ≤ 266 K (- 7 °C). 2.4. Diagnostic requirements 2.4.1. The NO x Control Diagnostic system (NCD) shall be able to identify the NO x control malfunctions (NCMs) considered by this annex by means of Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTCs) stored in the computer memory and to communicate that information off-board upon request. 2.4.2. Requirements for recording Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTCs) 2.4.2.1. The NCD system shall record a DTC for each distinct NO x Control Malfunction (NCM). 2.4.2.2. The NCD system shall conclude within 60 minutes of engine operation whether a detectable malfunction is present. At this time, a "confirmed and active" DTC shall be stored and the warning system be activated according to paragraph 4. 2.4.2.3. In cases where more than 60 minutes running time is required for the monitors to accurately detect and confirm a NCM (e.g. monitors using statistical models or with respect to fluid consumption on the machine), the Type Approval Authority may permit a longer period for monitoring provided the manufacturer justifies the need for the longer period (for example by technical rationale, experimental results, in house experience, etc.). 2.4.3. Requirements for erasing Diagnostic trouble codes (DTCs) 2.4.4. An NCD system shall not be programmed or otherwise designed to partially or totally deactivate based on age of the machine during the actual life of the engine, nor shall the system contain any algorithm or strategy designed to reduce the effectiveness of the NCD system over time. 2.4.5. Any reprogrammable computer codes or operating parameters of the NCD system shall be resistant to tampering. 2.4.6. NCD engine family The manufacturer is responsible for determining the composition of an NCD engine family. Grouping engine systems within an NCD engine family shall be based on good engineering judgment and be subject to approval by the Type Approval Authority. Engines that do not belong to the same engine family may still belong to the same NCD engine family. 2.4.6.1. Parameters defining an NCD engine family An NCD engine family is characterized by basic design parameters that shall be common to engine systems within the family. In order that engine systems are considered to belong to the same NCD engine family, the following list of basic parameters shall be similar: These similarities shall be demonstrated by the manufacturer by means of relevant engineering demonstration or other appropriate procedures and subject to the approval of the Type Approval Authority. The manufacturer may request approval by the Type Approval Authority of minor differences in the methods of monitoring/diagnosing the NCD system due to engine system configuration variation, when these methods are considered similar by the manufacturer and they differ only in order to match specific characteristics of the components under consideration (e.g. size, exhaust flow, etc.); or their similarities are based on good engineering judgment. 3. MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 4. OPERATOR WARNING SYSTEM 5. OPERATOR INDUCEMENT SYSTEM 5.1. The machine shall incorporate an operator inducement system based on one of the following principles: 5.2. Upon prior approval of the Type Approval Authority, the engine may be fitted with a means to disable the operator inducement during an emergency declared by a national or regional government, their emergency services or their armed services. 5.3. Low-level inducement system Figure 1 Low-level inducement torque reduction scheme 5.4. Severe inducement system 5.5. In order to account for safety concerns and to allow for self-healing diagnostics, use of an inducement override function for releasing full engine power is permitted, provided it 5.6. The operator inducement system shall be deactivated when the conditions for its activation have ceased to exist. The operator inducement system shall not be automatically deactivated without the reason for its activation having been remedied. 5.7. Details of the operator inducement system activation and deactivation procedures are described in Appendix 2 of this annex. 5.8. As part of the application for type-approval under this Regulation, the manufacturer shall demonstrate the operation of the operator inducement system, as specified in Appendix 2 of this annex. 6. REAGENT AVAILABILITY 6.1. Reagent level indicator The machine shall include an indicator that clearly informs the operator of the level of reagent in the reagent storage tank. The minimum acceptable performance level for the reagent indicator is that it shall continuously indicate the reagent level whilst the operator warning system referred to in paragraph 4. is activated. The reagent indicator may be in the form of an analogue or digital display, and may show the level as a proportion of the full tank capacity, the amount of remaining reagent, or the estimated operating hours remaining. 6.2. Activation of the operator warning system 6.3. Activation of the operator inducement system 7. REAGENT QUALITY MONITORING 7.1. The engine or machine shall include a means of determining the presence of an incorrect reagent on board a machine. 7.2. Activation of the operator warning system When the monitoring system confirms that the reagent quality is incorrect, the operator warning system described in paragraph 4. shall be activated. When the warning system includes a message display system, it shall display a message indicating the reason of the warning (for example "incorrect urea detected", "incorrect AdBlue detected", or "incorrect reagent detected"). 7.3. Activation of the operator inducement system 8. REAGENT DOSING ACTIVITY 8.1. The engine shall include a means of determining interruption of dosing. 8.2. Reagent dosing activity counter 8.3. Activation of the operator warning system The operator warning system described in paragraph 4. shall be activated in the case of interruption of dosing which sets the dosing activity counter in accordance with paragraph 8.2.1. When the warning system includes a message display system, it shall display a message indicating the reason of the warning (e.g. "urea dosing malfunction", "AdBlue dosing malfunction", or "reagent dosing malfunction"). 8.4. Activation of the operator inducement system 9. MONITORING FAILURES THAT MAY BE ATTRIBUTED TO TAMPERING 9.1. In addition to the level of reagent in the reagent tank, the reagent quality, and the interruption of dosing, the following failures shall be monitored because they may be attributed to tampering: 9.2. Monitoring requirements 9.2.1. The NO x Control Diagnostic (NCD) system shall be monitored for electrical failures and for removal or deactivation of any sensor that prevents it from diagnosing any other failures mentioned in paragraphs 6. to 8. (component monitoring). A non-exhaustive list of sensors that affect the diagnostic capability are those directly measuring NO x concentration, urea quality sensors, ambient sensors and sensors used for monitoring reagent dosing activity, reagent level, or reagent consumption. 9.2.2. EGR valve counter 9.2.3. NCD system counter(s) 9.3. Activation of the operator warning system The operator warning system described in paragraph 4. shall be activated in case any of the failures specified in paragraph 9.1. occur, and shall indicate that an urgent repair is required. When the warning system includes a message display system, it shall display a message indicating the reason of the warning (for example "reagent dosing valve disconnected", or "critical emission failure"). 9.4. Activation of the operator inducement system 9.4.1. The low-level inducement system described in paragraph 5.3. shall be activated if a failure specified in paragraph 9.1. is not rectified within a maximum of 36 engine operating hours after the activation of the operator warning system in paragraph 9.3. 9.4.2. The severe inducement system described in paragraph 5.4. shall be activated if a failure specified in paragraph 9.1. is not rectified within a maximum of 100 engine operating hours after the activation of the operator warning system in paragraph 9.3. 9.4.3. The number of hours prior to activation of the inducement systems shall be reduced in case of a repetitive occurrence of the malfunction according to the mechanism described in Appendix 2 of this annex. 9.5. As an alternative to the requirements in paragraph 9.2., the manufacturer may use a NO x sensor located in the exhaust gas. In this case, Appendix 1 Demonstration requirements 1. GENERAL The compliance to the requirements of this annex shall be demonstrated during type-approval by performing, as illustrated in Table 1 and specified in this paragraph: Table 1 Illustration of the content of the demonstration process according to the provisions in paragraphs 3. and 4. 2. ENGINE FAMILIES AND NCD ENGINE FAMILIES The compliance of an engine family or an NCD engine family with the requirements of this appendix may be demonstrated by testing one of the members of the considered family, provided the manufacturer demonstrates to the Type Approval Authority that the monitoring systems necessary for complying with the requirements of this annex are similar within the family. 2.1. The demonstration that the monitoring systems for other members of the NCD family are similar may be performed by presenting to the approval authorities such elements as algorithms, functional analyses, etc. 2.2. The test engine is selected by the manufacturer in agreement with the Type Approval Authority. It may or may not be the parent engine of the considered family. 2.3. In the case where engines of an engine family belong to an NCD engine family that has already been type-approved according to paragraph 2.1. (Figure 3), the compliance of that engine family is deemed to be demonstrated without further testing, provided the manufacturer demonstrates to the authority that the monitoring systems necessary for complying with the requirements of this annex are similar within the considered engine and NCD engine families. Figure 3 Previously demonstrated conformity of an NCD engine family 3. DEMONSTRATION OF THE WARNING SYSTEM ACTIVATION 3.1. The compliance of the warning system activation shall be demonstrated by performing two tests: lack of reagent, and one failure category considered in paragraphs 7. to 9. of this annex. 3.2. Selection of the failures to be tested 3.2.1. For the purpose of demonstrating the activation of the warning system in case of a wrong reagent quality, a reagent shall be selected with a dilution of the active ingredient at least as dilute as that communicated by the manufacturer according to the requirements of paragraph 7. of this annex 3.2.2. For the purpose of demonstrating the activation of the warning system in case of failures that may be attributed to tampering, and are defined in paragraph 9. of this annex, the selection shall be performed according to the following requirements: 3.3. Demonstration 3.3.1. For the purpose of this demonstration, a separate test shall be performed for each of the failures considered in paragraph 3.1. 3.3.2. During a test, no failure shall be present other than the one addressed by the test. 3.3.3. Prior to starting a test, all DTC shall have been erased. 3.3.4. At the request of the manufacturer, and with the agreement of the Type Approval Authority, the failures subject to testing may be simulated. 3.3.5. Detection of failures other than lack of reagent For failures other than lack of reagent, once the failure installed or simulated, the detection of that failure shall be performed as follows: 3.3.6. Detection in case of lack of reagent availability For the purpose of demonstrating the activation of the warning system in case of lack of reagent availability, the engine system shall be operated over one or more NCD test cycles at the discretion of the manufacturer. 3.3.7. NCD test cycle 3.4. The demonstration of the warning system activation is deemed to be accomplished if, at the end of each demonstration test performed according to paragraph 3.3., the warning system has been properly activated. 4. DEMONSTRATION OF THE INDUCEMENT SYSTEM ACTIVATION 4.1. The demonstration of the inducement system activation shall be done by tests performed on an engine test bench. 4.1.1. Any components or sub-systems not physically mounted on the engine system, such as, but not limited to, ambient temperature sensors, level sensors, and operator warning and information systems, that are required in order to perform the demonstrations shall be connected to the engine system for that purpose, or shall be simulated, to the satisfaction of the Type Approval Authority. 4.1.2. If the manufacturer chooses, and subject to the agreement of the Type Approval Authority, the demonstration tests may be performed on a complete machine or machinery either by mounting the machine on a suitable test bed or by running it on a test track under controlled conditions. 4.2. The test sequence shall demonstrate the activation of the inducement system in case of lack of reagent and in case of one of the failures defined in paragraphs 7., 8., or 9. of this annex. 4.3. For the purpose of this demonstration, 4.4. The manufacturer shall, in addition, demonstrate the operation of the inducement system under those failure conditions defined in paragraphs 7., 8. or 9. of this annex which have not been chosen for use in demonstration tests described in paragraphs 4.1. to 4.3. These additional demonstrations may be performed by presentation to the Type Approval Authority of a technical case using evidence such as algorithms, functional analyses, and the result of previous tests. 4.4.1. These additional demonstrations shall in particular demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Type Approval Authority the inclusion of the correct torque reduction mechanism in the engine ECU. 4.5. Demonstration test of the low level inducement system 4.5.1. This demonstration starts when the warning system or when appropriate "continuous" warning system has been activated as a result of the detection of a failure selected by the Type Approval Authority. 4.5.2. When the system is being checked for its reaction to the case of lack of reagent in the tank, the engine system shall be run until the reagent availability has reached a value of 2,5 per cent of the nominal full capacity of the tank or the value declared by the manufacturer in accordance with paragraph 6.3.1. of this annex at which the low-level inducement system is intended to operate. 4.5.3. When the system is checked for its reaction in the case of a failure other than a lack of reagent in the tank, the engine system shall be run for the relevant number of operating hours indicated in Table 3 of this appendix or, at the choice of the manufacturer, until the relevant counter has reached the value at which the low-level inducement system is activated. 4.5.4. The demonstration of the low-level inducement system shall be deemed to be accomplished if, at the end of each demonstration test performed according to paragraphs 4.5.2. and 4.5.3., the manufacturer has demonstrated to the Type Approval Authority that the engine ECU has activated the torque reduction mechanism. 4.6. Demonstration test of the severe inducement system 4.6.1. This demonstration shall start from a condition where the low-level inducement system has been previously activated and may be performed as a continuation of the tests undertaken to demonstrate the low-level inducement system. 4.6.2. When the system is checked for its reaction in the case of lack of reagent in the tank, the engine system shall be run until the reagent tank is empty, or has reached the level below 2,5 per cent of the nominal full capacity of the tank at which the manufacturer has declared to activate the severe inducement system. 4.6.3. When the system is checked for its reaction in the case of a failure that is not a lack of reagent in the tank, the engine system shall then be run for the relevant number of operating hours indicated in Table 3 of this appendix or, at the choice of the manufacturer, until the relevant counter has reached the value at which the severe inducement system is activated. 4.6.4. The demonstration of the severe inducement system shall be deemed to be accomplished if, at the end of each demonstration test performed according to paragraphs 4.6.2. and 4.6.3., the manufacturer has demonstrated to the Type Approval Authority that the severe inducement mechanism considered in this annex has been activated. 4.7. Alternatively, if the manufacturer chooses, and subject to the agreement of the Type Approval Authority, the demonstration of the inducement mechanisms may be performed on a complete machine in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 5.4., either by mounting the machine on a suitable test bed or by running it on a test track under controlled conditions. 4.7.1. The machine shall be operated until the counter associated with the selected failure has reached the relevant number of operating hours indicated in Table 3 of this appendix or, as appropriate, until either the reagent tank is empty or, has reached the level below 2,5 per cent of the nominal full capacity of the tank at which the manufacturer has chosen to activate the severe inducement system. Appendix 2 Description of the operator warning and inducement activation and deactivation mechanisms 1. TO COMPLEMENT THE REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIED IN THIS ANNEX CONCERNING THE WARNING AND INDUCEMENT ACTIVATION AND DEACTIVATION MECHANISMS, THIS APPENDIX 2 SPECIFIES THE TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR AN IMPLEMENTATION OF THOSE ACTIVATION AND DEACTIVATION MECHANISMS. 2. ACTIVATION AND DEACTIVATION MECHANISMS OF THE WARNING SYSTEM 2.1. The operator warning system shall be activated when the diagnostic trouble code (DTC) associated with a NCM justifying its activation has the status defined in Table 2 of this appendix. Table 2 Activation of the operator warning system 2.2. The operator warning system shall be deactivated when the diagnostic system concludes that the malfunction relevant to that warning is no longer present or when the information including DTCs relative to the failures justifying its activation is erased by a scan tool. 2.2.1 Requirements for erasing "NO x control information" 2.2.1.1. Erasing/resetting "NO x control information" by a scan-tool On request of the scan tool, the following data shall be erased or reset to the value specified in this appendix from the computer memory (see Table 3). Table 3 Erasing/resetting "NO x control information" by a scan-tool 2.2.1.2. NO x control information shall not be erased by disconnection of the machine's battery(s). 2.2.1.3. The erasing of "NO x control information" shall only be possible under "engine-off" conditions. 2.2.1.4. When "NO x control information" including DTCs are erased, any counter reading associated with these failures and which is specified in this annex shall not be erased, but reset to the value specified in the appropriate paragraph of this annex. 3. ACTIVATION AND DEACTIVATION MECHANISM OF THE OPERATOR INDUCEMENT SYSTEM 4. COUNTER MECHANISM 4.1. General 4.2. Principle of counters mechanism 5. ILLUSTRATION OF THE ACTIVATION AND DEACTIVATION AND COUNTER MECHANISMS 5.1. This paragraph illustrates the activation and deactivation and counter mechanisms for some typical cases. The figures and descriptions given in paragraphs 5.2., 5.3. and 5.4. are provided solely for the purposes of illustration in this annex and should not be referenced as examples of either the requirements of this Regulation or as definitive statements of the processes involved. The counter hours in figures 6 and 7 refer to the maximum severe inducement values in Table 4. For simplification purposes, for example, the fact that the warning system will also be active when the inducement system is active has not been mentioned in the illustrations given. Figure 4 Reactivation and resetting to zero of a counter after a period when its value has been frozen Counter Failure 5.2. Figure 5 illustrates the operation of the activation and deactivation mechanisms when monitoring the reagent availability for five cases: Use case 1: the operator continues operating the machine in spite of the warning until machine operation is disabled. Refilling case 1 ("adequate" refilling): the operator refills the reagent tank so that a level above the 10 per cent threshold is reached. Warning and inducement are de-activated. Refilling cases 2 and 3 ("inadequate" refilling): The warning system is activated. The level of warning depends on the amount of available reagent. Refilling case 4 ("very inadequate" refilling): The low level inducement is activated immediately. Figure 5 Reagent availability Inducement Level of reagent 5.3. Figure 6 illustrates three cases of wrong reagent quality: Use case 1: the operator continues operating the machine in spite of the warning until machine operation is disabled. Repair case 1 ("bad" or "dishonest" repair): after disablement of the machine, the operator changes the quality of the reagent, but soon after, changes it again for a poor quality one. The inducement system is immediately reactivated and machine operation is disabled after 2 engine operating hours. Repair case 2 ("good" repair): after disablement of the machine, the operator rectifies the quality of the reagent. However some time afterwards, he refills again with a poor quality reagent. The warning, inducement and counting processes restart from zero. Figure 6 Filling with poor reagent quality Counter Inducement Wrong urea 5.4. Figure 7 illustrates three cases of failure of the urea dosing system. This figure also illustrates the process that applies in the case of the monitoring failures described in paragraph 9. of this annex. Use case 1: the operator continues operating the machine in spite of the warning until machine operation is disabled. Repair case 1 ("good" repair): after disablement of the machine, the operator repairs the dosing system. However some time afterwards, the dosing system fails again. The warning, inducement and counting processes restart from zero. Repair case 2 ("bad" repair): during the low-level inducement time (torque reduction), the operator repairs the dosing system. Soon after, however, the dosing system fails again. The low-level inducement system is immediately reactivated and the counter restarts from the value it had at the time of repair. Figure 7 Failure of the reagent dosing system Counter Inducement Dosing system not working Appendix 3 Demonstration of the minimum acceptable reagent concentration CD min ANNEX 10 DETERMINATION OF CO 2 EMISSIONS Appendix 1 Determination of CO 2 emissions for engines of power bands up to P 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1. This appendix sets out the provisions and test procedures for reporting CO 2 emissions for all power bands up to P. If the manufacturer, based on the option indicated in paragraph 5.2. of this Regulation, chooses to use the procedure of Annex 4B, Appendix 2 of this annex shall apply. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 2.1. CO 2 emissions shall be determined over the applicable test cycle specified in paragraph 1.1 of Annex 4A in accordance with paragraph 3. (NRSC) or paragraph 4. (hot start NRTC), respectively, of Annex 4A to this Regulation. For power bands L to P, CO 2 emissions shall be determined over the hot start NRTC test cycle. 2.2. The test results shall be reported as cycle averaged brake specific values and expressed in the unit of g/kWh. 2.3. If, at the choice of the manufacturer, the NRSC is operated as a ramped modal cycle, either the 3. DETERMINATION OF CO 2 EMISSIONS 3.1. Raw measurement This paragraph applies, if CO 2 is measured in the raw exhaust gas. 3.1.1. Measurement CO 2 in the raw exhaust gas emitted by the engine submitted for testing shall be measured with a non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) analyser in accordance with paragraph 1.4.3.2. (NRSC) or paragraph 2.3.3.2. (NRTC), respectively, of Appendix 1 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. The measurement system shall meet the linearity requirements of paragraph 1.5. of Appendix 2 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. The measurement system shall meet the requirements of paragraph 1.4.1. (NRSC) or paragraph 2.3.1. (NRTC), respectively, of Appendix 1 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. 3.1.2. Data evaluation The relevant data shall be recorded and stored in accordance with paragraph 3.7.4. (NRSC) or paragraph 4.5.7.2. (NRTC), respectively, of Annex 4A to this Regulation. 3.1.3. Calculation of cycle averaged emission If measured on a dry basis, the dry/wet correction in accordance with paragraph 1.3.2. (NRSC) or paragraph 2.1.2.2. (NRTC), respectively, of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation shall be applied. For the NRSC, the mass of CO 2 (g/h) shall be calculated for each individual mode in accordance with paragraph 1.3.4. of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. The exhaust gas flows shall be determined in accordance with paragraphs 1.2.1. to 1.2.5. of Appendix 1 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. For the NRTC, the mass of CO 2 (g/test) shall be calculated in accordance with paragraph 2.1.2.1. of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. The exhaust gas flow shall be determined in accordance with paragraph 2.2.3. of Appendix 1 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. 3.2. Dilute measurement This paragraph applies, if CO 2 is measured in the dilute exhaust gas. 3.2.1. Measurement CO 2 in the dilute exhaust gas emitted by the engine submitted for testing shall be measured with a non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) analyser in accordance with paragraph 1.4.3.2. (NRSC) or paragraph 2.3.3.2. (NRTC), respectively, of Appendix 1 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. Dilution of the exhaust shall be done with filtered ambient air, synthetic air or nitrogen. The flow capacity of the full flow system shall be large enough to completely eliminate water condensation in the dilution and sampling systems. The measurement system shall meet the linearity requirements of paragraph 1.5. of Appendix 2 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. The measurement system shall meet the requirements of paragraph 1.4.1. (NRSC) or paragraph 2.3.1. (NRTC), respectively, of Appendix 1 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. 3.2.2. Data evaluation The relevant data shall be recorded and stored in accordance with paragraph 3.7.4. (NRSC) or paragraph 4.5.7.2. (NRTC), respectively, of Annex 4A to this Regulation. 3.2.3. Calculation of cycle averaged emission If measured on a dry basis, the dry/wet correction in accordance with paragraph 1.3.2. (NRSC) or paragraph 2.1.2.2. (NRTC), respectively, of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation shall be applied. For the NRSC, the mass of CO 2 (g/h) shall be calculated for each individual mode in accordance with paragraph 1.3.4. of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. The diluted exhaust gas flows shall be determined in accordance with paragraph 1.2.6. of Appendix 1 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. For the NRTC, the mass of CO 2 (g/test) shall be calculated in accordance with paragraph 2.2.3. of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. The diluted exhaust gas flow shall be determined in accordance with paragraph 2.2.1. of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. Background correction shall be applied in accordance with paragraph 2.2.3.1.1. of Appendix 3 to Annex 4A to this Regulation. 3.3. Calculation of brake specific emissions 3.3.1. NRSC The brake specific emissions e CO 2 (g/kWh) shall be calculated as follows: 3.3.2. NRTC The cycle work needed for the calculation of brake specific CO 2 emissions shall be determined in accordance with paragraph 4.6.2. of Annex 4A to this Regulation. The brake specific emissions e CO 2 (g/kWh) shall be calculated as follows: Appendix 2 Determination of CO 2 emissions for power bands Q and R 1. INTRODUCTION The provisions and test procedures for reporting CO 2 emissions for power bands Q to R set out in this appendix shall apply. If the manufacturer, based on the option indicated in paragraph 5.2. of this Regulation, chooses to use the procedure of Annex 4B to this Regulation, the provisions and test procedures for reporting CO 2 emissions set out in this appendix 2 shall apply. 2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 2.1. CO 2 emissions shall be determined over the hot start NRTC test cycle in accordance with paragraph 7.8.3. of Annex 4B. 2.2. The test results shall be reported as cycle averaged brake specific values and expressed in the unit of g/kWh. 3. DETERMINATION OF CO 2 EMISSIONS 3.1. Raw measurement This paragraph applies, if CO 2 is measured in the raw exhaust gas. 3.1.1. Measurement CO 2 in the raw exhaust gas emitted by the engine submitted for testing shall be measured with a non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) analyser in accordance with paragraph 9.4.6. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. The measurement system shall meet the linearity requirements of paragraph 8.1.4. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. The measurement system shall meet the requirements of paragraph 8.1.9. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. 3.1.2. Data evaluation The relevant data shall be recorded and stored in accordance with paragraph 7.8.3.2. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. 3.1.3. Calculation of cycle averaged emission If measured on a dry basis, the dry/wet correction in accordance with paragraph A.8.2.2. of Appendix 8 or paragraph A.7.3.2. of Appendix 7 to Annex 4B to this Regulation shall be applied to the instantaneous concentration values before any further calculation is done. The mass of CO 2 (g/test) shall be calculated by multiplication of the time aligned instantaneous CO 2 concentrations and exhaust gas flows and integration over the test cycle in accordance with either of the following: 3.2. Dilute measurement This paragraph applies, if CO 2 is measured in the dilute exhaust gas. 3.2.1. Measurement CO 2 in the dilute exhaust gas emitted by the engine submitted for testing shall be measured with a non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) analyser in accordance with paragraph 9.4.6. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. Dilution of the exhaust shall be done with filtered ambient air, synthetic air or nitrogen. The flow capacity of the full flow system shall be large enough to completely eliminate water condensation in the dilution and sampling systems. The measurement system shall meet the linearity requirements of paragraph 8.1.4. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. The measurement system shall meet the requirements of paragraph 8.1.9. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. 3.2.2. Data evaluation The relevant data shall be recorded and stored in accordance with paragraph 7.8.3.2. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. 3.2.3. Calculation of cycle averaged emission If measured on a dry basis, the dry/wet correction in accordance with paragraph A.8.3.2. of Appendix 8 or paragraph A.7.4.2. of Appendix 7 to Annex 4B to this Regulation shall be applied to the instantaneous concentration values before any further calculation is done. The mass of CO 2 (g/test) shall be calculated by multiplication of the CO 2 concentrations and the diluted exhaust gas flows in accordance with either of the following: Background correction shall be applied in accordance with paragraph A.8.3.2.4. of Appendix 8 or paragraph A.7.4.1. of Appendix 8 to Annex 4B to this Regulation. 3.3. Calculation of brake specific emissions The cycle work needed for the calculation of brake specific CO 2 emissions shall be determined in accordance with paragraph 7.8.3.4. of Annex 4B to this Regulation. The brake specific emissions e CO2 (g/kWh) shall be calculated as follows: