COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2019/423 of 13 March 2019 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Teat disinfectants biocidal product family of Novadan’ THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation is granted to Novadan ApS for the biocidal product family ‘Teat disinfectants biocidal product family of Novadan’ with authorisation number EU-0019757-0000. The Union authorisation is valid from 7 April 2019 until 31 March 2029. The Union authorisation is subject to compliance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 13 March 2019. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/2100 of 4 September 2017 setting out scientific criteria for the determination of endocrine-disrupting properties pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and Council ( OJ L 301, 17.11.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) ECHA opinion of 6 July 2018 on the Union authorisation of ‘Teat disinfectants biocidal product family of Novadan’ (ECHA/BPC/215/2018). Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Teat disinfectants biocidal product family of Novadan Product type 3 — Veterinary hygiene (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0019757-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0019757-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL — META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1: Post-milking manual dipping (concentrate) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 2 – Post-milking, manual spraying, trigger sprayer (concentrate) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) when applying the product by manual spraying. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 3 – Post-milking manual spraying using an electronic sprayer (concentrate) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) when applying the product by manual spraying. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 4. Use # 4 – Post-milking automated dipping (concentrate) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.5. Use description Table 5. Use # 5 – Post-milking automated spraying by robot (concentrate) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use Dilute the concentrated product by decanting or pumping. Fill the reservoir with the diluted concentrate and screw the dip cup on top. The concentrate is to be diluted 1:4 The concentrated products in meta-SPC 1 contain 0,89 % total iodine and are diluted 1:4 to an in-use solution containing 0,178 % total iodine. This corresponds to a 20 % (w/w) dilution. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. To ensure sufficient contact time, care should be taken that the product is not removed after application. Leave the product on the teats and keep the animals standing for at least five minutes after treatment for post-milking disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Description of first aid measures General: Remove affected person from source of contamination. After inhalation: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After skin contact: Rinse with water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Seek medical advice if any skin reaction/or discomfort occurs. After eye contact: Immediately rinse with water (at least 15 minutes). Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After ingestion: Contact poison treatment specialist immediately if symptoms occur and/or in case of mouth contact with large quantities. Do not give fluids or induce vomiting in case of impaired consciousness; place in recovery position and seek medical advice immediately. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Environmental emergency measures Prevent run-off from entering drains, sewers or waterways Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air) Dike to collect larger liquid spills Contain and/or absorb spill with inert material, then place in closed and suitable container for disposal according to regulations Do not place spilled materials back into the original container 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Method of disposal: Dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. Empty containers are rinsed with plenty of water and disposed to normal or commercial waste. The paper towels used for the cleaning of teats are disposed in the normal rubbish. Product classified as hazardous waste: No Packaging classified as hazardous waste: No EWC waste code: EWC: 0706 wastes from the MFSU of fats, grease, soaps, detergents, disinfectants and cosmetics Other information: When handling waste, consideration should be made to the safety precautions applying to handling of the product. Waste code applies to product remnants in pure form. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Mentioned in the SDS : Keep in original container. Store the product away from direct sunlight in opaque containers. Keep separate from food, feedstuffs, fertilisers and other sensitive material. Store above freezing. Storage temperature: 0 – 30 °C Shelf-life: 24 months. 6. OTHER INFORMATION pH range of meta-SPC 1: 4-5 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 6. Use # 1 – Post-milking manual dipping (RTU) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 7. Use # 2 – Post-milking automated dipping (RTU) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. To ensure sufficient contact time, care should be taken that the product is not removed after application. Leave the product on the teats and keep the animals standing for at least five minutes after treatment for post-milking disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Description of first aid measures General: Remove affected person from source of contamination. After inhalation: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After skin contact: Rinse with water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Seek medical advice if any skin reaction/or discomfort occurs. After eye contact: Immediately rinse with water (at least 15 minutes). Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After ingestion: Contact poison treatment specialist immediately if symptoms occur and/or in case of mouth contact with large quantities. Do not give fluids or induce vomiting in case of impaired consciousness; place in recovery position and seek medical advice immediately. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Environmental emergency measures Prevent run-off from entering drains, sewers or waterways Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air) Dike to collect larger liquid spills Contain and/or absorb spill with inert material, then place in closed and suitable container for disposal according to regulations Do not place spilled materials back into the original container 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Method of disposal: Dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. Empty containers are rinsed with plenty of water and disposed to normal or commercial waste. The paper towels used for the cleaning of teats are disposed in the normal rubbish. Product classified as hazardous waste: No Packaging classified as hazardous waste: No EWC waste code: EWC: 0706 wastes from the MFSU of fats, grease, soaps, detergents, disinfectants and cosmetics Other information: When handling waste, consideration should be made to the safety precautions applying to handling of the product. Waste code applies to product remnants in pure form. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Mentioned in the SDS : Keep in original container. Store the product away from direct sunlight in opaque containers. Keep separate from food, feedstuffs, fertilisers and other sensitive material. Store above freezing. Storage temperature: 0 – 30 °C Shelf-life: 24 months. 6. OTHER INFORMATION pH range of meta-SPC 2: 4-5 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 8. Use # 1 – Post-milking manual dipping (RTU) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 9. Use # 2 – Post-milking automated dipping (RTU) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use Fill the reservoir with the RTU product and screw the dip cup on top. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended To ensure sufficient contact time, care should be taken that the product is not removed after application. Leave the product on the teats and keep the animals standing for at least five minutes after treatment for post-milking disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Description of first aid measures General: Remove affected person from source of contamination. After inhalation: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After skin contact: Rinse with water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Seek medical advice if any skin reaction/or discomfort occurs. After eye contact: Immediately rinse with water (at least 15 minutes). Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After ingestion: Contact poison treatment specialist immediately if symptoms occur and/or in case of mouth contact with large quantities. Do not give fluids or induce vomiting in case of impaired consciousness; place in recovery position and seek medical advice immediately. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Environmental emergency measures Prevent run-off from entering drains, sewers or waterways Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air) Dike to collect larger liquid spills Contain and/or absorb spill with inert material, then place in closed and suitable container for disposal according to regulations Do not place spilled materials back into the original container 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Method of disposal: Dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. Empty containers are rinsed with plenty of water and disposed to normal or commercial waste. The paper towels used for the cleaning of teats are disposed in the normal rubbish. Product classified as hazardous waste: No Packaging classified as hazardous waste: No EWC waste code: EWC: 0706 wastes from the MFSU of fats, grease, soaps, detergents, disinfectants and cosmetics Other information: When handling waste, consideration should be made to the safety precautions applying to handling of the product. Waste code applies to product remnants in pure form. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Mentioned in the SDS : Keep in original container. Store the product away from direct sunlight in opaque containers. Keep separate from food, feedstuffs, fertilisers and other sensitive material. Store above freezing. Storage temperature: 0 – 30 °C Shelf-life: 18 months. 6. OTHER INFORMATION pH range of meta-SPC 3: 4-5 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 4 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4 4.1. Use description Table 10. Use # 1 – Post-milking manual dipping (RTU) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 11. Use # 2 – Post-milking, manual spraying, trigger sprayer (RTU) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves when applying the product by manual spraying (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 12. Use # 3 – Post-milking manual spraying using an electronic sprayer (RTU) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves when applying the product by manual spraying (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 13. Use # 4 – Post-milking automated dipping (RTU) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.5. Use description Table 14. Use # 5 – Post-milking automated spraying by robot (RTU) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 4 ) OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use Fill the reservoir with the RTU product and screw the dip cup on top. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. To ensure sufficient contact time, care should be taken that the product is not removed after application. Leave the product on the teats and keep the animals standing for at least five minutes after treatment for post-milking disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Description of first aid measures General: Remove affected person from source of contamination. After inhalation: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After skin contact: Rinse with water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Seek medical advice if any skin reaction/or discomfort occurs. After eye contact: Immediately rinse with water (at least 15 minutes). Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After ingestion: Contact poison treatment specialist immediately if symptoms occur and/or in case of mouth contact with large quantities. Do not give fluids or induce vomiting in case of impaired consciousness; place in recovery position and seek medical advice immediately. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Environmental emergency measures Prevent run-off from entering drains, sewers or waterways Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air) Dike to collect larger liquid spills Contain and/or absorb spill with inert material, then place in closed and suitable container for disposal according to regulations Do not place spilled materials back into the original container 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Method of disposal: Dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. Empty containers are rinsed with plenty of water and disposed to normal or commercial waste. The paper towels used for the cleaning of teats are disposed in the normal rubbish. Product classified as hazardous waste: No Packaging classified as hazardous waste: No EWC waste code: EWC: 0706 wastes from the MFSU of fats, grease, soaps, detergents, disinfectants and cosmetics Other information: When handling waste, consideration should be made to the safety precautions applying to handling of the product. Waste code applies to product remnants in pure form. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Mentioned in the SDS : Keep in original container. Store the product away from direct sunlight in opaque containers. Keep separate from food, feedstuffs, fertilisers and other sensitive material. Store above freezing. Storage temperature: 0 – 30 °C Shelf-life: 24 months. 6. OTHER INFORMATION pH range of meta-SPC 4: 4-5 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 5 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 5 4.1. Use description Table 15. Use # 1 – Post-milking manual dipping (RTU) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 16. Use # 2 – Post-milking, manual spraying, trigger sprayer (RTU) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves when applying the product by manual spraying (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 17. Use # 3 – Post-milking manual spraying using an electronic sprayer (RTU) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves when applying the product by manual spraying (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 18. Use # 4 – Post-milking automated dipping (RTU) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.5. Use description Table 19. Use # 5 – Post-milking automated spraying by robot (RTU) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 5 ) OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use Fill the reservoir with the RTU product and screw the dip cup on top. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. To ensure sufficient contact time, care should be taken that the product is not removed after application. Leave the product on the teats and keep the animals standing for at least five minutes after treatment for post-milking disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Description of first aid measures General: Remove affected person from source of contamination. After inhalation: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After skin contact: Rinse with water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Seek medical advice if any skin reaction/or discomfort occurs. After eye contact: Immediately rinse with water (at least 15 minutes). Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After ingestion: Contact poison treatment specialist immediately if symptoms occur and/or in case of mouth contact with large quantities. Do not give fluids or induce vomiting in case of impaired consciousness; place in recovery position and seek medical advice immediately. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Environmental emergency measures Prevent run-off from entering drains, sewers or waterways Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air) Dike to collect larger liquid spills Contain and/or absorb spill with inert material, then place in closed and suitable container for disposal according to regulations Do not place spilled materials back into the original container 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Method of disposal: Dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. Empty containers are rinsed with plenty of water and disposed to normal or commercial waste. The paper towels used for the cleaning of teats are disposed in the normal rubbish. Product classified as hazardous waste: No Packaging classified as hazardous waste: No EWC waste code: EWC: 0706 wastes from the MFSU of fats, grease, soaps, detergents, disinfectants and cosmetics Other information: When handling waste, consideration should be made to the safety precautions applying to handling of the product. Waste code applies to product remnants in pure form. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Mentioned in the SDS : Keep in original container. Store the product away from direct sunlight in opaque containers. Keep separate from food, feedstuffs, fertilisers and other sensitive material. Store above freezing. Storage temperature: 0 – 30 °C Shelf-life: 24 months. 6. OTHER INFORMATION pH range of meta-SPC 5: 4-5 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 6 1. META SPC 6 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 6 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 6 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 6 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 6 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 6 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 6 4.1. Use description Table 20. Use # 1 – Post-milking manual dipping (RTU) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 21. Use # 2 – Post-milking, manual spraying, trigger sprayer (RTU) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves when applying the product by manual spraying (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 22. Use # 3 – Post-milking manual spraying using an electronic sprayer (RTU) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves when applying the product by manual spraying (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 23. Use # 4 – Post-milking automated dipping (RTU) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.5. Use description Table 24. Use # 5 – Post-milking automated spraying by robot (RTU) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 6 ) OF THE META SPC 6 5.1. Instructions for use Fill the reservoir with the RTU product and screw the dip cup on top. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. To ensure sufficient contact time, care should be taken that the product is not removed after application. Leave the product on the teats and keep the animals standing for at least five minutes after treatment for post-milking disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Description of first aid measures General: Remove affected person from source of contamination. After inhalation: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After skin contact: Rinse with water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Seek medical advice if any skin reaction/or discomfort occurs. After eye contact: Immediately rinse with water (at least 15 minutes). Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. Get medical attention if any discomfort continues. After ingestion: Contact poison treatment specialist immediately if symptoms occur and/or in case of mouth contact with large quantities. Do not give fluids or induce vomiting in case of impaired consciousness; place in recovery position and seek medical advice immediately. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Environmental emergency measures Prevent run-off from entering drains, sewers or waterways Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air) Dike to collect larger liquid spills Contain and/or absorb spill with inert material, then place in closed and suitable container for disposal according to regulations Do not place spilled materials back into the original container 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Method of disposal: Dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. Empty containers are rinsed with plenty of water and disposed to normal or commercial waste. The paper towels used for the cleaning of teats are disposed in the normal rubbish. Product classified as hazardous waste: No Packaging classified as hazardous waste: No EWC waste code: EWC: 0706 wastes from the MFSU of fats, grease, soaps, detergents, disinfectants and cosmetics Other information: When handling waste, consideration should be made to the safety precautions applying to handling of the product. Waste code applies to product remnants in pure form. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Mentioned in the SDS : Keep in original container. Store the product away from direct sunlight in opaque containers. Keep separate from food, feedstuffs, fertilisers and other sensitive material. Store above freezing. Storage temperature: 0 – 30 °C Shelf-life: 24 months. 6. OTHER INFORMATION pH range of meta-SPC 6: 4-5 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 6 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3. ( 4 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 4. ( 5 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 5. ( 6 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 6.