COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION of 26 March 2013 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions for the production of cement, lime and magnesium oxide (notified under document C(2013) 1728) (Text with EEA relevance) (2013/163/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The BAT conclusions for the production of cement, lime and magnesium oxide are set out in the Annex to this Decision. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 26 March 2013. For the Commission Janez POTOČNIK Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 . ( 3 ) BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF CEMENT, LIME AND MAGNESIUM OXIDE These BAT conclusions concern the following industrial activities specified in Section 3.1 of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU, namely: Regarding point 3.1(c) above, these BAT conclusions only address the production of MgO using the dry process route based on mined natural magnesite (magnesium carbonate - MgCO 3 ). In particular, concerning the above-mentioned activities, these BAT conclusions cover the following: These BAT conclusions do not address the following activities: Other reference documents which are of relevance for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Where these BAT conclusions address waste co-incineration plants, this is without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter IV of and Annex VI to Directive 2010/75/EU. Where these BAT conclusions address energy efficiency, this is without prejudice to the provisions of the new Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) on Energy Efficiency. NOTE ON THE EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION The exchange of information on BAT for the Cement, Lime and Magnesium Oxide sectors ended in 2008. The information available then, complemented by additional information concerning the emissions from magnesium oxide production, was used for reaching these BAT conclusions. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: Definition for certain products Definition for certain air pollutants Abbreviations GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Averaging periods and reference conditions for air emissions Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) given in these BAT conclusions refer to standard conditions: dry gas at a temperature of 273 K, and a pressure of 1 013 hPa. Values given in concentrations apply under the following reference conditions: For averaging periods the following definitions apply: Conversion to reference oxygen concentration The formula for calculating the emissions concentration at a reference oxygen level is shown below: Where: BAT CONCLUSIONS 1.1 General BAT conclusions The BAT mentioned in this section apply to all installations covered by these BAT conclusions (cement, lime and magnesium oxide industry). The process-specific BAT included in Sections 1.2 - 1.4 apply in addition to the general BAT mentioned in this section. 1.1.1 Environmental management systems (EMS) 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance of the plants/installations producing cement, lime and magnesium oxide, production BAT is to implement and adhere to an environmental management system (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Applicability The scope (e.g. level of details) and nature of the EMS (e.g. standardised or non-standardised) will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2 Noise 2. In order to reduce/minimise noise emissions during the manufacturing processes for cement, lime and magnesium oxide, BAT is to use a combination of the following techniques: 1.2 BAT conclusions for the cement industry Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section can be applied to all installations in the cement industry. 1.2.1 General primary techniques 3. In order to reduce emissions from the kiln and use energy efficiently, BAT is to achieve a smooth and stable kiln process, operating close to the process parameter set points by using the following techniques: 4. In order to prevent and/or reduce emissions, BAT is to carry out a careful selection and control of all substances entering the kiln. Description Careful selection and control of substances entering the kiln can reduce emissions. The chemical composition of the substances and the way they are fed in the kiln are factors that should be taken into account during the selection. Substances of concern may include the substances mentioned in BAT 11 and in BAT 24 to 28. 1.2.2 Monitoring 5. BAT is to carry out the monitoring and measurements of process parameters and emissions on a regular basis and to monitor emissions in accordance with the relevant EN standards or, if EN standards are not available, ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality, including the following: Description The selection between continuous or periodic measurements mentioned in BAT 5(f) is based on the emission source and the type of pollutant expected. 1.2.3 Energy consumption and process selection 1.2.3.1 Process selection 6. In order to reduce energy consumption, BAT is to use a dry process kiln with multistage preheating and precalcination. Description In this type of kiln system, exhaust gases and recovered waste heat from the cooler can be used to preheat and precalcine the raw material feed before entering the kiln, providing significant savings in energy consumption. Applicability Applicable to new plants and major upgrades, subject to raw materials moisture content. BAT-associated energy consumption levels See Table 1. Table 1 BAT-associated energy consumption levels for new plants and major upgrades using dry process kiln with multistage preheating and precalcination 1.2.3.2 Energy consumption 7. In order to reduce/minimise thermal energy consumption, BAT is to use a combination of the following techniques: Description Several factors affect the energy consumption of modern kiln systems such as raw materials properties (e.g. moisture content, burnability), the use of fuels, with different properties, as well as the use of a gas bypass system. Furthermore, the production capacity of the kiln has an influence on the energy demand. Technique 7c: the appropriate number of cyclone stages for preheating is determined by the throughput and the moisture content of raw materials and fuels which have to be dried by the remaining flue-gas heat because local raw materials vary widely regarding their moisture content or burnability Technique 7d: conventional and waste fuels can be used in the cement industry. The characteristics of the fuels used, such as adequate calorific value and low moisture content, have a positive influence on the specific energy consumption of the kiln. Technique 7f: the removal of hot raw material and hot gas leads to a higher specific energy consumption of about 6 – 12 MJ/tonne clinker per percentage point of removed kiln inlet gas. Hence, minimising the use of gas bypass has a positive effect on energy consumption. 8. In order to reduce primary energy consumption, BAT is to consider the reduction of the clinker content of cement and cement products. Description The reduction of the clinker content of cement and cement products can be achieved by adding fillers and/or additions, such as blast furnace slag, limestone, fly ash and pozzolana in the grinding step in accordance with the relevant cement standards. Applicability Generally applicable to the cement industry, subject to (local) availability of fillers and/or additions and local market specificities. 9. In order to reduce primary energy consumption, BAT is to consider cogeneration/combined heat and power plants. Description The employment of cogeneration plants for the production of steam and electricity or combined heat and power plants can be applied in the cement industry by recovering waste heat from the clinker cooler or kiln flue-gases using the conventional steam cycle processes or other techniques. Furthermore, excess heat can be recovered from the clinker cooler or kiln flue-gases for district heating or industrial applications. Applicability The technique is applicable in all cement kilns if sufficient excess heat is available, if appropriate process parameters can be met, and if economic viability is ensured. 10. In order to reduce/minimise electrical energy consumption, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 1.2.4 Use of waste 1.2.4.1 Waste quality control 11. In order to guarantee the characteristics of the wastes to be used as fuels and/or raw materials in a cement kiln and reduce emissions, BAT is to apply the following techniques: Description Different types of waste materials can replace primary raw materials and/or fossil fuels in cement manufacturing and will contribute to saving natural resources. 1.2.4.2 Waste feeding into the kiln 12. In order to ensure appropriate treatment of the wastes used as fuel and/or raw materials in the kiln, BAT is to use the following techniques: 1.2.4.3 Safety management for the use of hazardous waste materials 13. BAT is to apply safety management for the storage, handling and feeding of hazardous waste materials, such as using a risk-based approach according to the source and type of waste, for the labelling, checking, sampling and testing of waste to be handled. 1.2.5 Dust emissions 1.2.5.1 Diffuse dust emissions 14. In order to minimise/prevent diffuse dust emissions from dusty operations, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 15. In order to minimise/prevent diffuse dust emissions from bulk storage areas, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 1.2.5.2 Channelled dust emissions from dusty operations This section concerns dust emissions arising from dusty operations other than those from kiln firing, cooling and the main milling processes. This covers processes such as the crushing of raw materials; raw material conveyors and elevators; the storage of raw materials, clinker and cement; the storage of fuels and the dispatch of cement. 16. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions, BAT is to apply a maintenance management system which especially addresses the performance of filters applied to dusty operations, other than those from kiln firing, cooling and main milling processes. Taking this management system into account, BAT is to use dry flue-gas cleaning with a filter. Description For dusty operations, dry flue-gas cleaning with a filter usually consists of a fabric filter. A description of fabric filters is provided in Section 1.5.1. BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for channelled dust emissions from dusty operations (other than those from kiln firing, cooling and the main milling processes) is < 10 mg/Nm 3 , as the average over the sampling period (spot measurement, for at least half an hour). It should be noted that for small sources (< 10 000 Nm 3 /h) a priority approach, based on the maintenance management system, regarding the frequency for checking the performance of the filter has to be taken into account (see also BAT 5). 1.2.5.3 Dust emissions from kiln firing processes 17. In order to reduce dust emissions from flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use dry flue-gas cleaning with a filter. BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for dust emissions from flue-gases of kiln firing processes is <10 – 20 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value. When applying fabric filters or new or upgraded ESPs, the lower level is achieved. 1.2.5.4 Dust emissions from cooling and milling processes 18. In order to reduce dust emissions from the flue-gases of cooling and milling processes, BAT is to use dry flue-gas cleaning with a filter. BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for dust emissions from the flue-gases of cooling and milling processes is <10 – 20 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value or average over the sampling period (spot measurements for at least half an hour). When applying fabric filters or new or upgraded ESPs, the lower level is achieved. 1.2.6 Gaseous compounds 1.2.6.1 NO x emissions 19. In order to reduce the emissions of NO x from the flue-gases of kiln firing and/or preheating/precalcining processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 2. Table 2 BAT-associated emission levels for NO x from the flue-gases of kiln firing and/or preheating/precalcining processes in the cement industry 20. When SNCR is used, BAT is to achieve efficient NO x reduction, while keeping the ammonia slip as low as possible, by using the following technique: Applicability SNCR is generally applicable to rotary cement kilns. The injection zones vary with the type of kiln process. In long wet and long dry process kilns it may be difficult to obtain the right temperature and retention time needed. See also BAT 19. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 3. Table 3 BAT-associated emission levels for NH 3 slip in the flue-gases when SNCR is applied 1.2.6.2 SO x emissions 21. In order to reduce/minimise the emissions of SO x from the flue-gases of kiln firing and/or preheating/precalcining processes, BAT is to use one of the following techniques: Description Depending on the raw materials and the fuel quality, levels of SO x emissions can be kept low not requiring the use of an abatement technique. If necessary, primary techniques and/or abatement techniques such as absorbent addition or wet scrubber can be used to reduce SO x emissions. Wet scrubbers have already been operated in plants with initial unabated SO x levels higher than 800 – 1 000 mg/Nm 3 . BAT-associated emission levels See Table 4. Table 4 BAT-associated emission levels for SO x from the flue-gases of kiln firing and/or preheating/precalcining processes in the cement industry 22. In order to reduce SO 2 emissions from the kiln, BAT is to optimise the raw milling processes. Description The technique consists of optimising the raw milling process so that the raw mill can be operated to act as SO 2 abatement for the kiln. This can be achieved by adjusting factors such as: Applicability Applicable if the dry milling process is used in compound mode. 1.2.6.3 CO emissions and CO trips 1.2.6.3.1 Reduction of CO trips 23. In order to minimise the frequency of CO trips and keep their total duration to below 30 minutes annually, when using electrostatic precipitators (ESPs) or hybrid filters, BAT is to use the following techniques in combination: Description For safety reasons, due to the risk of explosions, ESPs will have to shut down during elevated CO levels in the flue-gases. The following techniques prevent CO trips and, therefore, reduce ESP shutdown times: Disruptions predominantly happen during the start-up operation phase. For safe operation, the gas analysers for ESP protection have to be on-line during all operational phases and the ESP downtime can be reduced by using a backup monitoring system maintained in operation. The continuous CO monitoring system needs to be optimised for reaction time and should be located close to the CO source, e.g. at a preheater tower outlet, or at a kiln inlet in the case of a wet kiln application. When hybrid filters are used, the grounding of the bag support cage with the cell plate is recommended. 1.2.6.4 Total organic carbon emissions (TOC) 24. In order to keep the emissions of TOC from the flue-gases of the kiln firing processes low, BAT is to avoid feeding raw materials with a high content of volatile organic compounds (VOC) into the kiln system via the raw material feeding route. 1.2.6.5 Hydrogen chloride (HCl) and hydrogen fluoride (HF) emissions 25. In order prevent/reduce the emissions of HCl from flue-gases of the kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following primary techniques: BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for the emissions of HCl is <10 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value or average over the sampling period (spot measurements, for at least half an hour). 26. In order to prevent/reduce the emissions of HF from the flue-gases of the kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following primary techniques: BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for the emissions of HF is <1 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value or average over the sampling period (spot measurements, for at least half an hour). 1.2.7 PCDD/F emissions 27. In order to prevent emissions of PCDD/F or to keep the emissions of PCDD/F from the flue-gases of the kiln firing processes low, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for the emissions of PCDD/F from the flue-gases of the kiln firing processes is <0,05 – 0,1 ng PCDD/F I-TEQ/Nm 3 , as the average over the sampling period (6 – 8 hours). 1.2.8 Metal emissions 28. In order to minimise the emissions of metals from the flue-gases of the kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 5. Table 5 BAT-associated emission levels for metals from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes 1.2.9 Process losses/waste 29. In order to reduce solid waste from the cement manufacturing process along with raw material savings, BAT is to: Description Collected dust can be recycled back into the production processes whenever practicable. This recycling may take place directly into the kiln or kiln feed (the alkali metal content being the limiting factor) or by blending with finished cement products. A quality assurance procedure might be required when the collected dusts are recycled back into the production processes. Alternative uses may be found for material that cannot be recycled (e.g. additive for flue-gas desulphurisation in combustion plants). 1.3 BAT conclusions for the lime industry Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section can be applied to all installations in the lime industry. 1.3.1 General primary techniques 30. In order to reduce all kiln emissions and use energy efficiently, BAT is to achieve a smooth and stable kiln process, operating close to the process parameter set points by using the following techniques: Applicability Process control optimisation is applicable to all lime plants to varying degrees. Complete process automation is generally not achievable due to the uncontrollable variables, i.e. quality of the limestone. 31. In order to prevent and/or reduce emissions, BAT is to carry out a careful selection and control of the raw materials entering the kiln. Description Raw materials entering the kiln have a significant effect on air emissions due to their impurities content; hence, a careful selection of raw materials may reduce these emissions at source. For example, the variations of sulphur and chlorine contents in the limestone/dolomite have an effect on the range of the SO 2 and HCl emissions in the flue-gas, while the presence of organic matter has an influence on TOC and CO emissions. Applicability The applicability depends on the (local) availability of raw materials with low impurities content. The type of final product and the type of kiln used may represent an additional constraint. 1.3.2 Monitoring 32. BAT is to carry out monitoring and measurements of process parameters and emissions on a regular basis and to monitor emissions in accordance with the relevant EN standards or, if EN standards are not available, ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality, including the following: Description The selection between continuous or periodic measurements mentioned in BAT 32(c) to 32(f) is based on the emission source and the type of pollutant expected. For periodic measurements of dust, NO x , SO x and CO emissions, a frequency of once a month and up to once a year at the time of normal operating conditions is given as an indication. For periodic measurements of PCDD/F, TOC, HCl, HF, metal emissions, a frequency appropriate to the raw materials and fuels that are used in the process should be applied. 1.3.3 Energy consumption 33. In order to reduce/minimise thermal energy consumption, BAT is to use a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated consumption levels See Table 6. Table 6 BAT-associated levels for thermal energy consumption in the lime and dolime industry 34. In order to minimise electrical energy consumption, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: Description – Technique (b) Vertical kilns can usually burn only coarse limestone pebbles. However, rotary kilns with higher energy consumption can also valorise small fractions and new vertical kilns can burn small granules from 10 mm. The larger granules of kiln feed stone are used more in vertical kilns than in rotary kilns. 1.3.4 Consumption of limestone 35. In order to minimise limestone consumption, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 1.3.5 Selection of fuels 36. In order to prevent/reduce emissions, BAT is to carry out a careful selection and control of fuels entering the kiln. Description Fuels entering the kiln may have a significant effect on air emissions due to their impurities content. The content of sulphur (for long rotary kilns in particular), nitrogen and chlorine have an effect on the range of the SO x , NO x and HCl emissions in the flue-gas. Depending on the chemical composition of the fuel and the type of kiln used, the choice of appropriate fuels or a fuel mix can lead to emissions reductions. Applicability Except for mixed feed shaft kilns, all types of kilns can operate with all types of fuels and fuel mixtures subject to fuels availability which may be impacted by the energy policy of the Member State. The selection of fuel also depends on the desired quality of the final product, the technical possibility to feed the fuel into the selected kiln, and economic considerations. 1.3.5.1 Use of waste fuels 1.3.5.1.1 Waste quality control 37. In order to guarantee the characteristics of waste to be used as fuel in a lime kiln, BAT is to apply the following techniques: 1.3.5.1.2 Waste feeding into the kiln 38. In order to prevent/reduce emissions occurring from the use of waste fuels into the kiln, BAT is to use the following techniques: 1.3.5.1.3 Safety management for the use of hazardous waste materials 39. In order to prevent accidental emissions, BAT is to use safety management for the storage, handling and feeding into the kiln of hazardous waste materials. Description The use of a safety management for the storage, handling and feeding of hazardous waste materials consists of a risk-based approach according to the source and type of waste, for the labelling, checking, sampling and testing of waste to be handled. 1.3.6 Dust emissions 1.3.6.1 Diffuse dust emissions 40. In order to minimise/prevent diffuse dust emissions from dusty operations, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: Applicability In raw material preparation operations, like crushing and sieving, dust separation is not normally needed, because of the moisture content of the raw material. 41. In order to minimise/prevent diffuse dust emissions from bulk storage areas, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 1.3.6.2 Channelled dust emissions from dusty operations other than those from kiln firing processes 42. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions from dusty operations other than those from kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one of the following techniques and to use a maintenance management system which specifically addresses the performance of filters: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 7. Table 7 BAT-associated emission levels for channelled dust emissions from dusty operations other than those from kiln firing processes It should be noted that for small sources (< 10 000 Nm 3 /h) a priority approach regarding the frequency for checking the performance of the filter has to be taken into account (see BAT 32). 1.3.6.3 Dust emissions from kiln firing processes 43. In order to reduce dust emissions from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use flue-gas cleaning with a filter. One or a combination of the following techniques can be used: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 8. Table 8 BAT-associated emission levels for dust emissions from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes 1.3.7 Gaseous compounds 1.3.7.1 Primary techniques for reducing emissions of gaseous compounds 44. In order to reduce the emissions of gaseous compounds (i.e. NO x , SO x , HCl, CO, TOC/VOC, volatile metals) from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 1.3.7.2 NO x emissions 45. In order to reduce the emissions of NO X from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 9. Table 9 BAT-associated emission levels for NO x from flue-gases of kiln firing processes in the lime industry 46. When SNCR is used, BAT is to achieve efficient NO x reduction, while keeping the ammonia slip as low as possible, by using the following technique: Applicability Applicable only to Lepol rotary kilns, where the ideal temperature range of 850 to 1 020 °C is accessible. See also BAT 45, technique (b). BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for the emissions of NH 3 slip from the flue-gases is <30 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value or average over the sampling period (spot measurements for at least half an hour). 1.3.7.3 SO x emissions 47. In order to reduce the emissions of SO x from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 10. Table 10 BAT-associated emission levels for SO x from flue-gases of kiln firing processes in the lime industry 1.3.7.4 CO emissions and CO trips 1.3.7.4.1 CO emissions 48. In order to reduce the emissions of CO from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: In this context, see also BAT 30 and 31 in Section 1.3.1 and BAT 32 in Section 1.3.2. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 11. Table 11 BAT-associated emission levels for CO from the flue-gas of kiln firing processes 1.3.7.4.2 Reduction of CO trips 49. In order to minimise the frequency of CO trips when using electrostatic precipitators, BAT is to use the following techniques: Description For safety reasons, due to the risk of explosions, ESPs will have to shut down during elevated CO levels in the flue-gases. The following techniques prevent CO trips and, therefore, reduce ESP shutdown times: Disruptions predominantly happen during the start-up operation phase. For safe operation, the gas analysers for ESP protection have to be online during all operational phases and the ESP downtime can be reduced by using a backup monitoring system maintained in operation. The continuous CO monitoring system needs to be optimised for reaction time and should be located close to the CO source, e.g. at a preheater tower outlet, or at a kiln inlet in the case of a wet kiln application. Applicability Generally applicable to rotary kilns fitted with electrostatic precipitators (ESPs). 1.3.7.5 Total organic carbon emissions (TOC) 50. In order to reduce the emissions of TOC from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: Applicability For applicability of general primary techniques and monitoring see BAT 30 and 31 in Section 1.3.1, and BAT 32 in Section 1.3.2. Technique (b) is generally applicable to the lime industry, subject to local raw materials availability and/or the type of lime produced. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 12. Table 12 BAT-associated emission levels for TOC from the flue-gas of kiln firing processes 1.3.7.6 Hydrogen chloride (HCl) and hydrogen fluoride (HF) emissions 51. In order to reduce the emissions of HCl and the emissions of HF from the flue-gas of kiln firing processes, when using waste, BAT is to use the following primary techniques: Applicability The techniques are generally applicable in the lime industry but subject to local availability of suitable fuel. BAT-associated emission levels See Table 13. Table 13 BAT-associated emission levels for HCl and HF emissions from the flue-gas of kiln firing processes, when using wastes 1.3.8 PCDD/F emissions 52. In order to prevent or reduce the emissions of PCDD/F from the flue-gas of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following primary techniques: BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AELs are < 0,05 – 0,1 ng PCDD/F I-TEQ/Nm 3 , as the average over the sampling period (6 – 8 hours). 1.3.9 Metal emissions 53. In order to minimise the emissions of metals from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 14. Table 14 BAT associated emission levels for metals from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, when using wastes Furthermore in this context, see also BAT 37 (Section 1.3.5.1.1) and BAT 38 (Section 1.3.5.1.2). 1.3.10 Process losses/waste 54. In order to reduce the solid wastes from the lime manufacturing processes and to save raw materials, BAT is to use the following techniques: 1.4 BAT conclusions for the magnesium oxide industry Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section can be applied to all installations in the magnesium oxide industry (dry process route). 1.4.1 Monitoring 55. BAT is to carry out monitoring and measurements of process parameters and emissions on a regular basis and to monitor emissions in accordance with the relevant EN standards or, if EN standards are not available, ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality, including the following: Description The selection between continuous or periodic measurements mentioned in BAT 55 (c) is based on the emission source and the type of pollutant expected. For periodic measurements for dust, NO x , SO x and CO emissions from kiln processes, a frequency of once a month and up to once a year and at the time of normal operating conditions is given as an indication. 1.4.2 Energy consumption 56. In order to reduce thermal energy consumption, BAT is to use a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated consumption levels The BAT-associated thermal energy consumption is 6 – 12 GJ/t, depending on the process and the products ( 34 ) . 57. In order to minimise electrical energy consumption, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 1.4.3 Dust emissions 1.4.3.1 Diffuse dust emissions 58. In order to minimise/prevent diffuse dust emissions from dusty operations, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following techniques: 1.4.3.2 Channelled dust emissions from dusty operations other than kiln firing processes 59. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions from dusty operations other than those from kiln firing processes, BAT is to use flue-gas cleaning with a filter by applying one or a combination of the following techniques, and to use a maintenance management system which specifically addresses the performance of techniques: BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for channelled dust emissions from dusty operations other than those from kiln firing processes is < 10 mg/Nm 3 , as daily average or average over the sampling period (spot measurements, for at least half an hour). It should be noted that for small sources (< 10 000 Nm 3 /h) a priority approach, based on a maintenance management system regarding the frequency for checking the performance of the filter has to be taken into account (see BAT 55). 1.4.3.3 Dust emissions from the kiln firing process 60. In order to reduce dust emissions from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use flue-gas cleaning with a filter by applying one or a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for dust emissions from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes is < 20 – 35 mg/Nm 3 as the daily average value or average over the sampling period (spot measurements, for at least half an hour). 1.4.4 Gaseous compounds 1.4.4.1 General primary techniques for reducing emissions of gaseous compounds 61. In order to reduce the emissions of gaseous compounds (i.e. NO x , HCl, SO x , CO) from flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use one or a combination of the following primary techniques: 1.4.4.2 NO x emissions 62. In order to reduce the emissions of NO x from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use a combination of the following techniques: BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for the emissions of NO X from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes is < 500 – 1 500 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value or average over the sampling period (spot measurements for at least half an hour) stated as NO 2 . The higher values are related to the high temperature DBM process. 1.4.4.3 CO emissions and CO trips 1.4.4.3.1 CO emissions 63. In order to reduce the emissions of CO from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use a combination of the following techniques: Applicability The techniques for the reduction of CO emissions are generally applicable to the magnesia industry. The selection of raw materials with a low content of organic matter is subject to raw materials availability. BAT-associated emission levels The BAT-AEL for the emissions of CO from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes is < 50 – 1 000 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value or average over the sampling period (spot measurements for at least half an hour). 1.4.4.3.2 Reduction of CO trips 64. In order to minimise the number of CO trips when applying ESPs, BAT is to use the following techniques: Description For safety reasons, due to the risk of explosions, ESPs will have to shut down during elevated CO levels in the flue-gases. The following techniques prevent CO trips and, therefore, reduce ESP shutdown times: Disruptions predominantly happen during the start-up operation phase. For safe operation, the gas analysers for ESP protection have to be online during all operational phases and the ESP downtime can be reduced by using a backup monitoring system maintained in operation. The continuous CO monitoring system needs to be optimised for reaction time and should be located close to the CO source, e.g. at a preheater tower outlet, or at a kiln inlet in the case of a wet kiln application. Applicability Generally applicable to kilns fitted with electrostatic precipitators (ESPs). 1.4.4.4 SO x emissions 65. In order to reduce the emissions of SO x from the flue-gases of kiln firing processes, BAT is to use a combination of the following primary and secondary techniques: BAT-associated emission levels See Table 15. Table 15 BAT-associated emission levels for SO x from flue-gases of kiln firing processes in the magnesia industry 1.4.5 Process losses/waste 66. In order to reduce/minimise process losses/waste, BAT is to reuse various types of collected magnesium carbonate dusts in the process. Applicability Generally applicable, subject to dust chemical composition. 67. In order to reduce/minimise process losses/waste, BAT is to utilise the various types of collected magnesium carbonate dusts in other marketable products when these are not recyclable. Applicability The utilisation of magnesium carbonate dusts in other marketable products may not be within the control of the operator. 68. In order to reduce/minimise process losses/waste, BAT is to reuse sludge resulting from the wet process of the flue-gas desulphurisation in the process or in other sectors. Applicability The utilisation of sludge resulting from the wet process of the flue-gas desulphurisation in other sectors may not be within the control of the operator. 1.4.6 Use of wastes as fuels and/or raw materials 69. In order to guarantee the characteristics of waste to be used as fuels and/or raw materials in magnesium oxide kilns, BAT is to use the following techniques: Applicability Wastes may be used as fuels and/or raw materials in the magnesia industry (although they had not yet been applied in the magnesia industry in 2007) subject to availability, the type of kiln used, the desired product qualities and the technical possibility of feeding the fuels into the kiln. DESCRIPTION OF TECHNIQUES 1.5 Description of techniques for the cement industry 1.5.1 Dust emissions 1.5.2 NO x emissions 1.5.3 SO x emissions 1.6 Description of techniques for lime industry 1.6.1 Dust emissions 1.6.2 NO x emissions 1.6.3 SO x emissions 1.7 Description of techniques for the magnesia industry (dry process route) 1.7.1 Dust emissions 1.7.2 SO x emissions ( 1 ) OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) For sintered dolime produced by the ‧double-pass process‧, the correction for oxygen does not apply. ( 3 ) For dead burned magnesia (DBM) produced by the ‧double-pass process‧, the correction for oxygen does not apply. ( 4 ) Levels do not apply to plants producing special cement or white cement clinker that require significantly higher process temperatures due to product specifications. ( 5 ) Under normal (excluding, e.g. start-ups and shutdowns) and optimised operational conditions. ( 6 ) The production capacity has an influence on the energy demand, with higher capacities providing energy savings and smaller capacities requiring more energy. Energy consumption also depends on the number of cyclone preheater stages, with more cyclone preheater stages leading to lower energy consumption of the kiln process. The appropriate number of cyclone preheater stages is mainly determined by the moisture content of raw materials. ( 7 ) A description of the techniques is given in Section 1.5.1. ( 8 ) A description of the techniques is given in Section 1.5.1 ( 9 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.5.2. ( 10 ) The upper level of the BAT-AEL range is 500 mg/Nm 3 , if the initial NO x level after primary techniques is > 1 000 mg/Nm 3 . ( 11 ) Existing kiln system design, fuel mix properties including waste and raw material burnability (e.g. special cement or white cement clinker) can influence the ability to be within the range. Levels below 350 mg/Nm 3 are achieved at kilns with favourable conditions when using SNCR. In 2008, the lower value of 200 mg/Nm 3 has been reported as a monthly average for three plants (easy burning mix used) using SNCR. ( 12 ) Depending on initial levels and NH 3 slip. ( 13 ) The ammonia slip depends on the initial NO x level and on the NO x abatement efficiency. For Lepol and long rotary kilns, the level may be even higher. ( 14 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.5.3 ( 15 ) The range takes into account the sulphur content in the raw materials. ( 16 ) For white cement and special cement clinker production, the ability of clinker to retain fuel sulphur might be significantly lower leading to higher SO X emissions. ( 17 ) Low levels have been reported based on the quality of the raw materials and the fuels. ( 18 ) Low levels have been reported based on the quality of the raw materials and the fuels. Values higher than 0,03 mg/Nm 3 have to be further investigated. Values close to 0,05 mg/Nm 3 require consideration of additional techniques (e.g. lowering of the flue-gas temperature, activated carbon). ( 19 ) Energy consumption depends on the type of product, the product quality, the process conditions and the raw materials ( 20 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.6.1. ( 21 ) If necessary, centrifugal separators/cyclones can be used as pretreatment of the flue-gases. ( 22 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.6.1. ( *1 ) In exceptional cases where the resistivity of dust is high, the BAT-AEL could be higher, up to 30 mg/Nm 3 , as the daily average value. ( 23 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.6.2 ( 24 ) The higher ends of the ranges are related to the production of dolime and hard burned lime. Higher levels than the upper end of the range may be associated with the production of sintered dolime. ( 25 ) For LRK and PRK with shaft producing hard burned lime, the upper level is up to 800 mg/Nm 3 ( 26 ) Where primary techniques as indicated in BAT 45 (a)I are not sufficient to reach this level and where secondary techniques are not applicable to reduce the NO x emissions to 350 mg/Nm 3 , the upper level is 500 mg/Nm 3 , especially for hard burned lime and for the use of biomass as fuel. ( 27 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.6.3 ( 28 ) The level depends on the initial SO x level in the flue-gas and on the reduction technique used. ( 29 ) For the production of sintered dolime using the ‘double- pass process’, SO x emissions might be higher than the upper end of the range. ( 30 ) Emissions can be higher depending on raw materials used and/or type of lime produced, e.g. hydraulic lime. ( 31 ) BAT-AEL does not apply to MFSK and ASK. ( 32 ) Level can be higher depending on the content of organic matter of raw materials used and/or the type of lime produced, in particular for the production of natural hydraulic lime. ( 33 ) In exceptional cases, the level can be higher. ( 34 ) This range only reflects information provided for the magnesium oxide chapter of the BREF. More specific information about best performing techniques along with the products produced was not provided. ( 35 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.7.1 ( 36 ) A description of the techniques is provided in Section 1.7.1. ( 37 ) A description of the measure/technique is provided in Section 1.7.2 ( 38 ) The BAT-AELs depend on the content of sulphur in the raw materials and fuels. The lower end of the range is associated with the use of raw materials with low sulphur content and the use of natural gas; the upper end of the range is associated with the use of raw materials with higher sulphur content and/or the use of sulphur-containing fuels. ( 39 ) Cross-media effects should be taken into account to assess the best combination of BAT to reduce SO x emissions. ( 40 ) When a wet scrubber is not applicable, BAT-AELs depend on the sulphur content of raw materials and fuels. In this case, the BAT-AEL is < 1 500 mg/Nm 3 while ensuring a SO X emissions removal efficiency of at least 60 %.