COMMISSION DECISION of 30 April 2009 completing the technical requirements for waste characterisation laid down by Directive 2006/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the management of waste from extractive industries (notified under document number C(2009) 3013) (2009/360/EC) THE COMMISSION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, Having regard to Directive 2006/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the management of waste from extractive industries and amending Directive 2004/35/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 22(1)(e) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Waste characterisation 1. Member States shall ensure that the waste characterisation to be carried out by operators in the extractive industries complies with this Decision. 2. Waste characterisation shall cover the following categories of information as specified in the Annex: 3. The criteria for defining inert waste laid down in Decision 2009/359/EC shall be taken into account for the purpose of assessing the geochemical behaviour of waste. Where, on the basis of those criteria, waste is considered to be ‘inert’, it shall be only subject to the relevant part of geochemical testing referred to in point 5 of the Annex. Article 2 Collection and evaluation of information 1. Information and data necessary for the waste characterisation shall be collected in the order set out in paragraphs 2 to 5. 2. Existing investigations and studies, including existing permits, geological surveys, similar sites, lists of inert waste, appropriate certification schemes, European or national standards for similar material, which satisfy the technical requirements set out in the Annex shall be used. 3. The quality and representativity of all information shall be evaluated and possible missing information shall be identified. 4. Where information necessary for the characterisation of the waste is missing, a sampling plan shall be drawn up in accordance with standard EN 14899 and samples shall be taken in accordance with that sampling plan. Sampling plans shall be based on identified information as necessary, including: The reliability and quality of the sampling results shall be evaluated. 5. The results of the characterisation process shall be evaluated. Where necessary, additional information shall be collected following the same methodology. The final result shall feed into the waste management plan. Article 3 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 30 April 2009. For the Commission Stavros DIMAS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 102, 11.4.2006, p. 15 . ( 2 ) See page 46 of this Official Journal. ( 3 ) OJ L 114, 27.4.2006, p. 9 . TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WASTE CHARACTERISATION 1. Background information Review and understanding of the general background and objectives of the extractive operation. Collection of general information about: 2. Geological background of deposit to be exploited Identification of the waste units to be exposed by extraction and processing by providing relevant information on: 3. The waste and its intended handling Description of the nature of all the wastes occurring in each prospecting, extraction and processing operation, including overburden, waste rock and tailings, by providing information on the following elements: 4. Geotechnical behaviour of waste Identification of the suitable parameters for assessing the intrinsic physical characteristics of the waste taking into account the type of waste facility. Relevant parameters to be considered are: granulometry, plasticity, density and water content, degree of compaction, shear strength and angle of friction, permeability and void ratio, compressibility and consolidation. 5. Geochemical characteristics and behaviour of the waste Specification of the chemical and mineralogical characteristics of the waste, and of any additives or residuals remaining in the waste. Prediction of drainage chemistry over time for each type of waste, taking into account its intended handling, in particular: ( 1 ) OJ L 226, 6.9.2000, p. 3 .