COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2018/1258 of 18 September 2018 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family Ecolab Iodine PT3 Family (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation is granted to Ecolab Deutschland GmbH for the biocidal product family Ecolab Iodine PT3 Family with authorisation number EU-0018398-0000. The Union authorisation is valid from 11 October 2018 until 30 September 2028. The Union authorisation is subject to compliance with the SPC set out in the Annex. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 18 September 2018. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/2100 of 4 September 2017 setting out scientific criteria for the determination of endocrine-disrupting properties pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and Council ( OJ L 301, 17.11.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) ECHA opinion of 12 December 2017 on the Union authorisation of Ecolab Iodine PT3 Family (ECHA/BPC/177/2017). Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Ecolab Iodine PT3 Family Product type 3 — Veterinary hygiene (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0018398-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0018398-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL — META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1 – Teat dips for post-milking disinfection 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 1 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. Product to be applied post-milking by use of a dipping cup. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. Apply product on the whole teat and do not wipe it. Keep the animals standing for 5 min. Before the next milking, carefully clean the teats. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Potential Health Effects Eyes: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Skin: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Ingestion: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Inhalation: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Chronic Exposure: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. First Aid Measures: Eye contact: Immediately flush eyes with plenty of water, occasionally lifting the upper and lower eyelids. Check for and remove any contact lenses. Get medical attention if irritation occurs. Inhalation: Remove victim to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. In case of inhalation of decomposition products in a fire, symptoms may be delayed. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Skin contact: Flush contaminated skin with plenty of water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Ingestion: Wash out mouth with water. If material has been swallowed and the exposed person is conscious, give small quantities of water to drink. Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by medical personnel. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Environmental emergency measures: Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air). To prevent malfunctioning of an individual wastewater treatment plant, possible residues containing the product must be discharged to the manure storage (for spreading on agricultural soils or fermentation into biogas installation) or to the municipal sewer If legally allowed. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. European Waste Catalogue: 200130-detergents other than those mentioned in 20 01 29. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store between 5 °C and 25 °C and away from direct sunlight. Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in the original containers. Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 2. Use # 1 – Teat dips for post-milking disinfection 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 2 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. Product to be applied post-milking by use of a dipping cup. Apply product on the whole teat and do not wipe it. Keep the animals standing for 5 min. Before the next milking, carefully clean the teats. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Potential Health Effects Eyes: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Skin: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Ingestion: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Inhalation: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Chronic Exposure: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. First Aid Measures: Eye contact: Immediately flush eyes with plenty of water, occasionally lifting the upper and lower eyelids. Check for and remove any contact lenses. Get medical attention if irritation occurs. Inhalation: Remove victim to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. In case of inhalation of decomposition products in a fire, symptoms may be delayed. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Skin contact: Flush contaminated skin with plenty of water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Ingestion: Wash out mouth with water. If material has been swallowed and the exposed person is conscious, give small quantities of water to drink. Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by medical personnel. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Environmental emergency measures: Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air). To prevent malfunctioning of an individual wastewater treatment plant, possible residues containing the product must be discharged to the manure storage (for spreading on agricultural soils or fermentation into biogas installation) or to the municipal sewer If legally allowed. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. European Waste Catalogue: 200130-detergents other than those mentioned in 20 01 29. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store between 5 °C and 25 °C and away from direct sunlight. Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in the original containers. Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 3. Use # 1 – Teat dips or sprays for post-milking disinfection 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product to be applied by dipping or spraying on teats of milk-producing animals post-milking, using manual or automatic equipment. Post-milking: Apply product on the whole teat and do not wipe it. Keep the animals standing for 5 min. Before the next milking, carefully clean the teats. See also general instructions for use of meta SPC 3. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. See also general risk mitigation measures of meta SPC 3. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.2. Use description Table 4. Use # 2 – Teat dips or sprays for pre-milking disinfection 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product to be applied by dipping or spraying on teats of milk-producing animals pre-milking, using manual equipment. Pre-milking: Clean teats by wiping with cloth before disinfection. Apply product on the whole teats and leave it for 1 min. Then wipe with a single use paper or a towel. See also general instructions for use of meta SPC3. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for post-milking disinfection. See also general risk mitigation measures of meta SPC3. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 3 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use See use-specific instructions for each use. Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use-specific risk mitigation measures for each use. Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) for spraying application. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Potential Health Effects Eyes: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Skin: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Ingestion: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Inhalation: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Chronic Exposure: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. First Aid Measures: Eye contact: Immediately flush eyes with plenty of water, occasionally lifting the upper and lower eyelids. Check for and remove any contact lenses. Get medical attention if irritation occurs. Inhalation: Remove victim to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. In case of inhalation of decomposition products in a fire, symptoms may be delayed. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Skin contact: Flush contaminated skin with plenty of water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Ingestion: Wash out mouth with water. If material has been swallowed and the exposed person is conscious, give small quantities of water to drink. Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by medical personnel. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Environmental emergency measures: Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air). To prevent malfunctioning of an individual wastewater treatment plant, possible residues containing the product must be discharged to the manure storage (for spreading on agricultural soils or fermentation into biogas installation) or to the municipal sewer If legally allowed. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. European Waste Catalogue: 200130-detergents other than those mentioned in 20 01 29. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store between 5 °C and 25 °C and away from direct sunlight. Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in the original containers. Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 4 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4 4.1. Use description Table 5. Use # 1 – Teat dips or sprays for post-milking disinfection 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 4 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 4 ) OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. Product to be applied by dipping or spraying on teats of milk-producing animals post-milking using manual or automatic equipment. Apply product on the whole teat and do not wipe it. Keep the animals standing for 5 min. Before the next milking, carefully clean the teats. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) for spraying application. In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Potential Health Effects Eyes: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Skin: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Ingestion: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Inhalation: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Chronic Exposure: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. First Aid Measures: Eye contact: Immediately flush eyes with plenty of water, occasionally lifting the upper and lower eyelids. Check for and remove any contact lenses. Get medical attention if irritation occurs. Inhalation: Remove victim to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. In case of inhalation of decomposition products in a fire, symptoms may be delayed. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Skin contact: Flush contaminated skin with plenty of water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Ingestion: Wash out mouth with water. If material has been swallowed and the exposed person is conscious, give small quantities of water to drink. Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by medical personnel. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Environmental emergency measures: Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air). To prevent malfunctioning of an individual wastewater treatment plant, possible residues containing the product must be discharged to the manure storage (for spreading on agricultural soils or fermentation into biogas installation) or to the municipal sewer If legally allowed. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. European Waste Catalogue: 200130-detergents other than those mentioned in 20 01 29. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store between 5 °C and 25 °C and away from direct sunlight. Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in the original containers. Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 5 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 5 4.1. Use description Table 6. Use # 1 – Teat dips for post-milking disinfection 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 5 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 5 ) OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. Product to be applied post-milking by use of a dipping cup. Apply product on the whole teat and do not wipe it. Keep the animals standing for 5 min. Before the next milking, carefully clean the teats. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Potential Health Effects Eyes: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Skin: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Ingestion: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Inhalation: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Chronic Exposure: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. First Aid Measures: Eye contact: Immediately flush eyes with plenty of water, occasionally lifting the upper and lower eyelids. Check for and remove any contact lenses. Get medical attention if irritation occurs. Inhalation: Remove victim to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. In case of inhalation of decomposition products in a fire, symptoms may be delayed. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Skin contact: Flush contaminated skin with plenty of water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Ingestion: Wash out mouth with water. If material has been swallowed and the exposed person is conscious, give small quantities of water to drink. Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by medical personnel. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Environmental emergency measures: Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air). To prevent malfunctioning of an individual wastewater treatment plant, possible residues containing the product must be discharged to the manure storage (for spreading on agricultural soils or fermentation into biogas installation) or to the municipal sewer If legally allowed. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. European Waste Catalogue: 200130-detergents other than those mentioned in 20 01 29. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store between 5 °C and 25 °C and away from direct sunlight. Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in the original containers. Shelf life: 18 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 6 1. META SPC 6 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 6 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 6 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 6 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 6 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 6 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 6 4.1. Use description Table 7. Use # 1 – Teat dips or sprays for post-milking disinfection 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use of meta SPC 6 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of meta SPC 6 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of meta SPC 6 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of meta SPC 6 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of meta SPC 6 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 6 ) OF THE META SPC 6 5.1. Instructions for use Always read the label or leaflet before use and follow all the instructions provided. The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. Product to be applied by dipping or spraying post-milking using manual or automatic equipment. Apply product on the whole teat and do not wipe it. Keep the animals standing for 5 min. Before the next milking, carefully clean the teats. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) for spraying application In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another biocidal product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre-milking disinfection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Potential Health Effects Eyes: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Skin: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Ingestion: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Inhalation: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. Chronic Exposure: Health injuries are not known or expected under normal use. First Aid Measures: Eye contact: Immediately flush eyes with plenty of water, occasionally lifting the upper and lower eyelids. Check for and remove any contact lenses. Get medical attention if irritation occurs. Inhalation: Remove victim to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. In case of inhalation of decomposition products in a fire, symptoms may be delayed. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Skin contact: Flush contaminated skin with plenty of water. Remove contaminated clothing and shoes. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Ingestion: Wash out mouth with water. If material has been swallowed and the exposed person is conscious, give small quantities of water to drink. Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by medical personnel. Get medical attention if symptoms occur. Environmental emergency measures: Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air). To prevent malfunctioning of an individual wastewater treatment plant, possible residues containing the product must be discharged to the manure storage (for spreading on agricultural soils or fermentation into biogas installation) or to the municipal sewer If legally allowed. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. European Waste Catalogue: 200130-detergents other than those mentioned in 20 01 29. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store between 5 °C and 25 °C and away from direct sunlight. Keep out of reach of children. Keep container tightly closed. Store in the original containers. Shelf life: 24 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 6 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC3. ( 4 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC4. ( 5 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC5. ( 6 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC6.