DIRECTIVE 2010/75/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) (Recast) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 2 ) , Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 3 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: CHAPTER I COMMON PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Directive lays down rules on integrated prevention and control of pollution arising from industrial activities. It also lays down rules designed to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce emissions into air, water and land and to prevent the generation of waste, in order to achieve a high level of protection of the environment taken as a whole. Article 2 1. This Directive shall apply to the industrial activities giving rise to pollution referred to in Chapters II to VI. 2. This Directive shall not apply to research activities, development activities or the testing of new products and processes. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Directive the following definitions shall apply: Article 4 Obligation to hold a permit 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that no installation or combustion plant, waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant is operated without a permit. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, Member States may set a procedure for the registration of installations covered only by Chapter V. The procedure for registration shall be specified in a binding act and include at least a notification to the competent authority by the operator of the intention to operate an installation. 2. Member States may opt to provide that a permit cover two or more installations or parts of installations operated by the same operator on the same site. Where a permit covers two or more installations, it shall contain conditions to ensure that each installation complies with the requirements of this Directive. 3. Member States may opt to provide that a permit cover several parts of an installation operated by different operators. In such cases, the permit shall specify the responsibilities of each operator. Article 5 Granting of a permit 1. Without prejudice to other requirements laid down in national or Union law, the competent authority shall grant a permit if the installation complies with the requirements of this Directive. 2. Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the conditions of, and the procedures for the granting of, the permit are fully coordinated where more than one competent authority or more than one operator is involved or more than one permit is granted, in order to guarantee an effective integrated approach by all authorities competent for this procedure. 3. In the case of a new installation or a substantial change where Article 4 of Directive 85/337/EEC applies, any relevant information obtained or conclusion arrived at pursuant to Articles 5, 6, 7 and 9 of that Directive shall be examined and used for the purposes of granting the permit. Article 6 General binding rules Without prejudice to the obligation to hold a permit, Member States may include requirements for certain categories of installations, combustion plants, waste incineration plants or waste co-incineration plants in general binding rules. Where general binding rules are adopted, the permit may simply include a reference to such rules. Article 7 Incidents and accidents Without prejudice to Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage ( 30 ) , in the event of any incident or accident significantly affecting the environment, Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that: Article 8 Non-compliance 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the permit conditions are complied with. 2. In the event of a breach of the permit conditions, Member States shall ensure that: Where the breach of the permit conditions poses an immediate danger to human health or threatens to cause an immediate significant adverse effect upon the environment, and until compliance is restored in accordance with points (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph, the operation of the installation, combustion plant, waste incineration plant, waste co-incineration plant or relevant part thereof shall be suspended. Article 9 Emission of greenhouse gases 1. Where emissions of a greenhouse gas from an installation are specified in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC in relation to an activity carried out in that installation, the permit shall not include an emission limit value for direct emissions of that gas, unless necessary to ensure that no significant local pollution is caused. 2. For activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC, Member States may choose not to impose requirements relating to energy efficiency in respect of combustion units or other units emitting carbon dioxide on the site. 3. Where necessary, the competent authorities shall amend the permit as appropriate. 4. Paragraphs 1 to 3 shall not apply to installations which are temporarily excluded from the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union in accordance with Article 27 of Directive 2003/87/EC. CHAPTER II PROVISIONS FOR ACTIVITIES LISTED IN ANNEX I Article 10 This Chapter shall apply to the activities set out in Annex I and, where applicable, reaching the capacity thresholds set out in that Annex. Article 11 General principles governing the basic obligations of the operator Member States shall take the necessary measures to provide that installations are operated in accordance with the following principles: Article 12 Applications for permits 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that an application for a permit includes a description of the following: An application for a permit shall also include a non-technical summary of the details referred to in the first subparagraph. 2. Where information supplied in accordance with the requirements provided for in Directive 85/337/EEC or a safety report prepared in accordance with Directive 96/82/EC or other information produced in response to other legislation fulfils any of the requirements of paragraph 1, that information may be included in, or attached to, the application. Article 13 BAT reference documents and exchange of information 1. In order to draw up, review and, where necessary, update BAT reference documents, the Commission shall organise an exchange of information between Member States, the industries concerned, non-governmental organisations promoting environmental protection and the Commission. 2. The exchange of information shall, in particular, address the following: 3. The Commission shall establish and regularly convene a forum composed of representatives of Member States, the industries concerned and non-governmental organisations promoting environmental protection. The Commission shall obtain the opinion of the forum on the practical arrangements for the exchange of information and, in particular, on the following: The guidance referred to in points (c) and (d) of the second subparagraph shall take account of the opinion of the forum and shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 75(2). 4. The Commission shall obtain and make publicly available the opinion of the forum on the proposed content of the BAT reference documents and shall take into account this opinion for the procedures laid down in paragraph 5. 5. Decisions on the BAT conclusions shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 75(2). 6. After the adoption of a decision in accordance with paragraph 5, the Commission shall without delay make the BAT reference document publicly available and ensure that BAT conclusions are made available in all the official languages of the Union. 7. Pending the adoption of a relevant decision in accordance with paragraph 5, the conclusions on best available techniques from BAT reference documents adopted by the Commission prior to the date referred to in Article 83 shall apply as BAT conclusions for the purposes of this Chapter except for Article 15(3) and (4). Article 14 Permit conditions 1. Member States shall ensure that the permit includes all measures necessary for compliance with the requirements of Articles 11 and 18. Those measures shall include at least the following: 2. For the purpose of paragraph 1(a), emission limit values may be supplemented or replaced by equivalent parameters or technical measures ensuring an equivalent level of environmental protection. 3. BAT conclusions shall be the reference for setting the permit conditions. 4. Without prejudice to Article 18, the competent authority may set stricter permit conditions than those achievable by the use of the best available techniques as described in the BAT conclusions. Member States may establish rules under which the competent authority may set such stricter conditions. 5. Where the competent authority sets permit conditions on the basis of a best available technique not described in any of the relevant BAT conclusions, it shall ensure that: Where the BAT conclusions referred to in the first subparagraph do not contain emission levels associated with the best available techniques, the competent authority shall ensure that the technique referred to in the first subparagraph ensures a level of environmental protection equivalent to the best available techniques described in the BAT conclusions. 6. Where an activity or a type of production process carried out within an installation is not covered by any of the BAT conclusions or where those conclusions do not address all the potential environmental effects of the activity or process, the competent authority shall, after prior consultations with the operator, set the permit conditions on the basis of the best available techniques that it has determined for the activities or processes concerned, by giving special consideration to the criteria listed in Annex III. 7. For installations referred to in point 6.6 of Annex I, paragraphs 1 to 6 of this Article shall apply without prejudice to the legislation relating to animal welfare. Article 15 Emission limit values, equivalent parameters and technical measures 1. The emission limit values for polluting substances shall apply at the point where the emissions leave the installation, and any dilution prior to that point shall be disregarded when determining those values. With regard to indirect releases of polluting substances into water, the effect of a water treatment plant may be taken into account when determining the emission limit values of the installation concerned, provided that an equivalent level of protection of the environment as a whole is guaranteed and provided this does not lead to higher levels of pollution in the environment. 2. Without prejudice to Article 18, the emission limit values and the equivalent parameters and technical measures referred to in Article 14(1) and (2) shall be based on the best available techniques, without prescribing the use of any technique or specific technology. 3. The competent authority shall set emission limit values that ensure that, under normal operating conditions, emissions do not exceed the emission levels associated with the best available techniques as laid down in the decisions on BAT conclusions referred to in Article 13(5) through either of the following: Where point (b) is applied, the competent authority shall, at least annually, assess the results of emission monitoring in order to ensure that emissions under normal operating conditions have not exceeded the emission levels associated with the best available techniques. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 3, and without prejudice to Article 18, the competent authority may, in specific cases, set less strict emission limit values. Such a derogation may apply only where an assessment shows that the achievement of emission levels associated with the best available techniques as described in BAT conclusions would lead to disproportionately higher costs compared to the environmental benefits due to: The competent authority shall document in an annex to the permit conditions the reasons for the application of the first subparagraph including the result of the assessment and the justification for the conditions imposed. The emission limit values set in accordance with the first subparagraph shall, however, not exceed the emission limit values set out in the Annexes to this Directive, where applicable. The competent authority shall in any case ensure that no significant pollution is caused and that a high level of protection of the environment as a whole is achieved. On the basis of information provided by Member States in accordance with Article 72(1), in particular concerning the application of this paragraph, the Commission may, where necessary, assess and further clarify, through guidance, the criteria to be taken into account for the application of this paragraph. The competent authority shall re-assess the application of the first subparagraph as part of each reconsideration of the permit conditions pursuant to Article 21. 5. The competent authority may grant temporary derogations from the requirements of paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article and from Article 11(a) and (b) for the testing and use of emerging techniques for a total period of time not exceeding 9 months, provided that after the period specified, either the technique is stopped or the activity achieves at least the emission levels associated with the best available techniques. Article 16 Monitoring requirements 1. The monitoring requirements referred to in Article 14(1)(c) shall, where applicable, be based on the conclusions on monitoring as described in the BAT conclusions. 2. The frequency of the periodic monitoring referred to in Article 14(1)(e) shall be determined by the competent authority in a permit for each individual installation or in general binding rules. Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, periodic monitoring shall be carried out at least once every 5 years for groundwater and 10 years for soil, unless such monitoring is based on a systematic appraisal of the risk of contamination. Article 17 General binding rules for activities listed in Annex I 1. When adopting general binding rules, Member States shall ensure an integrated approach and a high level of environmental protection equivalent to that achievable with individual permit conditions. 2. General binding rules shall be based on the best available techniques, without prescribing the use of any technique or specific technology in order to ensure compliance with Articles 14 and 15. 3. Member States shall ensure that general binding rules are updated to take into account developments in best available techniques and in order to ensure compliance with Article 21. 4. General binding rules adopted in accordance with paragraphs 1 to 3 shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. Article 18 Environmental quality standards Where an environmental quality standard requires stricter conditions than those achievable by the use of the best available techniques, additional measures shall be included in the permit, without prejudice to other measures which may be taken to comply with environmental quality standards. Article 19 Developments in best available techniques Member States shall ensure that the competent authority follows or is informed of developments in best available techniques and of the publication of any new or updated BAT conclusions and shall make that information available to the public concerned. Article 20 Changes by operators to installations 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the operator informs the competent authority of any planned change in the nature or functioning, or an extension of the installation which may have consequences for the environment. Where appropriate, the competent authority shall update the permit. 2. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that no substantial change planned by the operator is made without a permit granted in accordance with this Directive. The application for a permit and the decision by the competent authority shall cover those parts of the installation and those details listed in Article 12 which may be affected by the substantial change. 3. Any change in the nature or functioning or an extension of an installation shall be deemed to be substantial if the change or extension in itself reaches the capacity thresholds set out in Annex I. Article 21 Reconsideration and updating of permit conditions by the competent authority 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the competent authority periodically reconsiders in accordance with paragraphs 2 to 5 all permit conditions and, where necessary to ensure compliance with this Directive, updates those conditions. 2. At the request of the competent authority, the operator shall submit all the information necessary for the purpose of reconsidering the permit conditions, including, in particular, results of emission monitoring and other data, that enables a comparison of the operation of the installation with the best available techniques described in the applicable BAT conclusions and with the emission levels associated with the best available techniques. When reconsidering permit conditions, the competent authority shall use any information resulting from monitoring or inspections. 3. Within 4 years of publication of decisions on BAT conclusions in accordance with Article 13(5) relating to the main activity of an installation, the competent authority shall ensure that: The reconsideration shall take into account all the new or updated BAT conclusions applicable to the installation and adopted in accordance with Article 13(5) since the permit was granted or last reconsidered. 4. Where an installation is not covered by any of the BAT conclusions, the permit conditions shall be reconsidered and, if necessary, updated where developments in the best available techniques allow for the significant reduction of emissions. 5. The permit conditions shall be reconsidered and, where necessary, updated at least in the following cases: Article 22 Site closure 1. Without prejudice to Directive 2000/60/EC, Directive 2004/35/EC, Directive 2006/118/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on the protection of groundwater against pollution and deterioration ( 31 ) and to relevant Union law on soil protection, the competent authority shall set permit conditions to ensure compliance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article upon definitive cessation of activities. 2. Where the activity involves the use, production or release of relevant hazardous substances and having regard to the possibility of soil and groundwater contamination at the site of the installation, the operator shall prepare and submit to the competent authority a baseline report before starting operation of an installation or before a permit for an installation is updated for the first time after 7 January 2013. The baseline report shall contain the information necessary to determine the state of soil and groundwater contamination so as to make a quantified comparison with the state upon definitive cessation of activities provided for under paragraph 3. The baseline report shall contain at least the following information: Where information produced pursuant to other national or Union law fulfils the requirements of this paragraph that information may be included in, or attached to, the submitted baseline report. The Commission shall establish guidance on the content of the baseline report. 3. Upon definitive cessation of the activities, the operator shall assess the state of soil and groundwater contamination by relevant hazardous substances used, produced or released by the installation. Where the installation has caused significant pollution of soil or groundwater by relevant hazardous substances compared to the state established in the baseline report referred to in paragraph 2, the operator shall take the necessary measures to address that pollution so as to return the site to that state. For that purpose, the technical feasibility of such measures may be taken into account. Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, upon definitive cessation of the activities, and where the contamination of soil and groundwater at the site poses a significant risk to human health or the environment as a result of the permitted activities carried out by the operator before the permit for the installation is updated for the first time after 7 January 2013 and taking into account the conditions of the site of the installation established in accordance with Article 12(1)(d), the operator shall take the necessary actions aimed at the removal, control, containment or reduction of relevant hazardous substances, so that the site, taking into account its current or approved future use, ceases to pose such a risk. 4. Where the operator is not required to prepare a baseline report referred to in paragraph 2, the operator shall, upon definitive cessation of the activities, take the necessary actions aimed at the removal, control, containment or reduction of relevant hazardous substances, so that the site, taking into account its current or approved future use, ceases to pose any significant risk to human health or the environment due to the contamination of soil and groundwater as a result of the permitted activities and taking into account the conditions of the site of the installation established in accordance with Article 12(1)(d). Article 23 Environmental inspections 1. Member States shall set up a system of environmental inspections of installations addressing the examination of the full range of relevant environmental effects from the installations concerned. Member States shall ensure that operators afford the competent authorities all necessary assistance to enable those authorities to carry out any site visits, to take samples and to gather any information necessary for the performance of their duties for the purposes of this Directive. 2. Member States shall ensure that all installations are covered by an environmental inspection plan at national, regional or local level and shall ensure that this plan is regularly reviewed and, where appropriate, updated. 3. Each environmental inspection plan shall include the following: 4. Based on the inspection plans, the competent authority shall regularly draw up programmes for routine environmental inspections, including the frequency of site visits for different types of installations. The period between two site visits shall be based on a systematic appraisal of the environmental risks of the installations concerned and shall not exceed 1 year for installations posing the highest risks and 3 years for installations posing the lowest risks. If an inspection has identified an important case of non-compliance with the permit conditions, an additional site visit shall be carried out within 6 months of that inspection. The systematic appraisal of the environmental risks shall be based on at least the following criteria: The Commission may adopt guidance on the criteria for the appraisal of environmental risks. 5. Non-routine environmental inspections shall be carried out to investigate serious environmental complaints, serious environmental accidents, incidents and occurrences of non-compliance as soon as possible and, where appropriate, before the granting, reconsideration or update of a permit. 6. Following each site visit, the competent authority shall prepare a report describing the relevant findings regarding compliance of the installation with the permit conditions and conclusions on whether any further action is necessary. The report shall be notified to the operator concerned within 2 months of the site visit taking place. The report shall be made publicly available by the competent authority in accordance with Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to environmental information ( 33 ) within 4 months of the site visit taking place. Without prejudice to Article 8(2), the competent authority shall ensure that the operator takes all the necessary actions identified in the report within a reasonable period. Article 24 Access to information and public participation in the permit procedure 1. Member States shall ensure that the public concerned are given early and effective opportunities to participate in the following procedures: The procedure set out in Annex IV shall apply to such participation. 2. When a decision on granting, reconsideration or updating of a permit has been taken, the competent authority shall make available to the public, including via the Internet in relation to points (a), (b) and (f), the following information: 3. The competent authority shall also make available to the public, including via the Internet at least in relation to point (a): 4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article shall apply subject to the restrictions laid down in Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 2003/4/EC. Article 25 Access to justice 1. Member States shall ensure that, in accordance with the relevant national legal system, members of the public concerned have access to a review procedure before a court of law or another independent and impartial body established by law to challenge the substantive or procedural legality of decisions, acts or omissions subject to Article 24 when one of the following conditions is met: 2. Member States shall determine at what stage the decisions, acts or omissions may be challenged. 3. What constitutes a sufficient interest and impairment of a right shall be determined by Member States, consistently with the objective of giving the public concerned wide access to justice. To this end, the interest of any non-governmental organisation promoting environmental protection and meeting any requirements under national law shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of paragraph 1(a). Such organisations shall also be deemed to have rights capable of being impaired for the purpose of paragraph 1(b). 4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not exclude the possibility of a preliminary review procedure before an administrative authority and shall not affect the requirement of exhaustion of administrative review procedures prior to recourse to judicial review procedures, where such a requirement exists under national law. Any such procedure shall be fair, equitable, timely and not prohibitively expensive. 5. Member States shall ensure that practical information is made available to the public on access to administrative and judicial review procedures. Article 26 Transboundary effects 1. Where a Member State is aware that the operation of an installation is likely to have significant negative effects on the environment of another Member State, or where a Member State which is likely to be significantly affected so requests, the Member State in whose territory the application for a permit pursuant to Article 4 or Article 20(2) was submitted shall forward to the other Member State any information required to be given or made available pursuant to Annex IV at the same time as it makes it available to the public. Such information shall serve as a basis for any consultations necessary in the framework of the bilateral relations between the two Member States on a reciprocal and equivalent basis. 2. Within the framework of their bilateral relations, Member States shall ensure that in the cases referred to in paragraph 1, the applications are also made available for an appropriate period of time to the public of the Member State likely to be affected so that it will have the right to comment on them before the competent authority reaches its decision. 3. The results of any consultations pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be taken into consideration when the competent authority reaches a decision on the application. 4. The competent authority shall inform any Member State which has been consulted pursuant to paragraph 1 of the decision reached on the application and shall forward to it the information referred to in Article 24(2). That Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that that information is made available in an appropriate manner to the public concerned in its own territory. Article 27 Emerging techniques 1. Member States shall, where appropriate, encourage the development and application of emerging techniques, in particular for those emerging techniques identified in BAT reference documents. 2. The Commission shall establish guidance to assist Member States in encouraging the development and application of emerging techniques as referred to in paragraph 1. CHAPTER III SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMBUSTION PLANTS Article 28 This Chapter shall apply to combustion plants, the total rated thermal input of which is equal to or greater than 50 MW, irrespective of the type of fuel used. This Chapter shall not apply to the following combustion plants: Article 29 Aggregation rules 1. Where the waste gases of two or more separate combustion plants are discharged through a common stack, the combination formed by such plants shall be considered as a single combustion plant and their capacities added for the purpose of calculating the total rated thermal input. 2. Where two or more separate combustion plants which have been granted a permit for the first time on or after 1 July 1987, or the operators of which have submitted a complete application for a permit on or after that date, are installed in such a way that, taking technical and economic factors into account, their waste gases could in the judgement of the competent authority, be discharged through a common stack, the combination formed by such plants shall be considered as a single combustion plant and their capacities added for the purpose of calculating the total rated thermal input. 3. For the purpose of calculating the total rated thermal input of a combination of combustion plants referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, individual combustion plants with a rated thermal input below 15 MW shall not be considered. Article 30 Emission limit values 1. Waste gases from combustion plants shall be discharged in a controlled way by means of a stack, containing one or more flues, the height of which is calculated in such a way as to safeguard human health and the environment. 2. All permits for installations containing combustion plants which have been granted a permit before 7 January 2013, or the operators of which have submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that such plants are put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, shall include conditions ensuring that emissions into air from these plants do not exceed the emission limit values set out in Part 1 of Annex V. All permits for installations containing combustion plants which had been granted an exemption as referred to in Article 4(4) of Directive 2001/80/EC and which are in operation after 1 January 2016, shall include conditions ensuring that emissions into the air from these plants do not exceed the emission limit values set out in Part 2 of Annex V. 3. All permits for installations containing combustion plants not covered by paragraph 2 shall include conditions ensuring that emissions into the air from these plants do not exceed the emission limit values set out in Part 2 of Annex V. 4. The emission limit values set out in Parts 1 and 2 of Annex V as well as the minimum rates of desulphurisation set out in Part 5 of that Annex shall apply to the emissions of each common stack in relation to the total rated thermal input of the entire combustion plant. Where Annex V provides that emission limit values may be applied for a part of a combustion plant with a limited number of operating hours, those limit values shall apply to the emissions of that part of the plant, but shall be set in relation to the total rated thermal input of the entire combustion plant. 5. The competent authority may grant a derogation for a maximum of 6 months from the obligation to comply with the emission limit values provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3 for sulphur dioxide in respect of a combustion plant which to this end normally uses low-sulphur fuel, in cases where the operator is unable to comply with those limit values because of an interruption in the supply of low-sulphur fuel resulting from a serious shortage. Member States shall immediately inform the Commission of any derogation granted under the first subparagraph. 6. The competent authority may grant a derogation from the obligation to comply with the emission limit values provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3 in cases where a combustion plant using only gaseous fuel has to resort exceptionally to the use of other fuels because of a sudden interruption in the supply of gas and for this reason would need to be equipped with a waste gas purification facility. The period for which such a derogation is granted shall not exceed 10 days except where there is an overriding need to maintain energy supplies. The operator shall immediately inform the competent authority of each specific case referred to in the first subparagraph. Member States shall inform the Commission immediately of any derogation granted under the first subparagraph. 7. Where a combustion plant is extended, the emission limit values set out in Part 2 of Annex V shall apply to the extended part of the plant affected by the change and shall be set in relation to the total rated thermal input of the entire combustion plant. In the case of a change to a combustion plant, which may have consequences for the environment and which affects a part of the plant with a rated thermal input of 50 MW or more, the emission limit values as set out in Part 2 of Annex V shall apply to the part of the plant which has changed in relation to the total rated thermal input of the entire combustion plant. 8. The emission limit values set out in Parts 1 and 2 of Annex V shall not apply to the following combustion plants: 9. For the following combustion plants, on the basis of the best available techniques, the Commission shall review the need to establish Union-wide emission limit values and to amend the emission limit values set out in Annex V: The Commission shall, by 31 December 2013, report the results of this review to the European Parliament and to the Council accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal. Article 31 Desulphurisation rate 1. For combustion plants firing indigenous solid fuel, which cannot comply with the emission limit values for sulphur dioxide referred to in Article 30(2) and (3) due to the characteristics of this fuel, Member States may apply instead the minimum rates of desulphurisation set out in Part 5 of Annex V, in accordance with the compliance rules set out in Part 6 of that Annex and with prior validation by the competent authority of the technical report referred to in Article 72(4)(a). 2. For combustion plants firing indigenous solid fuel, which co-incinerate waste, and which cannot comply with the C proc values for sulphur dioxide set out in points 3.1 or 3.2 of Part 4 of Annex VI due to the characteristics of the indigenous solid fuel, Member States may apply instead the minimum rates of desulphurisation set out in Part 5 of Annex V, in accordance with the compliance rules set out in Part 6 of that Annex. If Member States choose to apply this paragraph, C waste as referred to in point 1 of Part 4 of Annex VI shall be equal to 0 mg/Nm 3 . 3. The Commission shall, by 31 December 2019, review the possibility of applying minimum rates of desulphurisation set out in Part 5 of Annex V, taking into account, in particular, the best available techniques and benefits obtained from reduced sulphur dioxide emissions. Article 32 Transitional National Plan 1. During the period from 1 January 2016 to 30 June 2020, Member States may draw up and implement a transitional national plan covering combustion plants which were granted the first permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003. For each of the combustion plants covered by the plan, the plan shall cover emissions of one or more of the following pollutants: nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide and dust. For gas turbines, only nitrogen oxides emissions shall be covered by the plan. The transitional national plan shall not include any of the following combustion plants: 2. Combustion plants covered by the plan may be exempted from compliance with the emission limit values referred to in Article 30(2) for the pollutants which are subject to the plan or, where applicable, with the rates of desulphurisation referred to in Article 31. The emission limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and dust set out in the permit for the combustion plant applicable on 31 December 2015, pursuant in particular to the requirements of Directives 2001/80/EC and 2008/1/EC, shall at least be maintained. Combustion plants with a total rated thermal input of more than 500 MW firing solid fuels, which were granted the first permit after 1 July 1987, shall comply with the emission limit values for nitrogen oxides set out in Part 1 of Annex V. 3. For each of the pollutants it covers, the transitional national plan shall set a ceiling defining the maximum total annual emissions for all of the plants covered by the plan on the basis of each plant’s total rated thermal input on 31 December 2010, its actual annual operating hours and its fuel use, averaged over the last 10 years of operation up to and including 2010. The ceiling for the year 2016 shall be calculated on the basis of the relevant emission limit values set out in Annexes III to VII to Directive 2001/80/EC or, where applicable, on the basis of the rates of desulphurisation set out in Annex III to Directive 2001/80/EC. In the case of gas turbines, the emission limit values for nitrogen oxides set out for such plants in Part B of Annex VI to Directive 2001/80/EC shall be used. The ceilings for the years 2019 and 2020 shall be calculated on the basis of the relevant emission limit values set out in Part 1 of Annex V to this Directive or, where applicable, the relevant rates of desulphurisation set out in Part 5 of Annex V to this Directive. The ceilings for the years 2017 and 2018 shall be set providing a linear decrease of the ceilings between 2016 and 2019. Where a plant included in the transitional national plan is closed or no longer falls within the scope of Chapter III, this shall not result in an increase in total annual emissions from the remaining plants covered by the plan. 4. The transitional national plan shall also contain provisions on monitoring and reporting that comply with the implementing rules established in accordance with Article 41(b), as well as the measures foreseen for each of the plants in order to ensure timely compliance with the emission limit values that will apply from 1 July 2020. 5. Not later than 1 January 2013, Member States shall communicate their transitional national plans to the Commission. The Commission shall evaluate the plans and, where the Commission has raised no objections within 12 months of receipt of a plan, the Member State concerned shall consider its plan to be accepted. When the Commission considers a plan not to be in accordance with the implementing rules established in accordance with Article 41(b), it shall inform the Member State concerned that its plan cannot be accepted. In relation to the evaluation of a new version of a plan which a Member State communicates to the Commission, the time period referred to in the second subparagraph shall be 6 months. 6. Member States shall inform the Commission of any subsequent changes to the plan. Article 33 Limited life time derogation 1. During the period from 1 January 2016 to 31 December 2023, combustion plants may be exempted from compliance with the emission limit values referred to in Article 30(2) and with the rates of desulphurisation referred to in Article 31, where applicable, and from their inclusion in the transitional national plan referred to in Article 32 provided that the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. At the latest on 1 January 2016, each Member State shall communicate to the Commission a list of any combustion plants to which paragraph 1 applies, including their total rated thermal input, the fuel types used and the applicable emission limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and dust. For plants subject to paragraph 1, Member States shall communicate annually to the Commission a record of the number of operating hours since 1 January 2016. 3. In case of a combustion plant being, on 6 January 2011, part of a small isolated system and accounting at that date for at least 35 % of the electricity supply within that system, which is unable, due to its technical characteristics, to comply with the emission limit values referred to in Article 30(2), the number of operating hours referred to in paragraph 1(a) of this Article shall be 18 000, starting from 1 January 2020 and ending no later than 31 December 2023, and the date referred to in paragraph 1(b) and paragraph 2 of this Article shall be 1 January 2020. 4. In case of a combustion plant with a total rated thermal input of more than 1 500 MW which started operating before 31 December 1986 and fires indigenous solid fuel with a net calorific value of less than 5 800 kJ/kg, a moisture content greater than 45 % by weight, a combined moisture and ash content greater than 60 % by weight and a calcium oxide content in ash greater than 10 %, the number of operating hours referred to in paragraph 1(a) shall be 32 000. Article 34 Small isolated systems 1. Until 31 December 2019, combustion plants being, on 6 January 2011, part of a small isolated system may be exempted from compliance with the emission limit values referred to in Article 30(2) and the rates of desulphurisation referred to in Article 31, where applicable. Until 31 December 2019, the emission limit values set out in the permits of these combustion plants, pursuant in particular to the requirements of Directives 2001/80/EC and 2008/1/EC, shall at least be maintained. 2. Combustion plants with a total rated thermal input of more than 500 MW firing solid fuels, which were granted the first permit after 1 July 1987, shall comply with the emission limit values for nitrogen oxides set out in Part 1 of Annex V. 3. Where there are, on the territory of a Member State combustion plants covered by this Chapter that are part of a small isolated system, that Member State shall report to the Commission before 7 January 2013 a list of those combustion plants, the total annual energy consumption of the small isolated system and the amount of energy obtained through interconnection with other systems. Article 35 District heating plants 1. Until 31 December 2022, a combustion plant may be exempted from compliance with the emission limit values referred to in Article 30(2) and the rates of desulphurisation referred to in Article 31 provided that the following conditions are fulfilled: 2. At the latest on 1 January 2016, each Member State shall communicate to the Commission a list of any combustion plants to which paragraph 1 applies, including their total rated thermal input, the fuel types used and the applicable emission limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and dust. In addition, Member States shall, for any combustion plants to which paragraph 1 applies and during the period mentioned in that paragraph, inform the Commission annually of the proportion of useful heat production of each plant which was delivered in the form of steam or hot water to a public network for district heating, expressed as a rolling average over the preceding 5 years. Article 36 Geological storage of carbon dioxide 1. Member States shall ensure that operators of all combustion plants with a rated electrical output of 300 megawatts or more for which the original construction licence or, in the absence of such a procedure, the original operating licence is granted after the entry into force of Directive 2009/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the geological storage of carbon dioxide ( 34 ) , have assessed whether the following conditions are met: 2. If the conditions laid down in paragraph 1 are met, the competent authority shall ensure that suitable space on the installation site for the equipment necessary to capture and compress carbon dioxide is set aside. The competent authority shall determine whether the conditions are met on the basis of the assessment referred to in paragraph 1 and other available information, particularly concerning the protection of the environment and human health. Article 37 Malfunction or breakdown of the abatement equipment 1. Member States shall ensure that provision is made in the permits for procedures relating to malfunction or breakdown of the abatement equipment. 2. In the case of a breakdown, the competent authority shall require the operator to reduce or close down operations if a return to normal operation is not achieved within 24 hours, or to operate the plant using low polluting fuels. The operator shall notify the competent authority within 48 hours after the malfunction or breakdown of the abatement equipment. The cumulative duration of unabated operation shall not exceed 120 hours in any 12-month period. The competent authority may grant a derogation from the time limits set out in the first and third subparagraphs in one of the following cases: Article 38 Monitoring of emissions into air 1. Member States shall ensure that the monitoring of air polluting substances is carried out in accordance with Part 3 of Annex V. 2. The installation and functioning of the automated monitoring equipment shall be subject to control and to annual surveillance tests as set out in Part 3 of Annex V. 3. The competent authority shall determine the location of the sampling or measurement points to be used for the monitoring of emissions. 4. All monitoring results shall be recorded, processed and presented in such a way as to enable the competent authority to verify compliance with the operating conditions and emission limit values which are included in the permit. Article 39 Compliance with emission limit values The emission limit values for air shall be regarded as being complied with if the conditions set out in Part 4 of Annex V are fulfilled. Article 40 Multi-fuel firing combustion plants 1. In the case of a multi-fuel firing combustion plant involving the simultaneous use of two or more fuels, the competent authority shall set the emission limit values in accordance with the following steps: 2. In the case of multi-fuel firing combustion plants covered by Article 30(2), which use the distillation and conversion residues from the refining of crude-oil for own consumption, alone or with other fuels, the following emission limit values may be applied instead of the emission limit values set according to paragraph 1: 3. In the case of multi-fuel firing combustion plants covered by Article 30(2), which use the distillation and conversion residues from the refining of crude-oil for own consumption, alone or with other fuels, the average emission limit values for sulphur dioxide set out in Part 7 of Annex V may be applied instead of the emission limit values set according to paragraphs 1 or 2 of this Article. Article 41 Implementing rules Implementing rules shall be established concerning: Those implementing rules shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 75(2). The Commission shall make appropriate proposals not later than 7 July 2011. CHAPTER IV SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR WASTE INCINERATION PLANTS AND WASTE CO-INCINERATION PLANTS Article 42 1. This Chapter shall apply to waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants which incinerate or co-incinerate solid or liquid waste. This Chapter shall not apply to gasification or pyrolysis plants, if the gases resulting from this thermal treatment of waste are purified to such an extent that they are no longer a waste prior to their incineration and they can cause emissions no higher than those resulting from the burning of natural gas. For the purposes of this Chapter, waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants shall include all incineration lines or co-incineration lines, waste reception, storage, on site pretreatment facilities, waste-, fuel- and air-supply systems, boilers, facilities for the treatment of waste gases, on-site facilities for treatment or storage of residues and waste water, stacks, devices and systems for controlling incineration or co-incineration operations, recording and monitoring incineration or co-incineration conditions. If processes other than oxidation, such as pyrolysis, gasification or plasma process, are applied for the thermal treatment of waste, the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant shall include both the thermal treatment process and the subsequent incineration process. If waste co-incineration takes place in such a way that the main purpose of the plant is not the generation of energy or production of material products but rather the thermal treatment of waste, the plant shall be regarded as a waste incineration plant. 2. This Chapter shall not apply to the following plants: Article 43 Definition of residue For the purposes of this Chapter, ‘residue’ shall mean any liquid or solid waste which is generated by a waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant. Article 44 Applications for permits An application for a permit for a waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant shall include a description of the measures which are envisaged to guarantee that the following requirements are met: Article 45 Permit conditions 1. The permit shall include the following: 2. In addition to the requirements set out in paragraph 1, the permit granted to a waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant using hazardous waste shall include the following: 3. Member States may list the categories of waste to be included in the permit which can be co-incinerated in certain categories of waste co-incineration plants. 4. The competent authority shall periodically reconsider and, where necessary, update permit conditions. Article 46 Control of emissions 1. Waste gases from waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants shall be discharged in a controlled way by means of a stack the height of which is calculated in such a way as to safeguard human health and the environment. 2. Emissions into air from waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants shall not exceed the emission limit values set out in parts 3 and 4 of Annex VI or determined in accordance with Part 4 of that Annex. If in a waste co-incineration plant more than 40 % of the resulting heat release comes from hazardous waste, or the plant co-incinerates untreated mixed municipal waste, the emission limit values set out in Part 3 of Annex VI shall apply. 3. Discharges to the aquatic environment of waste water resulting from the cleaning of waste gases shall be limited as far as practicable and the concentrations of polluting substances shall not exceed the emission limit values set out in Part 5 of Annex VI. 4. The emission limit values shall apply at the point where waste waters from the cleaning of waste gases are discharged from the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant. When waste waters from the cleaning of waste gases are treated outside the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant at a treatment plant intended only for the treatment of this sort of waste water, the emission limit values set out in Part 5 of Annex VI shall be applied at the point where the waste waters leave the treatment plant. Where the waste water from the cleaning of waste gases is treated collectively with other sources of waste water, either on site or off site, the operator shall make the appropriate mass balance calculations, using the results of the measurements set out in point 2 of Part 6 of Annex VI in order to determine the emission levels in the final waste water discharge that can be attributed to the waste water arising from the cleaning of waste gases. Under no circumstances shall dilution of waste water take place for the purpose of complying with the emission limit values set out in Part 5 of Annex VI. 5. Waste incineration plant sites and waste co-incineration plant sites, including associated storage areas for waste, shall be designed and operated in such a way as to prevent the unauthorised and accidental release of any polluting substances into soil, surface water and groundwater. Storage capacity shall be provided for contaminated rainwater run-off from the waste incineration plant site or waste co-incineration plant site or for contaminated water arising from spillage or fire-fighting operations. The storage capacity shall be adequate to ensure that such waters can be tested and treated before discharge where necessary. 6. Without prejudice to Article 50(4)(c), the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant or individual furnaces being part of a waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant shall under no circumstances continue to incinerate waste for a period of more than 4 hours uninterrupted where emission limit values are exceeded. The cumulative duration of operation in such conditions over 1 year shall not exceed 60 hours. The time limit set out in the second subparagraph shall apply to those furnaces which are linked to one single waste gas cleaning device. Article 47 Breakdown In the case of a breakdown, the operator shall reduce or close down operations as soon as practicable until normal operations can be restored. Article 48 Monitoring of emissions 1. Member States shall ensure that the monitoring of emissions is carried out in accordance with Parts 6 and 7 of Annex VI. 2. The installation and functioning of the automated measuring systems shall be subject to control and to annual surveillance tests as set out in point 1 of Part 6 of Annex VI. 3. The competent authority shall determine the location of the sampling or measurement points to be used for monitoring of emissions. 4. All monitoring results shall be recorded, processed and presented in such a way as to enable the competent authority to verify compliance with the operating conditions and emission limit values which are included in the permit. 5. As soon as appropriate measurement techniques are available within the Union, the Commission shall, by means of delegated acts in accordance with Article 76 and subject to the conditions laid down in Articles 77 and 78, set the date from which continuous measurements of emissions into the air of heavy metals and dioxins and furans are to be carried out. Article 49 Compliance with emission limit values The emission limit values for air and water shall be regarded as being complied with if the conditions described in Part 8 of Annex VI are fulfilled. Article 50 Operating conditions 1. Waste incineration plants shall be operated in such a way as to achieve a level of incineration such that the total organic carbon content of slag and bottom ashes is less than 3 % or their loss on ignition is less than 5 % of the dry weight of the material. If necessary, waste pre-treatment techniques shall be used. 2. Waste incineration plants shall be designed, equipped, built and operated in such a way that the gas resulting from the incineration of waste is raised, after the last injection of combustion air, in a controlled and homogeneous fashion and even under the most unfavourable conditions, to a temperature of at least 850 °C for at least two seconds. Waste co-incineration plants shall be designed, equipped, built and operated in such a way that the gas resulting from the co-incineration of waste is raised in a controlled and homogeneous fashion and even under the most unfavourable conditions, to a temperature of at least 850 °C for at least two seconds. If hazardous waste with a content of more than 1 % of halogenated organic substances, expressed as chlorine, is incinerated or co-incinerated, the temperature required to comply with the first and second subparagraphs shall be at least 1 100 °C. In waste incineration plants, the temperatures set out in the first and third subparagraphs shall be measured near the inner wall of the combustion chamber. The competent authority may authorise the measurements at another representative point of the combustion chamber. 3. Each combustion chamber of a waste incineration plant shall be equipped with at least one auxiliary burner. This burner shall be switched on automatically when the temperature of the combustion gases after the last injection of combustion air falls below the temperatures set out in paragraph 2. It shall also be used during plant start-up and shut-down operations in order to ensure that those temperatures are maintained at all times during these operations and as long as unburned waste is in the combustion chamber. The auxiliary burner shall not be fed with fuels which can cause higher emissions than those resulting from the burning of gas oil as defined in Article 2(2) of Council Directive 1999/32/EC of 26 April 1999 relating to a reduction in the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels ( 36 ) , liquefied gas or natural gas. 4. Waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants shall operate an automatic system to prevent waste feed in the following situations: 5. Any heat generated by waste incineration plants or waste co-incineration plants shall be recovered as far as practicable. 6. Infectious clinical waste shall be placed straight in the furnace, without first being mixed with other categories of waste and without direct handling. 7. Member States shall ensure that the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant is operated and controlled by a natural person who is competent to manage the plant. Article 51 Authorisation to change operating conditions 1. Conditions different from those laid down in Article 50(1), (2) and (3) and, as regards the temperature, paragraph 4 of that Article and specified in the permit for certain categories of waste or for certain thermal processes, may be authorised by the competent authority provided the other requirements of this Chapter are met. Member States may lay down rules governing these authorisations. 2. For waste incineration plants, the change of the operating conditions shall not cause more residues or residues with a higher content of organic polluting substances compared to those residues which could be expected under the conditions laid down in Article 50(1), (2) and (3). 3. Emissions of total organic carbon and carbon monoxide from waste co-incineration plants, authorised to change operating conditions according to paragraph 1 shall also comply with the emission limit values set out in Part 3 of Annex VI. Emissions of total organic carbon from bark boilers within the pulp and paper industry co-incinerating waste at the place of its production which were in operation and had a permit before 28 December 2002 and which are authorised to change operating conditions according to paragraph 1 shall also comply with the emission limit values set out in Part 3 of Annex VI. 4. Member States shall communicate to the Commission all operating conditions authorised under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 and the results of verifications made as part of the information provided in accordance with the reporting requirements under Article 72. Article 52 Delivery and reception of waste 1. The operator of the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant shall take all necessary precautions concerning the delivery and reception of waste in order to prevent or to limit as far as practicable the pollution of air, soil, surface water and groundwater as well as other negative effects on the environment, odours and noise, and direct risks to human health. 2. The operator shall determine the mass of each type of waste, if possible according to the European Waste List established by Decision 2000/532/EC, prior to accepting the waste at the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant. 3. Prior to accepting hazardous waste at the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant, the operator shall collect available information about the waste for the purpose of verifying compliance with the permit requirements specified in Article 45(2). That information shall cover the following: 4. Prior to accepting hazardous waste at the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant, at least the following procedures shall be carried out by the operator: The samples referred to in point (b) shall be kept for at least 1 month after the incineration or co-incineration of the waste concerned. 5. The competent authority may grant exemptions from paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 to waste incineration plants or waste co-incineration plants which are a part of an installation covered by Chapter II and only incinerate or co-incinerate waste generated within that installation. Article 53 Residues 1. Residues shall be minimised in their amount and harmfulness. Residues shall be recycled, where appropriate, directly in the plant or outside. 2. Transport and intermediate storage of dry residues in the form of dust shall take place in such a way as to prevent dispersal of those residues in the environment. 3. Prior to determining the routes for the disposal or recycling of the residues, appropriate tests shall be carried out to establish the physical and chemical characteristics and the polluting potential of the residues. Those tests shall concern the total soluble fraction and heavy metals soluble fraction. Article 54 Substantial change A change of operation of a waste incineration plant or a waste co-incineration plant treating only non-hazardous waste in an installation covered by Chapter II which involves the incineration or co-incineration of hazardous waste shall be regarded as a substantial change. Article 55 Reporting and public information on waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants 1. Applications for new permits for waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants shall be made available to the public at one or more locations for an appropriate period to enable the public to comment on the applications before the competent authority reaches a decision. That decision, including at least a copy of the permit, and any subsequent updates, shall also be made available to the public. 2. For waste incineration plants or waste co-incineration plants with a nominal capacity of 2 tonnes or more per hour, the report referred to in Article 72 shall include information on the functioning and monitoring of the plant and give account of the running of the incineration or co-incineration process and the level of emissions into air and water in comparison with the emission limit values. That information shall be made available to the public. 3. A list of waste incineration plants or waste co-incineration plants with a nominal capacity of less than 2 tonnes per hour shall be drawn up by the competent authority and shall be made available to the public. CHAPTER V SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR INSTALLATIONS AND ACTIVITIES USING ORGANIC SOLVENTS Article 56 This chapter shall apply to activities listed in Part 1 of Annex VII and, where applicable, reaching the consumption thresholds set out in Part 2 of that Annex. Article 57 Definitions For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: Article 58 Substitution of hazardous substances Substances or mixtures which, because of their content of volatile organic compounds classified as carcinogens, mutagens, or toxic to reproduction under Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008, are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H340, H350, H350i, H360D or H360F, shall be replaced, as far as possible by less harmful substances or mixtures within the shortest possible time. Article 59 Control of emissions 1. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that each installation complies with either of the following: Member States shall report to the Commission in accordance with Article 72(1) on the progress in achieving the equivalent emission reduction referred to in point (b). 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a), where the operator demonstrates to the competent authority that for an individual installation the emission limit value for fugitive emissions is not technically and economically feasible, the competent authority may allow emissions to exceed that emission limit value provided that significant risks to human health or the environment are not to be expected and that the operator demonstrates to the competent authority that the best available techniques are being used. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, for coating activities covered by item 8 of the table in Part 2 of Annex VII which cannot be carried out under contained conditions, the competent authority may allow the emissions of the installation not to comply with the requirements set out in that paragraph if the operator demonstrates to the competent authority that such compliance is not technically and economically feasible and that the best available techniques are being used. 4. Member States shall report to the Commission on the derogations referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article in accordance with Article 72(2). 5. The emissions of either volatile organic compounds which are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H340, H350, H350i, H360D or H360F or halogenated volatile organic compounds which are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H341 or H351, shall be controlled under contained conditions as far as technically and economically feasible to safeguard public health and the environment and shall not exceed the relevant emission limit values set out in Part 4 of Annex VII. 6. Installations where two or more activities are carried out, each of which exceeds the thresholds in Part 2 of Annex VII shall: 7. All appropriate precautions shall be taken to minimise emissions of volatile organic compounds during start-up and shut-down operations. Article 60 Monitoring of emissions Member States shall, either by specification in the permit conditions or by general binding rules, ensure that measurements of emissions are carried out in accordance with Part 6 of Annex VII. Article 61 Compliance with emission limit values The emission limit values in waste gases shall be regarded as being complied with if the conditions set out in Part 8 of Annex VII are fulfilled. Article 62 Reporting on compliance The operator shall supply the competent authority, on request, with data enabling the competent authority to verify compliance with either of the following: This may include a solvent management plan prepared in accordance with Part 7 of Annex VII. Article 63 Substantial change to existing installations 1. A change of the maximum mass input of organic solvents by an existing installation averaged over 1 day, where the installation is operated at its design output under conditions other than start-up and shut-down operations and maintenance of equipment, shall be considered as substantial if it leads to an increase of emissions of volatile organic compounds of more than: 2. Where an existing installation undergoes a substantial change, or falls within the scope of this Directive for the first time following a substantial change, that part of the installation which undergoes the substantial change shall be treated either as a new installation or as an existing installation, provided that the total emissions of the whole installation do not exceed those that would have resulted had the substantially changed part been treated as a new installation. 3. In case of a substantial change, the competent authority shall check compliance of the installation with the requirements of this Directive. Article 64 Exchange of information on substitution of organic solvents The Commission shall organise an exchange of information with the Member States, the industry concerned and non-governmental organisations promoting environmental protection on the use of organic solvents and their potential substitutes and techniques which have the least potential effects on air, water, soil, ecosystems and human health. The exchange of information shall be organised on all of the following: Article 65 Access to information 1. The decision of the competent authority, including at least a copy of the permit, and any subsequent updates, shall be made available to the public. The general binding rules applicable for installations and the list of installations subject to permitting and registration shall be made available to the public. 2. The results of the monitoring of emissions as required under Article 60 and held by the competent authority shall be made available to the public. 3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall apply, subject to the restrictions laid down in Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 2003/4/EC. CHAPTER VI SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR INSTALLATIONS PRODUCING TITANIUM DIOXIDE Article 66 This Chapter shall apply to installations producing titanium dioxide. Article 67 Prohibition of the disposal of waste Member States shall prohibit the disposal of the following waste into any water body, sea or ocean: Article 68 Control of emissions into water Emissions from installations into water shall not exceed the emission limit values set out in Part 1 of Annex VIII. Article 69 Prevention and control of emissions into air 1. The emission of acid droplets from installations shall be prevented. 2. Emissions into air from installations shall not exceed the emission limit values set out in Part 2 of Annex VIII. Article 70 Monitoring of emissions 1. Member States shall ensure the monitoring of emissions into water in order to enable the competent authority to verify compliance with the permit conditions and Article 68. 2. Member States shall ensure the monitoring of emissions into air in order to enable the competent authority to verify compliance with the permit conditions and Article 69. Such monitoring shall include at least monitoring of emissions as set out in Part 3 of Annex VIII. 3. Monitoring shall be carried out in accordance with CEN standards or, if CEN standards are not available, ISO, national or other international standards which ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. CHAPTER VII COMMITTEE, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS Article 71 Competent authorities Member States shall designate the competent authorities responsible for carrying out the obligations arising from this Directive. Article 72 Reporting by Member States 1. Member States shall ensure that information is made available to the Commission on the implementation of this Directive, on representative data on emissions and other forms of pollution, on emission limit values, on the application of best available techniques in accordance with Articles 14 and 15, in particular on the granting of exemptions in accordance with Article 15(4), and on progress made concerning the development and application of emerging techniques in accordance with Article 27. Member States shall make the information available in an electronic format. 2. The type, format and frequency of information to be made available pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be established in accordance with the regulatory procedure referred to in Article 75(2). This shall include the determination of the specific activities and pollutants for which data referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made available. 3. For all combustion plants covered by Chapter III of this Directive, Member States shall, from 1 January 2016, establish an annual inventory of the sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and dust emissions and energy input. Taking into account the aggregation rules set out in Article 29, the competent authority shall obtain the following data for each combustion plant: The annual plant-by-plant data contained in these inventories shall be made available to the Commission upon request. A summary of the inventories shall be made available to the Commission every 3 years within 12 months from the end of the three-year period considered. This summary shall show separately the data for combustion plants within refineries. The Commission shall make available to the Member States and to the public a summary of the comparison and evaluation of those inventories in accordance with Directive 2003/4/EC within 24 months from the end of the three-year period considered. 4. Member States shall, from 1 January 2016, report the following data annually to the Commission: Article 73 Review 1. By 7 January 2016, and every 3 years thereafter, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report reviewing the implementation of this Directive on the basis of the information referred to in Article 72. That report shall include an assessment of the need for Union action through the establishment or updating of Union-wide minimum requirements for emission limit values and for rules on monitoring and compliance for activities within the scope of the BAT conclusions adopted during the previous three-year period, on the basis of the following criteria: That assessment shall consider the opinion of the forum referred to in Article 13(4). Chapter III and Annex V of this Directive shall be considered to represent the Union-wide minimum requirements in the case of large combustion plants. The report shall be accompanied by a legislative proposal where appropriate. Where the assessment referred to in the second subparagraph identifies such a need, the legislative proposal shall include provisions establishing or updating Union-wide minimum requirements for emission limit values and for rules on monitoring and compliance assessment for the activities concerned. 2. The Commission shall, by 31 December 2012, review the need to control emissions from: The Commission shall report the results of that review to the European Parliament and to the Council accompanied by a legislative proposal where appropriate. 3. The Commission shall report to the European Parliament and the Council, by 31 December 2011, on the establishment in Annex I of: The Commission shall report the results of that review to the European Parliament and to the Council accompanied by a legislative proposal where appropriate. Article 74 Amendments of Annexes In order to allow the provisions of this Directive to be adapted to scientific and technical progress on the basis of best available techniques, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 76 and subject to the conditions laid down in Articles 77 and 78 as regards the adaptation of Parts 3 and 4 of Annex V, Parts 2, 6, 7 and 8 of Annex VI and Parts 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Annex VII to such scientific and technical progress. Article 75 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. The period laid down in Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at 3 months. Article 76 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt the delegated acts referred to in Article 48(5) and Article 74 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of 5 years from 6 January 2011. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegated power at the latest 6 months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be automatically extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council revokes it in accordance with Article 77. 2. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 3. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in Articles 77 and 78. Article 77 Revocation of the delegation 1. The delegation of power referred to in Article 48(5) and Article 74 may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. 2. The institution which has commenced an internal procedure for deciding whether to revoke a delegation of power shall endeavour to inform the other institution and the Commission within a reasonable time before the final decision is taken, indicating the delegated power which could be subject to revocation and possible reasons for a revocation. 3. The decision of revocation shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect immediately or on a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of the delegated acts already in force. It shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 78 Objections to delegated acts 1. The European Parliament or the Council may object to a delegated act within a period of 2 months from the date of notification. At the initiative of the European Parliament or the Council that period shall be extended by 2 months. 2. If, on expiry of the period referred to in paragraph 1, neither the European Parliament nor the Council has objected to the delegated act, it shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and shall enter into force on the date stated therein. The delegated act may be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and enter into force before the expiry of that period if the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission of their intention not to raise objections. 3. If either the European Parliament or the Council objects to the delegated act within the period referred to in paragraph 1, it shall not enter into force. The institution which objects shall state the reasons for objecting to the delegated act. Article 79 Penalties Member States shall determine penalties applicable to infringements of the national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive. The penalties thus provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall notify those provisions to the Commission by 7 January 2013 and shall notify it without delay of any subsequent amendment affecting them. Article 80 Transposition 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Article 2, points (8), (11) to (15), (18) to (23), (26) to (30), (34) to (38) and (41) of Article 3, Article 4(2) and (3), Article 7, Articles 8 and 10, Article 11(e) and (h), Article 12(1)(e) and (h), Article 13(7), point (ii) of Article 14(1)(c), points (d), (e), (f) and (h) of Article 14(1), Article 14(2) to (7), Article 15(2) to (5), Articles 16, 17 and 19, Article 21(2) to (5), Articles 22, 23, 24, 27, 28 and 29, Article 30(1), (2), (3), (4), (7) and (8), Articles 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38 and 39, Article 40(2) and (3), Articles 42 and 43, Article 45(1), Article 58, Article 59(5), Article 63, Article 65(3), Articles 69, 70, 71, 72 and 79, and with the first subparagraph and points 1.1, 1.4, 2.5(b), 3.1, 4, 5, 6.1(c), 6.4(b), 6.10 and 6.11 of Annex I, Annex II, point 12 of Annex III, Annex V, point (b) of Part 1, points 2.2, 2.4, 3.1 and 3.2 of Part 4, points 2.5 and 2.6 of Part 6 and point 1.1(d) of Part 8 of Annex VI, point 2 of Part 4, point 1 of Part 5, point 3 of Part 7 of Annex VII, points 1 and 2(c) of Part 1, points 2 and 3 of Part 2 and Part 3 of Annex VIII by 7 January 2013. They shall apply those measures from that same date. When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 81 Repeal 1. Directives 78/176/EEC, 82/883/EEC, 92/112/EEC, 1999/13/EC, 2000/76/EC and 2008/1/EC, as amended by the acts listed in Annex IX, Part A are repealed with effect from 7 January 2014, without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for transposition into national law and application of the Directives set out in Annex IX, Part B. 2. Directive 2001/80/EC as amended by the acts listed in Annex IX, Part A is repealed with effect from 1 January 2016, without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for transposition into national law and application of the Directives set out in Annex IX, Part B. 3. Article 82 Transitional provisions 1. In relation to installations carrying out activities referred to in Annex I, point 1.1 for activities with a total rated thermal input exceeding 50 MW, points 1.2 and 1.3, point 1.4(a), points 2.1 to 2.6, points 3.1 to 3.5, points 4.1 to 4.6 for activities concerning production by chemical processing, points 5.1 and 5.2 for activities covered by Directive 2008/1/EC, point 5.3 (a)(i) and (ii), point 5.4, point 6.1(a) and (b), points 6.2 and 6.3, point 6.4(a), point 6.4(b) for activities covered by Directive 2008/1/EC, point 6.4(c) and points 6.5 to 6.9 which are in operation and hold a permit before 7 January 2013 or the operators of which have submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that those installations are put into operation no later than 7 January 2014, Member States shall apply the laws, regulations and administrative provisions adopted in accordance with Article 80(1) from 7 January 2014 with the exception of Chapter III and Annex V. 2. In relation to installations carrying out activities referred to in Annex I, point 1.1 for activities with a total rated thermal input of 50 MW, point 1.4(b), points 4.1 to 4.6 for activities concerning production by biological processing, points 5.1 and 5.2 for activities not covered by Directive 2008/1/EC, point 5.3(a)(iii) to (v), point 5.3(b), points 5.5 and 5.6, point 6.1(c), point 6.4(b) for activities not covered by Directive 2008/1/EC and points 6.10 and 6.11 which are in operation before 7 January 2013, Member States shall apply the laws, regulations and administrative provisions adopted in accordance with this Directive from 7 July 2015 with the exception of Chapters III and IV and Annexes V and VI. 3. In relation to combustion plants referred to in Article 30(2), Member States shall, from 1 January 2016, apply the laws, regulations and administrative provisions adopted in accordance with Article 80(1) to comply with Chapter III and Annex V. 4. In relation to combustion plants referred to in Article 30(3), Member States shall no longer apply Directive 2001/80/EC from 7 January 2013. 5. In relation to combustion plants which co-incinerate waste, point 3.1 of Part 4 of Annex VI shall apply until: 6. Point 3.2 of Part 4 of Annex VI shall apply in relation to combustion plants which co-incinerate waste, as from: 7. Article 58 shall apply from 1 June 2015. Until that date, substances or mixtures which, because of their content of volatile organic compounds classified as carcinogens, mutagens, or toxic to reproduction under Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008, are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H340, H350, H350i, H360D or H360F or the risk phrases R45, R46, R49, R60 or R61, shall be replaced, as far as possible, by less harmful substances or mixtures within the shortest possible time. 8. Article 59(5) shall apply from 1 June 2015. Until that date, the emissions of either volatile organic compounds which are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H340, H350, H350i, H360D or H360F or the risk phrases R45, R46, R49, R60 or R61 or halogenated volatile organic compounds which are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H341 or H351 or the risk phrases R40 or R68, shall be controlled under contained conditions, as far as technically and economically feasible, to safeguard public health and the environment and shall not exceed the relevant emission limit values set out in Part 4 of Annex VII. 9. Point 2 of Part 4 of Annex VII shall apply from 1 June 2015. Until that date, for emissions of halogenated volatile organic compounds which are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H341 or H351 or the risk phrases R40 or R68, where the mass flow of the sum of the compounds causing the hazard statements H341 or H351 or the labelling R40 or R68 is greater than, or equal to, 100 g/h, an emission limit value of 20 mg/Nm 3 shall be complied with. The emission limit value refers to the mass sum of the individual compounds. Article 83 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 84 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 24 November 2010. For the European Parliament The President J. BUZEK For the Council The President O. CHASTEL ( 1 ) OJ C 182, 4.8.2009, p. 46 . ( 2 ) OJ C 325, 19.12.2008, p. 60 . ( 3 ) Position of the European Parliament of 10 March 2009 ( OJ C 87 E, 1.4.2010, p. 191 ) and position of the Council at first reading of 15 February 2010 ( OJ C 107 E, 27.4.2010, p. 1 ). Position of the European Parliament of 7 July 2010 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 8 November 2010. ( 4 ) OJ L 54, 25.2.1978, p. 19 . ( 5 ) OJ L 378, 31.12.1982, p. 1 . ( 6 ) OJ L 409, 31.12.1992, p. 11 . ( 7 ) OJ L 85, 29.3.1999, p. 1 . ( 8 ) OJ L 332, 28.12.2000, p. 91 . ( 9 ) OJ L 309, 27.11.2001, p. 1 . ( 10 ) OJ L 24, 29.1.2008, p. 8 . ( 11 ) OJ L 242, 10.9.2002, p. 1 . ( 12 ) OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 . ( 13 ) OJ L 175, 5.7.1985, p. 40 . ( 14 ) OJ L 10, 14.1.1997, p. 13 . ( 15 ) OJ L 124, 17.5.2005, p. 4 . ( 16 ) OJ L 309, 27.11.2001, p. 22 . ( 17 ) OJ L 33, 4.2.2006, p. 1 . ( 18 ) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 . ( 19 ) OJ C 321, 31.12.2003, p. 1 . ( 20 ) OJ L 159, 29.6.1996, p. 1 . ( 21 ) OJ L 125, 21.5.2009, p. 75 . ( 22 ) OJ L 106, 17.4.2001, p. 1 . ( 23 ) OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 . ( 24 ) OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1 . ( 25 ) OJ L 303, 31.10.1990, p. 6 . ( 26 ) OJ L 176, 15.7.2003, p. 37 . ( 27 ) OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 . ( 28 ) Commission Decision 2000/532/EC of 3 May 2000 replacing Decision 94/3/EC establishing a list of wastes pursuant to Article 1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on waste and Council Decision 94/904/EC establishing a list of hazardous waste pursuant to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous waste ( OJ L 226, 6.9.2000, p. 3 ). ( 29 ) OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 87 . ( 30 ) OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 56 . ( 31 ) OJ L 372, 27.12.2006, p. 19 . ( 32 ) Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) ( OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 ). ( 33 ) OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26 . ( 34 ) OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 114 . ( 35 ) OJ L 273, 10.10.2002, p. 1 . ( 36 ) OJ L 121, 11.5.1999, p. 13 . ( 37 ) OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 . ( 38 ) OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 . ANNEX I Categories of activities referred to in Article 10 The threshold values given below generally refer to production capacities or outputs. Where several activities falling under the same activity description containing a threshold are operated in the same installation, the capacities of such activities are added together. For waste management activities, this calculation shall apply at the level of activities 5.1, 5.3(a) and 5.3(b). The Commission shall establish guidance on: 1. Energy industries 1.1. Combustion of fuels in installations with a total rated thermal input of 50 MW or more 1.2. Refining of mineral oil and gas 1.3. Production of coke 1.4. Gasification or liquefaction of: 2. Production and processing of metals 2.1. Metal ore (including sulphide ore) roasting or sintering 2.2. Production of pig iron or steel (primary or secondary fusion) including continuous casting, with a capacity exceeding 2,5 tonnes per hour 2.3. Processing of ferrous metals: 2.4. Operation of ferrous metal foundries with a production capacity exceeding 20 tonnes per day 2.5. Processing of non-ferrous metals: 2.6. Surface treatment of metals or plastic materials using an electrolytic or chemical process where the volume of the treatment vats exceeds 30 m 3 3. Mineral industry 3.1. Production of cement, lime and magnesium oxide: 3.2. Production of asbestos or the manufacture of asbestos-based products 3.3. Manufacture of glass including glass fibre with a melting capacity exceeding 20 tonnes per day 3.4. Melting mineral substances including the production of mineral fibres with a melting capacity exceeding 20 tonnes per day 3.5. Manufacture of ceramic products by firing, in particular roofing tiles, bricks, refractory bricks, tiles, stoneware or porcelain with a production capacity exceeding 75 tonnes per day and/or with a kiln capacity exceeding 4 m 3 and with a setting density per kiln exceeding 300 kg/m 3 4. Chemical industry For the purpose of this section, production within the meaning of the categories of activities contained in this section means the production on an industrial scale by chemical or biological processing of substances or groups of substances listed in points 4.1 to 4.6 4.1. Production of organic chemicals, such as: 4.2. Production of inorganic chemicals, such as: 4.3. Production of phosphorous-, nitrogen- or potassium-based fertilisers (simple or compound fertilisers) 4.4. Production of plant protection products or of biocides 4.5. Production of pharmaceutical products including intermediates 4.6. Production of explosives 5. Waste management 5.1. Disposal or recovery of hazardous waste with a capacity exceeding 10 tonnes per day involving one or more of the following activities: 5.2. Disposal or recovery of waste in waste incineration plants or in waste co-incineration plants: 5.4. Landfills, as defined in Article 2(g) of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste ( 2 ) , receiving more than 10 tonnes of waste per day or with a total capacity exceeding 25 000 tonnes, excluding landfills of inert waste 5.5. Temporary storage of hazardous waste not covered under point 5.4 pending any of the activities listed in points 5.1, 5.2, 5.4 and 5.6 with a total capacity exceeding 50 tonnes, excluding temporary storage, pending collection, on the site where the waste is generated 5.6. Underground storage of hazardous waste with a total capacity exceeding 50 tonnes 6. Other activities 6.1. Production in industrial installations of: 6.2. Pre-treatment (operations such as washing, bleaching, mercerisation) or dyeing of textile fibres or textiles where the treatment capacity exceeds 10 tonnes per day 6.3. Tanning of hides and skins where the treatment capacity exceeds 12 tonnes of finished products per day 6.5. Disposal or recycling of animal carcases or animal waste with a treatment capacity exceeding 10 tonnes per day 6.6. Intensive rearing of poultry or pigs: 6.7. Surface treatment of substances, objects or products using organic solvents, in particular for dressing, printing, coating, degreasing, waterproofing, sizing, painting, cleaning or impregnating, with an organic solvent consumption capacity of more than 150 kg per hour or more than 200 tonnes per year 6.8. Production of carbon (hard-burnt coal) or electrographite by means of incineration or graphitisation 6.9. Capture of CO 2 streams from installations covered by this Directive for the purposes of geological storage pursuant to Directive 2009/31/EC 6.10. Preservation of wood and wood products with chemicals with a production capacity exceeding 75 m 3 per day other than exclusively treating against sapstain 6.11. Independently operated treatment of waste water not covered by Directive 91/271/EEC and discharged by an installation covered by Chapter II ( 1 ) OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 . ( 2 ) OJ L 182, 16.7.1999, p. 1 . ANNEX II List of polluting substances 1. Sulphur dioxide and other sulphur compounds 2. Oxides of nitrogen and other nitrogen compounds 3. Carbon monoxide 4. Volatile organic compounds 5. Metals and their compounds 6. Dust including fine particulate matter 7. Asbestos (suspended particulates, fibres) 8. Chlorine and its compounds 9. Fluorine and its compounds 10. Arsenic and its compounds 11. Cyanides 12. Substances and mixtures which have been proved to possess carcinogenic or mutagenic properties or properties which may affect reproduction via the air 13. Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans 1. Organohalogen compounds and substances which may form such compounds in the aquatic environment 2. Organophosphorus compounds 3. Organotin compounds 4. Substances and mixtures which have been proved to possess carcinogenic or mutagenic properties or properties which may affect reproduction in or via the aquatic environment 5. Persistent hydrocarbons and persistent and bioaccumulable organic toxic substances 6. Cyanides 7. Metals and their compounds 8. Arsenic and its compounds 9. Biocides and plant protection products 10. Materials in suspension 11. Substances which contribute to eutrophication (in particular, nitrates and phosphates) 12. Substances which have an unfavourable influence on the oxygen balance (and can be measured using parameters such as BOD, COD, etc.) 13. Substances listed in Annex X to Directive 2000/60/EC ANNEX III Criteria for determining best available techniques 1. the use of low-waste technology; 2. the use of less hazardous substances; 3. the furthering of recovery and recycling of substances generated and used in the process and of waste, where appropriate; 4. comparable processes, facilities or methods of operation which have been tried with success on an industrial scale; 5. technological advances and changes in scientific knowledge and understanding; 6. the nature, effects and volume of the emissions concerned; 7. the commissioning dates for new or existing installations; 8. the length of time needed to introduce the best available technique; 9. the consumption and nature of raw materials (including water) used in the process and energy efficiency; 10. the need to prevent or reduce to a minimum the overall impact of the emissions on the environment and the risks to it; 11. the need to prevent accidents and to minimise the consequences for the environment; 12. information published by public international organisations. ANNEX IV Public participation in decision-making 1. The public shall be informed (by public notices or other appropriate means such as electronic media where available) of the following matters early in the procedure for the taking of a decision or, at the latest, as soon as the information can reasonably be provided: 2. Member States shall ensure that, within appropriate time-frames, the following is made available to the public concerned: 3. The public concerned shall be entitled to express comments and opinions to the competent authority before a decision is taken. 4. The results of the consultations held pursuant to this Annex must be taken into due account in the taking of a decision. 5. The detailed arrangements for informing the public (for example by bill posting within a certain radius or publication in local newspapers) and consulting the public concerned (for example by written submissions or by way of a public inquiry) shall be determined by the Member States. Reasonable time-frames for the different phases shall be provided, allowing sufficient time to inform the public and for the public concerned to prepare and participate effectively in environmental decision-making subject to this Annex. ANNEX V Technical provisions relating to combustion plants PART 1 Emission limit values for combustion plants referred to in Article 30(2) 1. All emission limit values shall be calculated at a temperature of 273,15 K, a pressure of 101,3 kPa and after correction for the water vapour content of the waste gases and at a standardised O 2 content of 6 % for solid fuels, 3 % for combustion plants, other than gas turbines and gas engines using liquid and gaseous fuels and 15 % for gas turbines and gas engines. 2. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for SO 2 for combustion plants using solid or liquid fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines Combustion plants, using solid fuels which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, and which do not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, shall be subject to an emission limit value for SO 2 of 800 mg/Nm 3 . Combustion plants using liquid fuels, which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, and which do not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, shall be subject to an emission limit value for SO 2 of 850 mg/Nm 3 in case of plants with a total rated thermal input not exceeding 300 MW and of 400 mg/Nm 3 in case of plants with a total rated thermal input greater than 300 MW. A part of a combustion plant discharging its waste gases through one or more separate flues within a common stack, and which does not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, may be subject to the emission limit values set out in the preceding two paragraphs in relation to the total rated thermal input of the entire combustion plant. In such cases the emissions through each of those flues shall be monitored separately. 3. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for SO 2 for combustion plants using gaseous fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines Combustion plants, firing low calorific gases from gasification of refinery residues, which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, shall be subject to an emission limit value for SO 2 of 800 mg/Nm 3 . 4. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for NO x for combustion plants using solid or liquid fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines Combustion plants in chemical installations using liquid production residues as non-commercial fuel for own consumption with a total rated thermal input not exceeding 500 MW which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, shall be subject to an emission limit value for NO x of 450 mg/Nm 3 . Combustion plants using solid or liquid fuels with a total rated thermal input not exceeding 500 MW which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, and which do not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, shall be subject to an emission limit value for NO x of 450 mg/Nm 3 . Combustion plants using solid fuels with a total rated thermal input greater than 500 MW, which were granted a permit before 1 July 1987 and which do not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, shall be subject to an emission limit value for NO x of 450 mg/Nm 3 . Combustion plants using liquid fuels, with a total rated thermal input greater than 500 MW which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, and which do not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, shall be subject to an emission limit value for NO x of 400 mg/Nm 3 . A part of a combustion plant discharging its waste gases through one or more separate flues within a common stack, and which does not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, may be subject to the emission limit values set out in the preceding three paragraphs in relation to the total rated thermal input of the entire combustion plant. In such cases the emissions through each of those flues shall be monitored separately. 5. Gas turbines (including combined cycle gas turbines (CCGT)) using light and middle distillates as liquid fuels shall be subject to an emission limit value for NO x of 90 mg/Nm 3 and for CO of 100 mg/Nm 3 . Gas turbines for emergency use that operate less than 500 operating hours per year are not covered by the emission limit values set out in this point. The operator of such plants shall record the used operating hours. 6. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for NO x and CO for gas fired combustion plants For gas turbines (including CCGT), the NO x and CO emission limit values set out in the table contained in this point apply only above 70 % load. For gas turbines (including CCGT) which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003, and which do not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, the emission limit value for NO x is 150 mg/Nm 3 when firing natural gas and 200 mg/Nm 3 when firing other gases or liquid fuels. A part of a combustion plant discharging its waste gases through one or more separate flues within a common stack, and which does not operate more than 1 500 operating hours per year as a rolling average over a period of 5 years, may be subject to the emission limit values set out in the preceding paragraph in relation to the total rated thermal input of the entire combustion plant. In such cases the emissions through each of those flues shall be monitored separately. Gas turbines and gas engines for emergency use that operate less than 500 operating hours per year are not covered by the emission limit values set out in this point. The operator of such plants shall record the used operating hours. 7. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for dust for combustion plants using solid or liquid fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines 8. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for dust for combustion plants using gaseous fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines PART 2 Emission limit values for combustion plants referred to in Article 30(3) 1. All emission limit values shall be calculated at a temperature of 273,15 K, a pressure of 101,3 kPa and after correction for the water vapour content of the waste gases and at a standardised O 2 content of 6 % for solid fuels, 3 % for combustion plants other than gas turbines and gas engines using liquid and gaseous fuels and 15 % for gas turbines and gas engines. In case of combined cycle gas turbines with supplementary firing, the standardised O 2 content may be defined by the competent authority, taking into account the specific characteristics of the installation concerned. 2. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for SO 2 for combustion plants using solid or liquid fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines 3. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for SO 2 for combustion plants using gaseous fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines 4. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for NO x for combustion plants using solid or liquid fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines 5. Gas turbines (including CCGT) using light and middle distillates as liquid fuels shall be subject to an emission limit value for NO x of 50 mg/Nm 3 and for CO of 100 mg/Nm 3 Gas turbines for emergency use that operate less than 500 operating hours per year are not covered by the emission limit values set out in this point. The operator of such plants shall record the used operating hours. 6. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for NO x and CO for gas fired combustion plants For gas turbines (including CCGT), the NO x and CO emission limit values set out in this point apply only above 70 % load. Gas turbines and gas engines for emergency use that operate less than 500 operating hours per year are not covered by the emission limit values set out in this point. The operator of such plants shall record the used operating hours. 7. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for dust for combustion plants using solid or liquid fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines 8. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for dust for combustion plants using gaseous fuels with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines PART 3 Emission monitoring 1. The concentrations of SO 2 , NO x and dust in waste gases from each combustion plant with a total rated thermal input of 100 MW or more shall be measured continuously. The concentration of CO in waste gases from each combustion plant firing gaseous fuels with a total rated thermal input of 100 MW or more shall be measured continuously. 2. The competent authority may decide not to require the continuous measurements referred to in point 1 in the following cases: 3. Where continuous measurements are not required, measurements of SO 2 , NO x , dust and, for gas fired plants, also of CO shall be required at least once every 6 months. 4. For combustion plants firing coal or lignite, the emissions of total mercury shall be measured at least once per year. 5. As an alternative to the measurements of SO 2 and NO x referred to in point 3, other procedures, verified and approved by the competent authority, may be used to determine the SO 2 and NO x emissions. Such procedures shall use relevant CEN standards or, if CEN standards are not available, ISO, national or other international standards which ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 6. The competent authority shall be informed of significant changes in the type of fuel used or in the mode of operation of the plant. The competent authority shall decide whether the monitoring requirements laid down in points 1 to 4 are still adequate or require adaptation. 7. The continuous measurements carried out in accordance with point 1 shall include the measurement of the oxygen content, temperature, pressure and water vapour content of the waste gases. The continuous measurement of the water vapour content of the waste gases shall not be necessary, provided that the sampled waste gas is dried before the emissions are analysed. 8. Sampling and analysis of relevant polluting substances and measurements of process parameters as well as the quality assurance of automated measuring systems and the reference measurement methods to calibrate those systems shall be carried out in accordance with CEN standards. If CEN standards are not available, ISO, national or other international standards which ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality shall apply. The automated measuring systems shall be subject to control by means of parallel measurements with the reference methods at least once per year. The operator shall inform the competent authority about the results of the checking of the automated measuring systems. 9. At the emission limit value level, the values of the 95 % confidence intervals of a single measured result shall not exceed the following percentages of the emission limit values: 10. The validated hourly and daily average values shall be determined from the measured valid hourly average values after having subtracted the value of the confidence interval specified in point 9. Any day in which more than three hourly average values are invalid due to malfunction or maintenance of the automated measuring system shall be invalidated. If more than 10 days over a year are invalidated for such situations the competent authority shall require the operator to take adequate measures to improve the reliability of the automated measuring system. 11. In the case of plants which must comply with the rates of desulphurisation referred to in Article 31, the sulphur content of the fuel which is fired in the combustion plant shall also be regularly monitored. The competent authorities shall be informed of substantial changes in the type of fuel used. PART 4 Assessment of compliance with emission limit values 1. In the case of continuous measurements, the emission limit values set out in Parts 1 and 2 shall be regarded as having been complied with if the evaluation of the measurement results indicates, for operating hours within a calendar year, that all of the following conditions have been met: The validated average values are determined as set out in point 10 of Part 3. For the purpose of the calculation of the average emission values, the values measured during the periods referred to in Article 30(5) and (6) and Article 37 as well as during the start-up and shut-down periods shall be disregarded. 2. Where continuous measurements are not required, the emission limit values set out in Parts 1 and 2 shall be regarded as having been complied with if the results of each of the series of measurements or of the other procedures defined and determined according to the rules laid down by the competent authorities do not exceed the emission limit values. PART 5 Minimum rate of desulphurisation 1. Minimum rate of desulphurisation for combustion plants referred to in Article 30(2) 2. Minimum rate of desulphurisation for combustion plants referred to in Article 30(3) PART 6 Compliance with rate of desulphurisation The minimum rates of desulphurisation set out in Part 5 of this Annex shall apply as a monthly average limit value. PART 7 Average emission limit values for multi-fuel firing combustion plants within a refinery Average emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for SO 2 for multi-fuel firing combustion plants within a refinery, with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines, which use the distillation and conversion residues from the refining of crude-oil for own consumption, alone or with other fuels: These emission limit values shall be calculated at a temperature of 273,15 K, a pressure of 101,3 kPa and after correction for the water vapour content of the waste gases and at a standardised O 2 content of 6 % for solid fuels and 3 % for liquid and gaseous fuels. ( 1 ) The emission limit value is 450 mg/Nm 3 for the firing of distillation and conversion residues from the refining of crude-oil for own consumption in combustion plants with a total rated thermal input not exceeding 500 MW which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003. ( 2 ) Natural gas is naturally occurring methane with not more than 20 % (by volume) of inerts and other constituents. ( 3 ) 75 mg/Nm 3 in the following cases, where the efficiency of the gas turbine is determined at ISO base load conditions: ( 4 ) For single cycle gas turbines not falling into any of the categories mentioned under note (2), but having an efficiency greater than 35 % – determined at ISO base load conditions – the emission limit value for NO x shall be 50xη/35 where η is the gas turbine efficiency at ISO base load conditions expressed as a percentage. ( 5 ) 300 mg/Nm 3 for such combustion plants with a total rated thermal input not exceeding 500 MW which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003. ( 6 ) The emission limit value is 50 mg/Nm 3 for the firing of distillation and conversion residues from the refining of crude oil for own consumption in combustion plants which were granted a permit before 27 November 2002 or the operators of which had submitted a complete application for a permit before that date, provided that the plant was put into operation no later than 27 November 2003. ( 7 ) For single cycle gas turbines having an efficiency greater than 35 % – determined at ISO base load conditions – the emission limit value for NO x shall be 50xη/35 where η is the gas turbine efficiency at ISO base load conditions expressed as a percentage. ( 8 ) For combustion plants firing oil shale, the minimum rate of desulphurisation is 95 %. ANNEX VI Technical provisions relating to waste incineration plants and waste co-incineration plants PART 1 Definitions For the purpose of this Annex the following definitions shall apply: PART 2 Equivalence factors for dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans For the determination of the total concentration of dioxins and furans, the mass concentrations of the following dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans shall be multiplied by the following equivalence factors before summing: PART 3 Air emission limit values for waste incineration plants All emission limit values shall be calculated at a temperature of 273,15 K, a pressure of 101,3 kPa and after correcting for the water vapour content of the waste gases. They are standardised at 11 % oxygen in waste gas except in case of incineration of mineral waste oil as defined in point 3 of Article 3 of Directive 2008/98/EC, when they are standardised at 3 % oxygen, and in the cases referred to in Point 2.7 of Part 6. 1.1. Daily average emission limit values for the following polluting substances (mg/Nm 3 ) 1.2. Half-hourly average emission limit values for the following polluting substances (mg/Nm 3 ) 1.3. Average emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for the following heavy metals over a sampling period of a minimum of 30 minutes and a maximum of 8 hours These average values cover also the gaseous and the vapour forms of the relevant heavy metal emissions as well as their compounds. 1.4. Average emission limit value (ng/Nm 3 ) for dioxins and furans over a sampling period of a minimum of 6 hours and a maximum of 8 hours. The emission limit value refers to the total concentration of dioxins and furans calculated in accordance with Part 2. 1.5. Emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for carbon monoxide (CO) in the waste gases: The competent authority may authorise exemptions from the emission limit values set out in this point for waste incineration plants using fluidised bed technology, provided that the permit sets an emission limit value for carbon monoxide (CO) of not more than 100 mg/Nm 3 as an hourly average value. 2. Emission limit values applicable in the circumstances described in Article 46(6) and Article 47. The total dust concentration in the emissions into the air of a waste incineration plant shall under no circumstances exceed 150 mg/Nm 3 expressed as a half-hourly average. The air emission limit values for TOC and CO set out in points 1.2 and 1.5(b) shall not be exceeded. 3. Member States may lay down rules governing the exemptions provided for in this Part. PART 4 Determination of air emission limit values for the co-incineration of waste 1. The following formula (mixing rule) shall be applied whenever a specific total emission limit value ‘C’ has not been set out in a table in this Part. The emission limit value for each relevant polluting substance and CO in the waste gas resulting from the co-incineration of waste shall be calculated as follows: Member States may lay down rules governing the exemptions provided for in this Part. 2. Special provisions for cement kilns co-incinerating waste 2.1. The emission limit values set out in points 2.2 and 2.3 apply as daily average values for total dust, HCl, HF, NO x , SO 2 and TOC (for continuous measurements), as average values over the sampling period of a minimum of 30 minutes and a maximum of 8 hours for heavy metals and as average values over the sampling period of a minimum of 6 hours and a maximum of 8 hours for dioxins and furans. All values are standardised at 10 % oxygen. Half-hourly average values shall only be needed in view of calculating the daily average values. 2.2. C – total emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 except for dioxins and furans) for the following –polluting substances 2.3. C – total emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for SO 2 and TOC The competent authority may grant derogations for emission limit values set out in this point in cases where TOC and SO 2 do not result from the co-incineration of waste. 2.4. C- total emission limit values for CO The competent authority may set emission limit values for CO. 3. Special provisions for combustion plants co-incinerating waste 3.1. C proc expressed as daily average values (mg/Nm 3 ) valid until the date set out in Article 82(5) For determining the total rated thermal input of the combustion plants, the aggregation rules as defined in Article 29 shall apply. Half-hourly average values shall only be needed in view of calculating the daily average values. C proc for solid fuels with the exception of biomass (O 2 content 6 %): C proc for biomass (O 2 content 6 %): C proc for liquid fuels (O 2 content 3 %): C proc expressed as daily average values (mg/Nm 3 ) valid from the date set out in Article 82(6) For determining the total rated thermal input of the combustion plants, the aggregation rules as defined in Article 29 shall apply. Half-hourly average values shall only be needed in view of calculating the daily average values. 3.2.1. C proc for combustion plants referred to in Article 30(2), with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines C proc for solid fuels with the exception of biomass (O 2 content 6 %): C proc for biomass (O 2 content 6 %): C proc for liquid fuels (O 2 content 3 %): 3.2.2. C proc for combustion plants referred to in Article 30(3), with the exception of gas turbines and gas engines C proc for solid fuels with the exception of biomass (O 2 content 6 %): C proc for biomass (O 2 content 6 %): C proc for liquid fuels (O 2 content 3 %): 3.3. C — total emission limit values for heavy metals (mg/Nm 3 ) expressed as average values over the sampling period of a minimum of 30 minutes and a maximum of 8 hours (O 2 content 6 % for solid fuels and 3 % for liquid fuels) 3.4. C — total emission limit value (ng/Nm 3 ) for dioxins and furans expressed as average value measured over the sampling period of a minimum of 6 hours and a maximum of 8 hours (O 2 content 6 % for solid fuels and 3 % for liquid fuels) 4. Special provisions for waste co-incineration plants in industrial sectors not covered under Points 2 and 3 of this Part 4.1. C — total emission limit value (ng/Nm 3 ) for dioxins and furans expressed as average value measured over the sampling period of a minimum of 6 hours and a maximum of 8 hours: 4.2. C – total emission limit values (mg/Nm 3 ) for heavy metals expressed as average values over the sampling period of a minimum of 30 minutes and a maximum of 8 hours: PART 5 Emission limit values for discharges of waste water from the cleaning of waste gases PART 6 Monitoring of emissions 1. Measurement techniques 1.1. Measurements for the determination of concentrations of air and water polluting substances shall be carried out representatively. 1.2. Sampling and analysis of all polluting substances including dioxins and furans as well as the quality assurance of automated measuring systems and the reference measurement methods to calibrate them shall be carried out according to CEN-standards. If CEN standards are not available, ISO, national or other international standards which ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality shall apply. Automated measuring systems shall be subject to control by means of parallel measurements with the reference methods at least once per year. 1.3. At the daily emission limit value level, the values of the 95 % confidence intervals of a single measured result shall not exceed the following percentages of the emission limit values: Periodic measurements of the emissions into air and water shall be carried out in accordance with points 1.1 and 1.2. 2. Measurements relating to air polluting substances 2.1. The following measurements relating to air polluting substances shall be carried out: 2.2. The residence time as well as the minimum temperature and the oxygen content of the waste gases shall be subject to appropriate verification, at least once when the waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant is brought into service and under the most unfavourable operating conditions anticipated. 2.3. The continuous measurement of HF may be omitted if treatment stages for HCl are used which ensure that the emission limit value for HCl is not being exceeded. In that case the emissions of HF shall be subject to periodic measurements as laid down in point 2.1(c). 2.4. The continuous measurement of the water vapour content shall not be required if the sampled waste gas is dried before the emissions are analysed. 2.5. The competent authority may decide not to require continuous measurements for HCl, HF and SO 2 in waste incineration plants or waste co-incineration plants and require periodic measurements as set out in point 2.1(c) or no measurements if the operator can prove that the emissions of those pollutants can under no circumstances be higher than the prescribed emission limit values. The competent authority may decide not to require continuous measurements for NO x and require periodic measurements as set out in point 2.1(c) in existing waste incineration plants with a nominal capacity of less than 6 tonnes per hour or in existing waste co-incineration plants with a nominal capacity of less than 6 tonnes per hour if the operator can prove on the basis of information on the quality of the waste concerned, the technologies used and the results of the monitoring of emissions, that the emissions of NO x can under no circumstances be higher than the prescribed emission limit value. 2.6. The competent authority may decide to require one measurement every 2 years for heavy metals and one measurement per year for dioxins and furans in the following cases: 2.7. The results of the measurements shall be standardised using the standard oxygen concentrations mentioned in Part 3 or calculated according to Part 4 and by applying the formula given in Part 7. When waste is incinerated or co-incinerated in an oxygen-enriched atmosphere, the results of the measurements can be standardised at an oxygen content laid down by the competent authority reflecting the special circumstances of the individual case. When the emissions of polluting substances are reduced by waste gas treatment in a waste incineration plant or waste co-incineration plant treating hazardous waste, the standardisation with respect to the oxygen contents provided for in the first subparagraph shall be done only if the oxygen content measured over the same period as for the polluting substance concerned exceeds the relevant standard oxygen content. 3. Measurements relating to water polluting substances 3.1. The following measurements shall be carried out at the point of waste water discharge: 3.2. Where the waste water from the cleaning of waste gases is treated on site collectively with other on-site sources of waste water, the operator shall take the measurements: PART 7 Formula to calculate the emission concentration at the standard percentage oxygen concentration PART 8 Assessment of compliance with emission limit values 1. Air emission limit values 1.1. The emission limit values for air shall be regarded as being complied with if: 1.2. The half-hourly average values and the 10-minute averages shall be determined within the effective operating time (excluding the start-up and shut-down periods if no waste is being incinerated) from the measured values after having subtracted the value of the confidence interval specified in point 1.3 of Part 6. The daily average values shall be determined from those validated average values. To obtain a valid daily average value no more than five half-hourly average values in any day shall be discarded due to malfunction or maintenance of the continuous measurement system. No more than ten daily average values per year shall be discarded due to malfunction or maintenance of the continuous measurement system. 1.3. The average values over the sampling period and the average values in the case of periodical measurements of HF, HCl and SO 2 shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of Articles 45(1)(e), 48(3) and point 1 of Part 6. 2. Water emission limit values The emission limit values for water shall be regarded as being complied with if: ( 1 ) Until 1 January 2016, the competent authority may authorise exemptions from the limit value for NO x for Lepol kilns and long rotary kilns provided that the permit sets a total emission limit value for NO x of not more than 800 mg/Nm 3 . ANNEX VII Technical provisions relating to installations and activities using organic solvents PART 1 Activities 1. In each of the following points, the activity includes the cleaning of the equipment but not the cleaning of products unless specified otherwise. 2. Adhesive coating Any activity in which an adhesive is applied to a surface, with the exception of adhesive coating and laminating associated with printing activities. 3. Coating activity Any activity in which a single or multiple application of a continuous film of a coating is applied to: Coating activities do not include the coating of substrate with metals by electrophoretic and chemical spraying techniques. If the coating activity includes a step in which the same article is printed by whatever technique used, that printing step is considered part of the coating activity. However, printing activities operated as a separate activity are not included, but may be covered by Chapter V of this Directive if the printing activity falls within the scope thereof. 4. Coil coating Any activity where coiled steel, stainless steel, coated steel, copper alloys or aluminium strip is coated with either a film forming or laminate coating in a continuous process. 5. Dry cleaning Any industrial or commercial activity using volatile organic compounds in an installation to clean garments, furnishing and similar consumer goods with the exception of the manual removal of stains and spots in the textile and clothing industry. 6. Footwear manufacture Any activity of producing complete footwear or parts thereof. 7. Manufacturing of coating mixtures, varnishes, inks and adhesives The manufacture of the above final products, and of intermediates where carried out at the same site, by mixing of pigments, resins and adhesive materials with organic solvent or other carrier, including dispersion and predispersion activities, viscosity and tint adjustments and operations for filling the final product into its container. 8. Manufacturing of pharmaceutical products The chemical synthesis, fermentation, extraction, formulation and finishing of pharmaceutical products and, where carried out at the same site, the manufacture of intermediate products. 9. Printing Any reproduction activity of text and/or images in which, with the use of an image carrier, ink is transferred onto whatever type of surface. It includes associated varnishing, coating and laminating techniques. However, only the following sub-processes are subject to Chapter V: 10. Rubber conversion Any activity of mixing, milling, blending, calendering, extrusion and vulcanisation of natural or synthetic rubber and any ancillary operations for converting natural or synthetic rubber into a finished product. 11. Surface cleaning Any activity except dry cleaning using organic solvents to remove contamination from the surface of material including degreasing. A cleaning activity consisting of more than one step before or after any other activity shall be considered as one surface cleaning activity. This activity does not refer to the cleaning of the equipment but to the cleaning of the surface of products. 12. Vegetable oil and animal fat extraction and vegetable oil refining activities Any activity to extract vegetable oil from seeds and other vegetable matter, the processing of dry residues to produce animal feed, the purification of fats and vegetable oils derived from seeds, vegetable matter and/or animal matter. 13. Vehicle refinishing Any industrial or commercial coating activity and associated degreasing activities performing either of the following: 14. Winding wire coating Any coating activity of metallic conductors used for winding the coils in transformers and motors, etc. 15. Wood impregnation Any activity giving a loading of preservative in timber. 16. Wood and plastic lamination Any activity to adhere together wood and/or plastic to produce laminated products. PART 2 Thresholds and emission limit values The emission limit values in waste gases shall be calculated at a temperature of 273,15 K, and a pressure of 101,3 kPa. PART 3 Emission limit values for installations of the vehicle coating industry 1. The total emission limit values are expressed in terms of grams of organic solvent emitted in relation to the surface area of product in square metres and in kilograms of organic solvent emitted in relation to the car body. 2. The surface area of any product dealt with in the table under point 3 is defined as the surface area calculated from the total electrophoretic coating area, and the surface area of any parts that might be added in successive phases of the coating process which are coated with the same coatings as those used for the product in question, or the total surface area of the product coated in the installation. The surface of the electrophoretic coating area is calculated using the following formula: This method shall also be applied for other coated parts made out of sheets. Computer aided design or other equivalent methods shall be used to calculate the surface area of the other parts added, or the total surface area coated in the installation. 3. The total emission limit values in the table below refer to all process stages carried out at the same installation from electrophoretic coating, or any other kind of coating process, through to the final wax and polish of topcoating inclusive, as well as solvent used in cleaning of process equipment, including spray booths and other fixed equipment, both during and outside of production time. 4. Vehicle coating installations below the solvent consumption thresholds mentioned in the table under point 3 shall meet the requirements for the vehicle refinishing sector set out in Part 2. PART 4 Emission limit values relating to volatile organic compounds with specific risk phrases 1. For emissions of the volatile organic compounds referred to in Article 58 where the mass flow of the sum of the compounds causing the labelling referred to in that Article is greater than, or equal to, 10 g/h, an emission limit value of 2 mg/Nm 3 shall be complied with. The emission limit value refers to the mass sum of the individual compounds. 2. For emissions of halogenated volatile organic compounds which are assigned or need to carry the hazard statements H341 or H351, where the mass flow of the sum of the compounds causing the hazard statements H341 or H351 is greater than, or equal to, 100 g/h, an emission limit value of 20 mg/Nm 3 shall be complied with. The emission limit value refers to the mass sum of the individual compounds. PART 5 Reduction scheme 1. The operator may use any reduction scheme, specially designed for his installation. 2. In the case of applying coatings, varnishes, adhesives or inks, the following scheme can be used. Where the following method is inappropriate, the competent authority may allow an operator to apply any alternative scheme achieving equivalent emission reductions to those achieved if the emission limit values of Parts 2 and 3 were to be applied. The design of the scheme shall take into account the following facts: 3. The following scheme shall operate for installations for which a constant solid content of product can be assumed: PART 6 Emission monitoring 1. Channels to which abatement equipment is connected, and which at the final point of discharge emit more than an average of 10 kg/h of total organic carbon, shall be monitored continuously for compliance. 2. In the other cases, Member States shall ensure that either continuous or periodic measurements are carried out. For periodic measurements at least three measurement values shall be obtained during each measurement exercise. 3. Measurements are not required in the case where end-of-pipe abatement equipment is not needed to comply with this Directive. PART 7 Solvent management plan 1. Principles The solvent management plan shall be used to: 2. Definitions The following definitions provide a framework for the mass balance exercise. Inputs of organic solvents (I): Outputs of organic solvents (O): 3. Use of the solvent management plan for verification of compliance. The use made of the solvent management plan shall be determined by the particular requirement which is to be verified, as follows: PART 8 Assessment of compliance with emission limit values in waste gases 1. In the case of continuous measurements the emission limit values shall be considered to be complied with if: 2. In the case of periodic measurements the emission limit values shall be considered to be complied with if, in one monitoring exercise: 3. Compliance with Part 4 shall be verified on the basis of the sum of the mass concentrations of the individual volatile organic compounds concerned. For all other cases, compliance shall be verified on the basis of the total mass of organic carbon emitted unless otherwise specified in Part 2. 4. Gas volumes may be added to the waste gas for cooling or dilution purposes where technically justified but shall not be considered when determining the mass concentration of the pollutant in the waste gas. ( 1 ) OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1 . ANNEX VIII Technical provisions relating to installations producing titanium dioxide PART 1 Emission limit values for emissions into water 1. In case of installations using the sulphate process (as an annual average): 550 kg of sulphate per tonne of titanium dioxide produced. 2. In case of installations using the chloride process (as an annual average): 3. For installations using the chloride process and using more than one type of ore, the emission limit values in point 2 shall apply in proportion to the quantity of the ores used. PART 2 Emission limit values into air 1. The emission limit values which are expressed as concentrations in mass per cubic meter (Nm 3 ) shall be calculated at a temperature of 273,15 K, and a pressure of 101,3 kPa. 2. For dust: 50 mg/Nm 3 as an hourly average from major sources and 150 mg/Nm 3 as an hourly average from any other source. 3. For gaseous sulphur dioxide and trioxide discharged from digestion and calcination, including acid droplets calculated as SO 2 equivalent: 4. For chlorine in the case of installations using the chloride process: PART 3 Emission monitoring The monitoring of emissions into air shall include at least the continuous monitoring of: ANNEX IX PART A Repealed Directives with their successive amendments (referred to in Article 81) PART B List of time-limits for transposition into national law and application (referred to in Article 81) ( 1 ) Directive 2008/1/EC is a codified version of Council Directive 96/61/EC of24 September 1996 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control ( OJ L 257, 10.10.1996, p. 26 ) and the time-limits for transposition and application remain in force. ANNEX X Correlation Table