COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2017/1508 of 28 August 2017 on the reference document on best environmental management practice, sector environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the food and beverage manufacturing sector under Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 46(1) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The sectoral reference document on best environmental management practice, sector environmental performance indicators, and benchmarks of excellence for the food and beverage manufacturing sector is set out in the Annex. Article 2 EMAS-registered organisations in the food and beverage manufacturing sector shall take the sectoral reference document referred to in Article 1 into account and shall therefore: Article 3 This Decision shall enter into force on the ninetieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Done at Brussels, 28 August 2017. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ C 358, 8.12.2011, p. 2 . TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. INTRODUCTION This sectoral reference document (SRD) is based on a detailed scientific and policy report ( 1 ) (‘Best Practice Report’) developed by the Institute for Prospective Technological Studies (IPTS), one of the seven institutes of the European Commission's Joint Research Centre (JRC). Relevant legal background The Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) was introduced in 1993, for voluntary participation by organisations, by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 ( 2 ) . Subsequently, EMAS has undergone two major revisions: An important new element of the latest revision, which came into force on 11 January 2010, is Article 46 on the development of SRDs. The SRDs have to include best environmental management practices (BEMPs), environmental performance indicators for the specific sectors and, where appropriate, benchmarks of excellence and rating systems identifying performance levels. How to understand and use this document The eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) is a scheme for voluntary participation by organisations committed to continuous environmental improvement. Within this framework, this SRD provides sector-specific guidance to the food and beverage manufacturing sector and points out a number of options for improvement as well as best practices. The document was written by the European Commission using input from stakeholders. A Technical Working Group, comprising experts and stakeholders of the sector, led by the JRC, discussed and ultimately agreed on the best environmental management practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence described in this document; these benchmarks in particular were deemed to be representative of the levels of environmental performance that are achieved by the best performing organisations in the sector. The SRD aims to help and support all organisations that intend to improve their environmental performance by providing ideas and inspiration as well as practical and technical guidance. The SRD is primarily addressed to organisations that are already registered with EMAS; secondly to organisations that are considering registering with EMAS in the future; and thirdly to all organisations that wish to learn more about best environmental management practices in order to improve their environmental performance. Consequently, the objective of this document is to support all organisations in the food and beverage manufacturing sector to focus on relevant environmental aspects, both direct and indirect, and to find information on best environmental management practices, as well as appropriate sector-specific environmental performance indicators to measure their environmental performance, and benchmarks of excellence. How SRDs should be taken into account by EMAS registered organisations Pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009, EMAS registered organisations are to take SRDs into account at two different levels: Elements of SRDs (indicators, BEMPs or benchmarks of excellence) not considered relevant with regards to the significant environmental aspects identified by the organisation in its environmental review should not be reported or described in the environmental statement. EMAS participation is an ongoing process. Every time an organisation plans to improve its environmental performance (and reviews its environmental performance) it shall consult the SRD on specific topics to find inspiration about which issues to tackle next in a step-wise approach. EMAS environmental verifiers shall check if and how the SRD was taken into account by the organisation when preparing its environmental statement (Article 18(5)(d) of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009). When undertaking an audit, accredited environmental verifiers will need evidence from the organisation of how the relevant elements of the SRD have been selected in light of the environmental review and taken into account. They shall not check compliance with the described benchmarks of excellence, but they shall verify evidence on how the SRD was used as a guide to identify indicators and proper voluntary measures that the organisation can implement to improve its environmental performance. Given the voluntary nature of EMAS and SRD, no disproportionate burdens should be put on the organisations to provide such evidence. In particular, verifiers shall not require an individual justification for each of the best practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence which are mentioned in the SRD and not considered relevant by the organisation in the light of its environmental review. Nevertheless, they could suggest relevant additional elements for the organisation to take into account in the future as further evidence of its commitment to continuous performance improvement. Structure of the sectoral reference document This document consists of four sections. Section 1 introduces EMAS' legal background and describes how to use this document, while Section 2 defines the scope of this SRD. Section 3 briefly describes the different best environmental management practices (BEMPs) ( 5 ) together with information on their applicability, in general as well as at SME level. When specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence could be formulated for a particular BEMP, these are also given. Some of the indicators and benchmarks are relevant for more than one BEMP and are thus repeated whenever appropriate. Finally, Section 4 presents a comprehensive table with a selection of the most relevant environmental performance indicators, associated explanations and related benchmarks of excellence. 2. SCOPE This SRD addresses the environmental performance of the activities of the food and beverage manufacturing sector. In this document, the food and beverage manufacturing sector includes companies belonging to the following NACE code divisions (according to the statistical classification of economic activities established by Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 6 ) ): Best practices presented for the overall food and beverage manufacturing sector (Section 3.1) are addressed to all companies belonging to NACE codes 10 and 11. The following two tables present the most significant direct and indirect environmental aspects ( 7 ) for food and beverage manufacturers, the related main environmental pressures and how these are tackled in this document. They are addressed either by BEMPs described in Section 3.1 or by making reference to other available reference documents such as the Best Available Techniques (BAT) Reference Document for the Food, Drink and Milk Industries (FDM BREF) ( 8 ) . Table 2.1 The most significant direct environmental aspects for food and beverage manufacturers and how these are addressed in the SRD Table 2.2 The most significant indirect environmental aspects for all food and beverage manufacturers and how these are addressed in the SRD Environmental aspects listed in Tables 2.1 and 2.2 were selected as the most significant for the majority of food and beverage manufacturers. However, the environmental aspects to be managed by specific companies, and whether each aspect is direct or indirect for a specific company, should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Environmental aspects, such as hazardous waste, biodiversity or material use for areas other than those listed above could also be significant. In addition to the BEMPs listed in Tables 2.1 and 2.2, an overarching BEMP on ‘performing an environmental sustainability assessment of products and/or operations’ can help to improve the environmental performance for all environmental aspects and related pressures presented in the tables. Moreover, this SRD, apart from describing the best practices for the overall food and beverage manufacturing sector (all companies belonging to NACE codes 10 and 11) listed above, also includes a range of specific best practices for several subsectors, namely: 3. BEST ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND BENCHMARKS OF EXCELLENCE FOR THE FOOD AND BEVERAGE MANUFACTURING SECTOR 3.1. Best environmental management practices for the whole food and beverage manufacturing sector This section targets all food and beverage manufacturers (NACE codes 10 and 11). 3.1.1. Performing an environmental sustainability assessment of products and/or operations BEMP is to assess the environmental impact of products and operations using life-cycle assessment (LCA) tools ( 11 ) to identify priority areas for action, or ‘hotspots’, and define a strategy for reducing the environmental impacts. Applicability When undertaking an environmental sustainability assessment, food and beverage manufacturers can face a number of challenges which include the complexity of the product and the accessibility of information; it can be expensive and time-consuming to undertake LCAs, and certain environmental impacts may also be beyond the control of the manufacturer and thus very difficult to act upon, even if they can be quantified. This BEMP is applicable to SMEs in the food and beverage manufacturing sector, given that they can use simplified tools when their capabilities or resources do not permit full LCAs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.2. Sustainable supply chain management BEMP is to manage the supply chain, in particular ingredients or raw materials, by choosing one or more of the following three approaches: Additionally, for those food and beverage manufacturers using substantial amounts of water as an ingredient (e.g. beverage manufacturers), it is BEMP to firstly assess the risks posed, by the production site, to the local water resources. Afterwards, a water resource sustainability programme can be put in place, detailing specific actions that can be taken to support the preservation of the local water resources. Applicability Sustainable supply chain management can have some limitations: (i) the green procurement approach assumes that ‘green’ choices are available; (ii) recipes can be adapted if unsustainable ingredients can be removed with equivalent, more sustainable alternatives; and (iii) it may not always be possible to influence the performance of existing suppliers, e.g. due to small volumes of products purchased by an SME. However, the three approaches presented are in most cases broadly applicable. This BEMP, with the aforementioned limitations, is fully applicable to SMEs in the food and beverage manufacturing sector. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.3. Improving or selecting packaging to minimise the environmental impact BEMP is to minimise the environmental impact of packaging (i.e. primary, secondary and tertiary packaging), throughout the product life cycle, for example by the use of: Furthermore, BEMP is for food and beverage manufacturers to help consumers reducing the food waste they generate, by: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers including SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.4. Environmentally friendly cleaning operations BEMP is to reduce the amount of water, energy and chemicals used during cleaning operations by: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers including SMEs. However, some limitations may arise when substantial economic investment is needed in order to adopt more sophisticated cleaning systems. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.5. Improving transport and distribution operations BEMP is to improve the environmental impact of the transport and logistics operations, from a more strategic/general level down to operational considerations, by: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers, including SMEs. However, some of the specific measures listed above may not be relevant if the company does not manage or have any influence on the related specific activities in the field of transport and logistics. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.6. Improving freezing and refrigeration BEMP is to improve the existing refrigeration and freezing equipment and procedures by: When freezing and refrigeration equipment is upgraded or new facilities are designed and built, it is BEMP to: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers, including SMEs. Some limitations to the implementation of each of the measures listed above may arise from specific process or product requirements. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.7. Deploying energy management and improving energy efficiency throughout all operations BEMP is to manage energy use throughout all operations of the company by: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers, including SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.8. Integrating renewable energy in the manufacturing processes BEMP is to integrate the use of renewable energy into the production of food and beverages. Specifically, BEMP is to go beyond the use of renewable electricity and to meet the heat demand of production processes (after implementing measures to improve energy efficiency and to reuse waste heat, as mentioned in Section 3.1.7) with renewable heat (i.e. from solar heating systems, biomass or biogas) instead of non-renewable heat. The choice of the source of renewable heat depends on the local conditions, e.g. whether locally produced biomass and suitable feedstock for biogas production are available and/or if annual solar radiation is considerable. Applicability The principle of this BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers, including SMEs. However, renewable heat systems rely on the availability of a suitable local renewable energy source and the heat and temperature requirements of the production processes. Additionally, retrofitting an already existing production facility with renewable heat requires a detailed technical feasibility analysis taking into account the current layout and the constraints of the current production processes. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.9. Avoiding food waste in manufacturing operations BEMP is to reduce food waste generation at the production facility by identifying all avoidable waste with approaches such as: Using these approaches, food waste can be reduced by implementing the following: Moreover, it is BEMP to publicly report on food waste generation and the waste prevention activities in place and planned for the future, as well as to identify targets in this field and plan appropriate activities to achieve them. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers, including SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.10. Taking into account the Reference Document on Best Available Techniques in the Food, Drink and Milk Industries (FDM BREF) It is BEMP for all food and beverage manufacturers (NACE codes 10 and 11) to implement the relevant Best Available Techniques (BAT) or other techniques that can achieve equivalent or higher level of environmental performance, and consider the relevant emerging techniques presented in the ‘Reference Document on Best Available Techniques in the Food, Drink and Milk Industries (FDM BREF)’ ( 18 ) . It is BEMP to aim for the most demanding end of the Best Available Techniques-Associated Emission (or Environmental Performance) Levels (BAT-AE(P)Ls). Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all food and beverage manufacturers, including SMEs, provided that the Best Available Techniques and emerging techniques are relevant for the activities and processes of the company. Although the BAT and the related BAT-AE(P)Ls described in the FDM BREF were identified for large industrial installations, they are broadly relevant and often applicable also to smaller industrial production sites. However, the applicability and relevance of any specific technique for a specific company should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. For instance, most techniques would not be applicable to companies producing on a very small scale in a non-industrial facility. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2. Best environmental management practices in the processing of coffee This section targets companies processing coffee (NACE code 10.83). 3.2.1. Reduction of energy use through the adoption of green coffee preheating in batch coffee roasting BEMP is to preheat the coffee beans immediately before the roasting operation by means of recirculating the exhaust gases from the roasting of the previous batch. This energy-saving technique can be combined with other energy-saving techniques, such as the partial reuse of the roasting gases in the same roasting system either directly (roasters with recirculation) or by means of a heat exchanger, or to use the roasting gases to produce warm water or for space heating. Applicability This BEMP is applicable when planning the installation of any new batch coffee roaster but may require considerable space and/or reinforcement of the building structure. It is also possible to retrofit an existing roaster with a preheater; however, it is more complex than the installation of a coffee preheater in a new coffee roaster because of costs, space requirements, building works, etc. The applicability of this BEMP for SMEs may be limited because of the substantial economic investment needed. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3. Best environmental management practices in the manufacture of olive oil This section targets companies manufacturing olive oil (NACE code 10.41). 3.3.1. Minimising water consumption in olive oil separation During the separation (also known as clarification or polishing) of the olive oil from the remaining fine particles and water, BEMP is to use a vertical centrifuge that minimises the use of water. The quantity of water used should be kept to the minimum amount required to achieve the desired final olive oil composition. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all olive oil manufacturers, including SMEs. The amount of water needed in the separation phase is highly dependent on the quality of the oil coming from the decanter. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.2. Reduced washing of olives upon reception BEMP is to reduce the need for olives to be washed before being processed into olive oil. For instance, this can be achieved by harvesting the olives from the trees. To this aim, olive oil manufacturers can establish an appropriate cooperation with the farmers providing the olives. The adoption of appropriate measures to recycle the water still needed to wash olives can deliver further water savings. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to a broad range of olive oil mills: Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.4. Best environmental management practices in the manufacture of soft drinks This section targets companies manufacturing soft drinks (NACE code 11.07). 3.4.1. Use of blowers in the drying stage of bottles/packaging BEMP is to install well-designed high-velocity small blowers at the point of use (in can/bottle-drying stages and in air-ionising rinsing systems) which can replace compressed air-based dryers. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to manufacturers of soft drinks that air rinse or dry cans or bottles before filling them. This BEMP is applicable to SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.5. Best environmental management practices in the manufacture of beer This section targets companies manufacturing beer (NACE code 11.05). 3.5.1. Reducing energy use in wort boiling Beer manufacturers can reduce the energy use during wort boiling by: Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all manufacturers of beer, including SMEs. The adoption of wort preheating is applicable to new breweries, provided that there are no space restrictions for installing the equipment needed. In the case of existing plants an economic study should be carried out in order to assess the opportunity to change the wort boiling installation. The reduction of evaporation rates is not suitable for all types of beer since it influences the beer's organoleptic characteristics. When implemented, it needs to be considered within the overall brewing process and applied to the extent that is suitable to the specific product. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.5.2. Moving from batch to continuous fermentation systems BEMP is to move from batch to continuous fermentation systems to save energy and water. One option is the use of a four-tank continuous system consisting of three stirred tanks and a fourth unstirred one, where the beer is separated from the yeast. From the last tank, the clarified beer flows to a warm maturation tank where the flavour is refined by yeast action. Applicability There are some limitations to the applicability of this BEMP. The technique is mostly feasible for large-scale brewing operations. Moreover, switching to continuous brewing can have effects on the organoleptic characteristics of the final product and may not be suitable for all beer types. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.5.3. CO 2 recovery in beer production BEMP is to recover the CO 2 generated during beer production from the tops of the fermentation tanks/vessels, the maturation vessels and the bright beer tanks. CO 2 can then be scrubbed, purified and compressed for storage. It can later be used in-house in a number of brewery operations, e.g. carbonation and bottling, as well as sold or provided for other applications, in the framework of industrial symbiosis. Applicability This BEMP can be adapted to all scales of beer production. However, microbreweries and small breweries ( 20 ) might find it unattractive because of investments costs and the complexity of the system to recover the CO 2 generated. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.6. Best environmental management practices in the production of meat and poultry meat products This section targets companies producing meat and poultry meat products (NACE code 10.13). 3.6.1. High-pressure processing for decontamination of meat BEMP is to use high-pressure processing for pasteurisation and cooking processes in the production of meat and poultry meat products, in order to reduce energy use. High pressures can be used in different ways for: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all producers of meat and poultry meat products, including SMEs. However, investment costs for purchasing the equipment are high and could discourage SMEs. When this is the case, SMEs can use a rental service for high-pressure processing, if available. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.7. Best environmental management practices in the manufacture of fruit juice This section targets companies manufacturing fruit juice (NACE code 10.32). 3.7.1. Value-added use of fruit residues It is BEMP to dispose of the fruit residues of the production process by following the priority cascade: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all manufacturers of fruit juice, including SMEs, providing that local conditions (e.g. availability of local livestock to feed, presence of anaerobic digestion plants) allow the implementation of the options listed above. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.8. Best environmental management practices in cheese-making operations This section targets companies producing cheese (NACE code 10.51). 3.8.1. Recovery of whey BEMP is to recover all the whey from the production of cheese and to use it in new applications, according to the following priority list: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all cheese producers, including SMEs, provided that local conditions (e.g. sufficient generation of whey for the implementation of a whey concentration system, market demand for whey-based products, availability of local livestock to feed) allow the implementation of the options listed above. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.9. Best environmental management practices in manufacture of bread, biscuits and cakes This section targets companies producing bread, biscuits and cakes (NACE codes 10.71 and 10.72). 3.9.1. Unsold bread waste reduction schemes BEMP is to establish appropriate bread ‘take-back’ schemes where the unsold bread from the points of sale is taken back to the bakery where it was produced. The collected bread is stored in the bakery and can be processed into bread-crumbs and dumplings or can be collected by licensed companies (e.g. charities or social organisations if bread is still suitable for human consumption as it is), or can be used for other purposes (e.g. animal feed). The collection of bread by licensed companies can also take place directly at the points of sale. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all manufacturers of bread, including SMEs. Bakeries not delivering bread to distant points of sale can directly implement the measures listed above, without the need to set up a bread take-back scheme. Depending on the use that it is planned for the returned bread, appropriate handling, transport and storage must be ensured to meet hygiene requirements. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.9.2. Minimising energy consumption for baking BEMP is to minimise the energy consumption for baking by either operating existing ovens in the most energy-efficient way or by selecting the most efficient oven to cater for the specific baking needs based on: production requirements, energy sources, space constraints, temperature requirements, operation mode and heat transfer mode. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all manufacturers of bread, biscuits and cakes, including SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.10. Best environmental management practices in manufacture of wine This section targets companies producing wine (NACE code 11.02). 3.10.1. Reducing water use, organic waste generation and energy use in the winery BEMP is to: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all manufacturers of wine, including SMEs. However, there are some limitations to a number of the measures described above for existing wineries, where the applicability depends on the specific production processes already in place. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 4. RECOMMENDED SECTOR-SPECIFIC KEY ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS The following table lists a selection of key environmental performance indicators for the food and beverage manufacturing sector. These are a subset of all the indicators mentioned in Section 3. The table is divided by target group, according to the structure of this document: ( 1 ) The scientific and policy report is publicly available on the JRC-IPTS website at the following address: The conclusions on best environmental management practices and their applicability as well as the identified specific environmental performance indicators and the benchmarks of excellence contained in this Sectoral Reference Document are based on the findings documented in the scientific and policy report. All the background information and technical details can be found there. ( 2 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 of 29 June 1993 allowing voluntary participation by companies in the industrial sector in a Community eco-management and audit scheme ( OJ L 168, 10.7.1993, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 allowing voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) ( OJ L 114, 24.4.2001, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) According to Annex IV (B.e.) of the EMAS Regulation, the environmental statement shall contain ‘a summary of the data available on the performance of the organisation against its environmental objectives and targets with respect to its significant environmental impacts. Reporting shall be on the core indicators and on other relevant existing environmental performance indicators as set out in Section C’. Annex IV — Section C states that ‘each organisation shall also report annually on its performance relating to the more specific environmental aspects as identified in its environmental statement and, where available, take account of sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46.’ ( 5 ) A detailed description of each of the best practices, with practical guidance on how to implement them, is available in the ‘Best Practice Report’ published by the JRC and available on-line at Organisations are invited to consult it if interested in learning more about some of the best practices described in this SRD. ( 6 ) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical domains ( OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) According to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 ‘direct environmental aspect’ refers to an environmental aspect associated with activities, products and services of the organisation itself, over which it has direct management control. Instead ‘indirect environmental aspect’ refers to an environmental aspect which results from the interaction of the organisation with third parties and which can to a reasonable degree be influenced by the organisation. ( 8 ) For more information on the content of the Best Available Techniques Reference Documents and full explanation of terms and acronyms, refer to the European Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Bureau website: ( 9 ) The Sectoral Reference Document for the agriculture — crop and animal production sector and the related ‘Best Practice Report’ published by the JRC are available online at: ( 10 ) The Sectoral Reference Document for the retail trade sector and the related ‘Best Practice Report’ published by the JRC are available online at: ( 11 ) With the aim of establishing a common method for measuring life cycle environmental performance, the European Commission developed the Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) and Organisation Environmental Footprint (OEF) methods. The use of these methods was object of a Commission Recommendation in 2013 ( The development of product- and sector-specific rules is being tested (between 2013 and 2016) by more than 280 volunteering companies and organisations grouped in 26 pilot cases (see list on ( 12 ) The percentage of products can be calculated (here and in following similar indicators) by considering the total different types of products manufactured and how many types of products are assessed using a recognised environmental sustainability assessment protocol or by weighting with sales volume each type of product manufactured for example. ( 13 ) The environmental performance criteria used in green procurement may be based on certifications, standards, ecolabels, private initiatives/cooperation or the results of sustainability assessments (see BEMP 3.1.1) developed internally or externally. ( 14 ) As part of the ISO 14000 series of environmental standards, the International Standards Organisation (ISO) has drawn up a subseries (ISO 14020) specific to environmental labelling, which covers three types of labelling schemes. In this context a ‘Type I’ ecolabel is a multi-criteria label developed by a third party. Examples are, at EU level, the ‘EU Ecolabel’ or, at national or multilateral level, the ‘Blaue Engel’, the ‘Austrian Ecolabel’ and the ‘Nordic Swan’. ( 15 ) More information on the standard ISO 50001 — Energy management is available at: ( 16 ) A comprehensive energy management system can also be part of a more comprehensive environmental management system like EMAS ( 17 ) Overall equipment effectiveness (OEE) is calculated by multiplying three elements: (i) availability (percentage of planned time the equipment is operating); (ii) performance (actual throughput versus target throughput, as a percentage); and (iii) product quality rate (percentage of overall products that are not defects or defective). ( 18 ) For more information on the content of the Best Available Techniques Reference Documents and a full explanation of terms and acronyms, refer to the European Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Bureau website: ( 19 ) The best 10 % can correspond to the highest or lowest 10 % of each of the BAT-AE(P)L ranges, depending on which is the most environmentally demanding. ( 20 ) Council Directive 92/83/EEC of 19 October 1992 on the harmonization of the structures of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages ( OJ L 316, 31.10.1992, p. 21 ) defines ‘independent small brewery’ as a brewery whose annual production does not exceed 200 000 hl.