COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2019/2032 of 26 November 2019 establishing measures to prevent the introduction into and the spread within the Union of Fusarium circinatum Nirenberg & O’Donnell (formerly Gibberella circinata ) and repealing Decision 2007/433/EC (notified under document C(2019) 8359) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and their spread within the Community ( 1 ) , and in particular the third sentence of Article 16(3) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Definitions For the purpose of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 2 Action upon detection or suspected presence of the specified organism 1. Any person who suspects or becomes aware of the presence of the specified organism shall immediately inform the responsible official body and provide it with all relevant information concerning the presence, or suspected presence, of the specified organism. 2. The responsible official body shall immediately officially record such information. 3. Where the responsible official body has been informed of the presence, or suspected presence, of the specified organism, it shall take all necessary measures to confirm that presence, or the suspected presence. 4. Member States shall ensure that any person having under its control plants, plant products or wood of specified plants or wood of conifers (Pinales) which may be infected with the specified organism is immediately informed of the presence or the suspected presence of the specified organism, and of the measures to be taken. Article 3 Surveys of the presence of the specified organism in the territories of the Member States 1. Member States shall conduct annual surveys for the presence of the specified organism in their territories. Those surveys shall not be required to be carried out where it is unequivocally concluded that the specified organism cannot become established or spread in the Member State concerned due to its ecoclimatic conditions or the absence of the host species. 2. Those surveys shall fulfil the following conditions: Article 4 Establishment of demarcated areas 1. Where the presence of the specified organism is confirmed, the Member State concerned shall, without delay, demarcate an area in accordance with paragraph 2. 2. The demarcated area shall consist of: In cases where several buffer zones overlap or are geographically close, a wider demarcated area shall be defined which includes the relevant demarcated areas and the areas between them. The exact delimitation of the infested zone and buffer zone shall be based on sound scientific principles, the biology of the specified organism, the level of infestation and the distribution of specified plants in the area concerned. 3. If the presence of the specified organism is confirmed in the buffer zone, the delimitation of the infested zone and buffer zone shall immediately be reviewed and changed accordingly. 4. Where, based on the surveys referred to in Article 3, the specified organism is not detected in a demarcated area for a period of two consecutive years, the demarcation may be lifted. In such cases, the Member State concerned shall notify the Commission and other Member States of the lifting of the demarcation. 5. Where justified by the development of the respective phytosanitary risk as described in paragraphs 2, 3 or 4, Member States shall adapt the demarcated area accordingly. They shall immediately communicate that adaptation to the Commission and the other Member States. 6. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the Member State concerned may decide not to establish a demarcated area, where there is evidence that the presence of the specified organism is an isolated finding and there is no establishment of that organism, and that the spread of the specified organism is not possible due to the conditions under which specified plants as well as wood, isolated bark or wood packaging material of specified plants or conifers, were grown or stored. 7. In the case referred to in paragraph 6, the Member State concerned shall: Article 5 Eradication measures in the demarcated area 1. The Member State concerned shall apply the following measures in the demarcated area: For the purposes of points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph, removal shall include destruction of the plants and removal and safe disposal of roots, within at least the first 50 cm from the collar, and bark debris. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, specified plants which have been sampled and tested for the purposes of Article 3 and have been confirmed not to be infected by the specified organism, do not have to be removed. 3. The Member State concerned shall carry out appropriate investigations to identify the origin of the infection. It shall trace the specified plants, as well as wood and isolated bark originating from the specified plants or from conifers (Pinales), and associated with the case of infection concerned, including those which were moved before the demarcated area was established. The results of such investigations shall be communicated to the Member States from which the plants concerned originate and to the Member States where those plants have moved into. Article 6 Movement of specified plants within the Union 1. Specified plants intended for planting may only be moved within the Union territory, if they are accompanied by a plant passport. That plant passport shall be issued for the specified plants intended for planting if one of the following conditions is fulfilled: 2. Specified plants, other than plants intended for planting, may only be moved from an infested zone into a buffer zone, and out of a demarcated area into the rest of the Union territory, if they are accompanied by a plant passport. That plant passport shall only be issued if those specified plants originate in a place of production, including its vicinity of at least 1 km radius, where no symptoms of the specified organism have been observed during official annual inspections within a period of two years prior to their movement and have been tested prior to their movement, on the basis of a representative sample for each lot, and found free from the specified organism. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, no plant passport shall be required for the movement of the specified plants intended for planting to any person acting for purposes which are outside its trade, business or profession, and acquires those plants for its own use. 4. The derogation of paragraph 3 shall, however, not apply to movements from an infested zone into a buffer zone, and out of a demarcated area into the rest of the Union territory. Article 7 Movement of certain wood and isolated bark out of demarcated areas 1. The following material may only be moved from an infested zone into a buffer zone, and out of a demarcated area into the rest of the Union territory if it is accompanied by a plant passport: That plant passport shall be issued only when that material has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to achieve a minimum temperature of 56 °C for a minimum duration of 30 continuous minutes throughout the entire profile of the wood. 2. Wood to be treated in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article may only be moved out of the demarcated area under the following conditions: Article 8 Movement of wood packaging material out of demarcated areas Wood from conifers in the form of wood packaging material may only be moved from an infested zone into a buffer zone, and out of a demarcated area into the rest of the Union territory, if all of the following conditions are fulfilled: Article 9 Introduction into the Union of specified plants Specified plants may only be introduced into the Union territory from non-European third countries if they are accompanied by the certificate referred to in Article 13(1)(ii) of Directive 2000/29/EC, containing one of the following statements under the entry ‘Additional declaration’: Article 10 Introduction into the Union of certain wood and isolated bark 1. Wood of the specified plants, other than in the form of chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood waste and scrap, and isolated bark, obtained in whole or part from those plants, and other than in the form of wood packaging material, originating from non-European third countries, may only be introduced into the Union territory if it is accompanied by the certificate referred to in Article 13(1)(ii) of Directive 2000/29/EC. 2. That certificate shall contain one of the following statements under the entry ‘Additional declaration’: 3. Wood of conifers (Pinales) in the form of chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood waste and scrap, and of isolated bark, obtained in whole or part from these conifers originating from non-European third countries, may only be introduced into the Union territory if it is accompanied by the certificate referred to in Article 13(1)(ii) of Directive 2000/29/EC. 4. That certificate shall contain one of the following statements under the entry ‘Additional declaration’: Article 11 Official checks at introduction into the Union of specified plants as well as certain wood and isolated bark originating from non-European third countries 1. All consignments of specified plants, wood of the specified plants other than in the form of wood packaging material, and wood of conifers (Pinales) in the form of chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood waste and scrap obtained in whole or part from these conifers, introduced into the Union from a non-European third country where the specified organism is known to be present, shall be subject to meticulous official checks at the point of entry into the Union or at the place of destination established in accordance with Article 1 of Commission Directive 2004/103/EC ( 9 ) . 2. Those official checks shall include a visual inspection as well as, where appropriate, sampling and testing of the lot of plants, plant products or other objects to confirm the absence of the specified organism. Article 12 Compliance Member States shall repeal or amend the measures which they have adopted to protect their territories against the introduction and spread of the specified organism in order to comply with this Decision. They shall immediately inform the Commission of those measures. Article 13 Repeal Decision 2007/433/EC is repealed. Article 14 Addressees This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 26 November 2019. For the Commission Vytenis ANDRIUKAITIS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision 2007/433/EC of 18 June 2007 on provisional emergency measures to prevent the introduction into and the spread within the Community of Gibberella circinata Nirenberg & O’Donnell ( OJ L 161, 22.6.2007, p. 66 ). ( 3 ) Turland, N. J., et al. (eds.) 2018: International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Shenzhen Code) adopted by the Nineteenth International Botanical Congress Shenzhen, China, July 2017 . Regnum Vegetabile 159. Glashütten: Koeltz Botanical Books. DOI ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Directive (EU) 2019/523 of 21 March 2019 amending Annexes I to V to Council Directive 2000/29/EC on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community ( OJ L 86, 28.3.2019, p. 41 ). ( 5 ) EFSA Panel on Plant Health: Risk assessment of Gibberella circinata for the EU territory and identification and evaluation of risk management options. EFSA Journal 2010;8(6):1620. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2010.1620. ( 6 ) ISPM No 9: Guidelines for pest eradication programmes. Available at ( 7 ) ISPM No 14: The use of integrated measures in a systems approach for pest risk management. Available at ( 8 ) ISPM No 15: Regulation of wood packaging material in international trade. ( 9 ) Commission Directive 2004/103/EC of 7 October 2004 on identity and plant health checks of plants, plant products or other objects, listed in Part B of Annex V to Council Directive 2000/29/EC, which may be carried out at a place other than the point of entry into the Community or at a place close by and specifying the conditions related to these checks ( OJ L 313, 12.10.2004, p. 16 ).