Avis juridique important 88/105/EEC: Commission Opinion of 26 January 1988 concerning the Emsland nuclear power-station (Federal Republic of Germany) (Only the German text is authentic) Official Journal L 057 , 03/03/1988 P. 0036 - 0036 COMMISSION OPINION of 26 January 1988 concerning the Emsland nuclear power-station (Federal Republic of Germany) (Only the German text is authentic) (88/105/EEC) The general data concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Emsland nuclear power-station were provided by the German Government to the Commission, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, by letter received on 23 July 1987. In the course of the meeting of the Group of Experts set up pursuant to the Treaty, which took place on 10 November 1987 in Luxembourg, the representatives of the German Government provided further complementary information and details. On the basis of the data thus obtained and having consulted the Group of Experts, the Commission drew up the following opinion: 1. The distance from the nuclear power-station to the closest point on the territory of another Member State, the Netherlands, is approximately 20 kilometres; Belgium is 190 kilometres distant. 2. In normal operation the liquid and gaseous discharges of the station are not liable to give rise to significant exposure, from the health point of view, of the population of other Member States. 3. Solid radioactive wastes are to be stored only temporarily at the station site prior to transport to a Federal German storage or disposal facility. Similarly, irradiated fuel elements are to be stored only temporarily at the station site prior to transfer to a reprocessing plant. 4. In the case of an unplanned release of radioactive effluents which could be occasioned by an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the general data, doses liable to be received in other Member States will not be significant from the health point of view. A provisional agreement between the Federal German and Netherlands authorities exists on exchange of information in case of radiological emergency. Nevertheless, the Commission recommends that the competent authorities of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Netherlands finalize the general agreement on emergency planning, now under negotiation, as soon as possible, and in any case before connection of the Emsland nuclear power-station to the grid. This agreement should allow for hypothetical accidents to be taken into account which may have radiologial consequences more important than those presented in the general data. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Emsland nuclear power-station is not liable, either in normal operation or in the case of accidents of the type and magnitude considered in the general data, to result in the radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. This opinion is addressed to the Federal Republic of Germany. Done at Brussels, 26 January 1988. For the Commission Stanley CLINTON DAVIS Member of the Commission