COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2021/2054 of 8 November 2021 on the sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the telecommunications and information and communication technologies (ICT) services sector for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 46(1) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, sector environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the telecommunications and information and communication technologies (ICT) services sector is set out in the Annex. Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 25 March 2022. Done at Brussels, 8 November 2021. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Communication from the Commission – Establishment of the working plan setting out an indicative list of sectors for the adoption of sectoral and cross-sectoral reference documents, under Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) ( OJ C 358, 8.12.2011, p. 2 ). ( 3 ) Canfora P., Gaudillat P., Antonopoulos I., Dri M., Best Environmental Management Practice in the Telecommunications and ICT Services sector, EUR 30365 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2020, ISBN 978-92-76-21574-5, doi:10.2760/354984, JRC121781; Contents 1. INTRODUCTION This Sectoral Reference Document (SRD) is based on a detailed scientific and policy report ( 1 ) (‘Best Practice Report’) developed by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC). Relevant legal background The Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) was introduced in 1993, for voluntary participation by organisations, by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 ( 2 ) . Subsequently, EMAS has undergone two major revisions: An important new element of the latest revision, which came into force on 11 January 2010, is Article 46 on the development of SRDs. The SRDs have to include best environmental management practices (BEMPs), environmental performance indicators for the specific sectors and, where appropriate, benchmarks of excellence and rating systems identifying performance levels. How to understand and use this document The eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) is a scheme for voluntary participation by organisations committed to continuous environmental improvement. Within this framework, this SRD provides sector-specific guidance to the telecommunications and ICT services sector and points out a number of options for improvement as well as best practices. The document was written by the European Commission using input from stakeholders. A Technical Working Group, comprising experts and stakeholders of the sector, led by the JRC, discussed and ultimately agreed on the best environmental management practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence described in this document; these benchmarks in particular were deemed to be representative of the levels of environmental performance that are achieved by the best performing organisations in the sector. The SRD aims to help and support all organisations that intend to improve their environmental performance by providing ideas and inspiration as well as practical and technical guidance. The SRD is primarily addressed to organisations that are already registered with EMAS; secondly to organisations that are considering registering with EMAS in the future; and thirdly to all organisations that wish to learn more about best environmental management practices in order to improve their environmental performance. Consequently, the objective of this document is to support all organisations in the telecommunications and ICT services sector to focus on relevant environmental aspects, both direct and indirect, and to find information on best environmental management practices, as well as appropriate sector-specific environmental performance indicators to measure their environmental performance, and benchmarks of excellence. How SRDs should be taken into account by EMAS-registered organisations: Pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009, EMAS-registered organisations are to take SRDs into account at two different levels: Elements of SRDs (indicators, BEMPs or benchmarks of excellence) not considered relevant with regards to the significant environmental aspects identified by the organisation in its environmental review should not be reported or described in the environmental statement. EMAS participation is an ongoing process. Every time an organisation plans to improve its environmental performance (and reviews its environmental performance) it shall consult the SRD on specific topics to find inspiration about which issues to tackle next in a step-wise approach. EMAS environmental verifiers shall check if and how the SRD was taken into account by the organisation when preparing its environmental statement (Article 18(5)(d) of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009). When undertaking an audit, accredited environmental verifiers will need evidence from the organisation of how the relevant elements of the SRD have been selected in light of the environmental review and taken into account. They shall not check compliance with the described benchmarks of excellence, but they shall verify evidence on how the SRD was used as a guide to identify indicators and proper voluntary measures that the organisation can implement to improve its environmental performance. Given the voluntary nature of EMAS and SRD, no disproportionate burdens should be put on the organisations to provide such evidence. In particular, verifiers shall not require an individual justification for each of the best practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence which are mentioned in the SRD and not considered relevant by the organisation in light of its environmental review. Nevertheless, they could suggest relevant additional elements for the organisation to take into account in the future as further evidence of its commitment to continuous performance improvement. Structure of the Sectoral Reference Document This document consists of four chapters. Chapter 1 introduces EMAS’ legal background and describes how to use this document, while Chapter 2 defines the scope of this SRD. Chapter 3 briefly describes the different best environmental management practices (BEMPs) ( 5 ) together with information on their applicability. When specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence could be formulated for a particular BEMP, these are also given. However, defining benchmarks of excellence was not possible for all BEMPs, either because of the limited availability of data or because of the specific conditions of each company and/or site (e.g. environmental and climate conditions for data centres, accessibility of remote base stations, etc.) vary to such an extent that a benchmark of excellence would not be meaningful. Even when benchmarks of excellence are given, these are not meant as targets for all companies to reach or metrics to compare the environmental performance across companies of the sector, but rather as a measure of what is possible to help individual companies assess the progress they made and motivate them to improve further. Finally, Chapter 4 presents a comprehensive table with a selection of the most relevant environmental performance indicators, associated explanations and related benchmarks of excellence. 2. SCOPE This reference document addresses the environmental performance of the telecommunications and ICT services sector ( 6 ) . The best environmental management practices (BEMPs) described in this document were identified as best practices that can support the efforts of all Telecommunications and ICT services providers, i.e. telecommunication operators, ICT consultancy firms, data processing and hosting companies, software developers and publishers, broadcasters, installers of ICT equipment and sites, etc. Large organisations that store and process large quantities of data on their clients, supply chain and/or products (e.g. public administrations, hospitals, universities, banks) can also find several BEMPs of relevance to their activities. The companies and organisation of the telecommunications and ICT services sector that fall under the scope of this report are listed below: In addition to this core target group, other types of organisations classified under the NACE codes but not belonging to the NACE code sections listed above can also find several BEMPs of relevance, because of their increasing digitalisation: Other organisations that are classified under other NACE sections and have to manage or operate large data storage, data processing and/or telecommunication infrastructures as a vital part of their activities may also find several BEMPs of relevance. Some examples are organisations belonging to: The Telecommunications and ICT Services sector as defined in this report covers only a specific part of the value chain of such services and related equipment. This choice was aimed at avoiding overlap with other best practice reports: This document covers the core business activities of organisations in the Telecommunications and ICT Services sector. Beyond the direct management of ICT assets, core business activities are considered to include also the relationship with key stakeholders, although limited to practices that telecommunications and ICT services providers can implement themselves (e.g. establishing environmental criteria during procurement of ICT equipment, providing information to customers on the energy consumption of devices provided to them). The management of offices and general company transport are also not included as these are common for all types of organisations and not specific to organisations in the Telecommunications and ICT Services sector. Besides, the best environmental management practices (BEMPs) related to mobility (business travel and employee commuting) and sustainability practices in offices are already developed in the document on BEMP in the Public Administration Sector ( 9 ) . No BEMP that is specific to the Telecommunications and ICT Services buildings and transportation was identified in these areas. The manufacturing, retail and recycling of ICT equipment are not included in this study as they are covered in the documents on BEMP for other sectors. This report distinguishes between: An overview of the scope of the BEMPs for the Telecommunications and ICT Services sector is given in Figure 1. Figure 1: Overview of the scope of the document The main environmental aspects and associated environmental pressures for the telecommunications and ICT services sector are presented in Table 1. These environmental aspects were selected as the most relevant in the sector and are those that are covered in this document. However, the environmental aspects to be managed by specific organisations should be assessed on a case by case basis. Table 1 Main environmental aspects and environmental pressures related to the Telecommunications and ICT Services sector The BEMPs of this reference document are classified as illustrated in Table 2. Table 2 Structure of the document 3. BEST ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, SECTOR ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND BENCHMARKS OF EXCELLENCE FOR THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND ICT SERVICES SECTOR 3.1. BEMPs for cross-cutting issues This section focuses on cross-cutting measures which could apply to all types of organisations in the telecommunications and ICT services sector at different levels (data centres, telecommunication networks, end-user devices, etc.). 3.1.1. Making the best use of an environmental management system ICT facilities have important environmental impacts through energy consumption, water consumption and waste generation. It is particularly important for telecommunications and ICT services companies to monitor their environmental impacts and implement an environmental management system to systematically minimise these impacts. It is considered best practice to: Define the organisation’s ICT needs and audit the existing ICT equipment, services and software. Measure, monitor and manage the environmental performance of ICT equipment infrastructure and facilities. Set objectives and action plans based on benchmarking and best practices. Ensure that set objectives and action plans are part of effective company-wide environmental policies, such as an energy efficiency strategy Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all companies and organisation of the sector. However, the resources and means allocated to the process must be adapted to the size and the environmental impact of the site or the company. For small and mid-size companies, efforts needed must be assessed and validated. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.2. Procurement of sustainable ICT products and services The selection and deployment of ICT products and services needs to be based on an integrated strategy to tackle their inherent environmental impacts, such as their energy consumption and the use of specific materials such as rare metals and chemicals. It is considered best practice to: Establish energy and environmental performance criteria for ICT equipment provided to customers to help them reduce their environmental impact. Applicability The implementation of a policy for the procurement of sustainable ICT services and products is applicable in any company but will require specific skills on sustainability. Large organisations have greater potential to leverage influence over their suppliers, but SMEs may exert considerable influence over local suppliers. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.3. Optimising the energy consumption of end-user devices There is a large potential to reduce the energy consumption of end-user equipment used within the offices and facilities of telecommunications and ICT services companies thanks to specific power management measures. It is best practice to: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to both large and small companies, although SMEs might benefit more from techniques based on individual user awareness rather than deployment of automated controls, more suited to large companies. Implementing power management depends on the leadership’s commitment to support overall energy savings objectives and environmental performance. It is also dependant on the implication of the staff to contribute to the power management measures as well as support from the IT and procurement departments. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.4. Use of renewable and low carbon energy ICT facilities have a high carbon footprint due to intensive energy use. Electricity generation from renewable sources such as biomass, solar, wind and geothermal cooling systems, significantly reduces their carbon footprint. It is considered BEMP to: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable by all type of companies of the sector, including SMEs. The geographical location of the facility and its size may affect its applicability though. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.5. Resource efficiency of ICT equipment through waste prevention, reuse and recycling Resource efficiency and appropriate waste management in the ICT sector is important because of the use of specific materials that need to be properly treated at end-of-life to avoid damage to human health and the environment. It also offers a large potential for limiting resource depletion through recycling. Specific waste management techniques can be implemented in order to improve waste management at each stage of the waste hierarchy in ICT companies. It is BEMP to: Applicability 3.1.6. Minimising data traffic demand through green software While software does not directly consume energy, it greatly influences the energy efficiency of the ICT hardware on which it runs. However, a large share of software code does not take into account energy consumption, and opportunities exist to optimise software, reduce the volume of data processed and transmitted, and ultimately reduce the energy consumption of hardware. This BEMP is dedicated to practices that can be implemented either when developing new software or when optimising existing software, for servers and networks considering both mobile applications (for smartphones and tablets) and computer software (for laptop and desktop), as well as web portals and web-based applications. It is BEMP to: Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, whether companies procure or develop their own software solutions. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2. BEMPs for data centres This section deals with practices that improve the environmental performance of the operations of data centres. Many of the techniques identified within this chapter can also be implemented in telecommunication central offices. There is a large variety of data centres and many different ways to categorise them; the following characteristics can be used to differentiate between data centres: the size of the data centre (determined by the physical area, number of servers and/or workload capacity); its geographical location; the purpose or type of the operator (e.g. enterprise data centres, co-location ( 11 ) , co-hosting, or network operator facilities); and its security level (Tier I to IV). These characteristics all have an impact on the applicability of the following BEMPs to different data centres. 3.2.1. Implement an energy management system for data centres (including measuring, monitoring and management of ICT and other equipment) The energy consumption of data centres is responsible for a major share of their environmental impacts. It is therefore important for data centre operators to have a clear and detailed view on energy consumption at the appropriate granularity levels, and to systematically exploit all opportunities to minimise it. It is considered best practice to: Applicability General remarks on the applicability of data centre BEMPs apply. Most energy management best practices will be better suited to localised, mid-tier and enterprise-class data centres. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.2. Define and implement a data management and storage policy Minimising the quantity of data stored onto drives and the computing capacity required to run applications, databases and services is a key measure to reduce the energy consumption of data centres by reducing the number of powered hardware (servers and storage devices). It is considered best practice to: When properly implemented, these techniques lead to a reduction of the hardware purchased which also results in significant material resources savings. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable by all companies and organisations of the sector, irrespectively of their size, security level or purpose although application may be different for enterprises or colocation data centres. Even if virtualisation is more frequently used in bigger data centres, this technique can also be implemented in smaller server rooms. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.3. Improve airflow management and design The reliability of IT systems depends on environmental conditions (temperature, humidity, dust, etc.) that must be ensured by appropriate control of the indoor air quality. Airflow management for data centres aims at avoiding air recirculation and mixing of cooling air supplied and hot air rejected from equipment. It is BEMP to: Improved airflow management increases both the efficiency and the capacity of the cooling equipment, reduces the utilisation of fans and humidifiers (and their energy consumption) and minimise the production of waste heat. Applicability Most of these actions can only be implemented by the data centre operator since they require changes in operational conditions, evolutions of the design of the facility or installation of new equipment. Although the best practices identified can be implemented in data centres of any size, scale effects can be observed in larger data centres with shorter return on investments. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.4. Improve cooling management Cooling is needed to remove the heat produced by ICT equipment in a data centre or a network room and to ensure the right operating conditions for ICT equipment to perform reliably. Sizing the necessary cooling system of a data centre depends on the environment where the data centre is located, on the efficiency of the IT equipment used in the data centre and on the airflow management performance. It is BEMP to: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable in all companies of the sector. Maintaining the cooling system and carrying out regular reviews of its capacities can be done in most data centres, irrespectively of their size, security level or purpose. However, automating the cooling system output can imply costs to purchase smart equipment, making it more appropriate for large size data centres. It must be noted that specific regulation and environmental guidance can conflict with the decrease of cooling needs. For instance, BREEAM and LEED give points for increasing insulation of data centres. An increased insulation of data centres will require additional cooling needs since the heat produced by servers cannot dissipate. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.5. Review and adjust temperature and humidity settings ICT facilities are often overcooled, and the server intake temperature set point can be raised within the recommended or allowable temperature ranges (given in the manufacturer specifications) in order to reduce the cooling capacity and the energy consumption of the cooling system. A similar situation is generally observed regarding humidity, and the energy and water consumption of humidifiers can be reduced by allowing a broader range of humidity levels. It is therefore BEMP to: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector. Raising temperature set points, adjusting volumes and quality of supplied cool air, and reviewing humidity settings can be done in most data centres, irrespectively of their size, security level or purpose, within the operational specification given by the server manufacturer and within acceptable working conditions. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.6. BEMPs related to selecting and deploying new equipment for data centres The section deals with practices for the improvement of the energy efficiency of individual equipment and ICT services used in data centres: 3.2.6.1. Selection and deployment of environmentally friendly equipment for data centres The selection and deployment of ICT devices as well as cooling and power supply equipment needs to be based on an integrated strategy to minimise their overall environmental performance (energy use, water use, embodied energy, resource efficiency). It is BEMP to: Applicability Techniques on green procurement and environmentally-performant servers are broadly applicable to any new and existing data centre. For cooling systems, the location of the data centre is a fundamental factor concerning the feasibility and the performance of a free cooling system. Alternative cooling systems such as liquid cooling or free-air cooling are most easily implemented in new data centres rather than existing ones. For power systems, the elements to take into consideration for the adoption of new, more efficient UPS systems vary depending on when a new infrastructure is being built or when upgrading an existing infrastructure. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.7. BEMPs related to new build or refurbishment of data centres The section deals with practices for the improvement of the energy efficiency of new built or refurbished data centres. 3.2.7.1. Planning of new data centres When building or upgrading a data centre, the planning phase offers the most significant opportunities to ensure its environmental performance. Data centres are often oversized to allow future extensions, which generates energy inefficiencies. In many cases, the building can prevent the data centre from upgrading to new and more energy efficient equipment. It is BEMP to: Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all companies of the sector, being most relevant for localised, mid-tier and enterprise-class data centres. Building a data centre according to a modular architecture is particularly relevant for big data centres. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.7.2. Reuse of data centre waste heat As any electrical equipment, IT equipment requires power supply and produces waste heat while running. Data centres produce large quantities of waste heat, which is an opportunity for heat reuse. It is BEMP to: Applicability This BEMPs can be broadly implemented by any data centre regardless of its size, tier or purpose. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.7.3. Design of the data centre building and physical layout The physical layout of the data centre influences significantly its cooling system performance, since cooled areas (where racks are located) may be unnecessarily located close to internal heat sources (such as mechanical or electrical equipment) or in areas heated by external sources (e.g. solar radiation). It is BEMP to: Applicability This BEMP is most relevant for building new, enterprise-class data centres, as it aims to shape the aspect and structure of the new built data centre and can be costly to implement. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.7.4. Selecting the geographical location of the new data centre The geographical location of the data centre has great influence on its future carbon and environmental impacts. It is considered best practice to: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable in all types of companies from the sector, including SMEs, but most relevant for mid-tier and enterprise-class data centres. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.7.5. Use of alternative sources of water Water is used in data centres for two purposes: cooling and humidification, which are intimately linked. In particular, evaporative chillers require significant amount of water. It is BEMP to: Applicability This BEMP is relevant for large, enterprise-class data centres. The choice of the cooling system solution depends on the size of the data centre, which is intimately linked to the activity and the size of the company. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3. BEMPs related to electronic communication networks The section describes practices focusing on the network configuration of the different elements that form electronic communication infrastructure and networks ( 12 ) . 3.3.1. Improving the energy management of existing networks Due to end-user demand variability, traffic loads on electronic communication networks vary significantly over time and space. The energy consumption of modern telecommunications equipment is the highest when the equipment is operating at maximum traffic load, but it does not decrease much when the equipment is underutilised. A large part of the daily network energy consumption is thus spent for providing full system capacity, even when the actual traffic demand is much lower. It is BEMP to: Applicability The applicability of the various measures of this BEMP is presented in Table 3. Table 3 Applicability of best practices aiming at improving the energy management of existing electronic communication networks (ECNs) Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.2. Improving risk management for electromagnetic fields through assessment and transparency of data Electromagnetic fields (EMF) are a public concern in relation to the growing wireless networks. Strict regulations have been defined and intense research works have been carried out to tackle this issue. It is best practice for telecom operators to: Applicability The implementation of this BEMP depends on the content of national regulations regarding EMF and on the local context (existence of associations against EMF exposure, media coverage of EMF issues, visibility of antennas, etc.). It is most relevant for network operators. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.3. Selecting and deploying more energy-efficient electronic communication network equipment Both mobile and wireline networks use ICT equipment that require electricity and specific environmental conditions to properly function. Electronic communication ( 14 ) operators have the opportunity when selecting and deploying such materials within their networks to improve energy efficiency by selecting and configuring appropriate equipment. It is best practice to: Applicability The applicability of the measures of this BEMP is presented in Table 4. Table 4 Applicability of the measures of this BEMP Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.4. Installing and upgrading telecommunication networks Beyond the installation of new energy efficient equipment on network sites, organisational solutions can deliver significant energy savings, for instance, by ensuring that unused equipment is plugged off and power and cooling supply are not oversized and are optimised to the actual current needs. It is best practice to: Applicability This BEMP is more relevant for large mobile companies which own thousands of sites, and for operators of networks in rural areas (where the sites are more spaced out). Telecommunication operators and their suppliers in charge of the installation of ICT equipment are the main actors concerned by this BEMP. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.5. Reducing the environmental impacts when building or renovating telecommunication networks Telecommunication and broadcasting infrastructures generate neighbourhood nuisances (aesthetic impact, noise from generators and cooling system, etc.) and are responsible for land-use (potentially associated with biodiversity disturbance). To limit such impacts when building new infrastructures or when renovating existing ones, it is BEMP to: Applicability The applicability of the measures of this BEMP is presented in Table 5. Table 5 Applicability of the measures of this BEMP Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.4. Improving the energy and environmental performance in other sectors (‘ Greening by ICT’) This section deals with practices focussing on the most relevant opportunities for the telecommunications and ICT service sector to contribute to improving the environmental performance of other sectors. 3.4.1. Greening by ICT Across all sectors, four main change levers for reducing GHG emissions and improving environmental performance in general through ICT are available: These solutions are closely related to one another and complementary. They apply at different lifecycle stages: while developing the services or products, between the development phase and the utilisation phase, and at the user’s site. From an ICT company perspective and for each of these four main levers, it is best practice to: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 4. RECOMMENDED SECTOR-SPECIFIC KEY ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Table 4.1 lists a selection of key environmental performance indicators for the telecommunications and ICT services sector, together with the related benchmarks and reference to the relevant BEMPs. These are a subset of all the indicators mentioned in Section 3. Table 4.1 Key environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the telecommunications and ICT services sector ( 1 ) The scientific and policy report is publicly available on the JRC website at the following address: The conclusions on best environmental management practices and their applicability as well as the identified specific environmental performance indicators and the benchmarks of excellence contained in this Sectoral Reference Document are based on the findings documented in the scientific and policy report. All the background information and technical details can be found there. ( 2 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 of 29 June 1993 allowing voluntary participation by companies in the industrial sector in a Community eco-management and audit scheme ( OJ L 168, 10.7.1993, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 allowing voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) ( OJ L 114, 24.4.2001, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) According to Annex IV (B.(f)) of the EMAS Regulation, then environmental statement shall contain ‘a summary of the data available on the environmental performance of the organisation with respect to its significant environmental aspects. Reporting shall be on both the core environmental performance indicators and the specific environmental performance indicators as set out in Section C. Where environmental objectives and targets exist, the respective data shall be reported.’ Annex IV – Section C.3 states that ‘each organisation shall also report annually on its performance relating to the significant direct and indirect environmental aspects and impacts that are related to its core business activities, that are measurable and verifiable, and that are not covered already by the core indicators. Where available, the organisation shall take account of sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46 to facilitate the identification of relevant sector specific indicators.’ ( 5 ) A detailed description of each of the best practices, with practical guidance on how to implement them, is available in the ‘Best Practice Report’ published by the JRC and available online at: Organisations are invited to consult it if interested in learning more about some of the best practices described in this SRD. ( 6 ) Note that the European Electronic Communications Code (cf. Directive (EU) 2018/1972 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 establishing the European Electronic Communications Code), acknowledging the convergence of the telecommunications, media and information technology sectors, now establishes common rules applicable to the broader sector including e.g. broadcasting. Where relevant and applicable, BEMPs are mentioned in reference to the new nomenclature. ( 7 ) The best practice report for the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector is under development and will be available online at: ( 8 ) The best practice report for the retail trade sector is available online at: ( 9 ) The best practice report for the public administration sector is available online at: ( 10 ) Total carbon emissions for scope 1 and 2 can be calculated based on the Greenhouse Gas Protocol, available online at: ( 11 ) Co-location of data centres can also refer to exchange points of ICT services. ( 12 ) Please note that ‘electronic communication networks’ is used in the broad sense of the European Electronic Communications Code (including wireless, optical …) and not referring strictly to communications based only on a physical layer exchanging electronic signals. ( 13 ) This indicator is not suited to benchmark between different types of operators. ( 14 ) In the sense of the European Electronic Communications Code. ( 15 ) EU Code of Conduct on Energy Consumption of Broadband Equipment: ( 16 ) ETSI ES 202 336. ( 17 ) EMAS core indicators are listed in Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 (Section C.2). ( 18 ) The numbers refer to the sections in this document.