COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2025/455 of 7 March 2025 granting a Union authorisation for the single biocidal product ‘SatPax® 70/30 IPA’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0032869-0000 is granted to CSI-Ireland for the making available on the market and use of the single biocidal product ‘SatPax® 70/30 IPA’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 30 March 2025 until 28 February 2035. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 7 March 2025. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 , ELI: . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 30 May 2024 on the Union authorisation of ‘SatPax® 70/30 IPA’ (ECHA/BPC/432/2024), . Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product SatPax® 70/30 IPA Product type(s) PT02: Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals Authorisation number: EU-0032869-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0032869-0000 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Trade name(s) of the product 1.2. Authorisation holder 1.3. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the product 2.2. Type(s) of formulation RTU wipe pre-saturated with a liquid formulation (AL) 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) 4.1. Use description Table 1 Disinfection of smaller hard surface areas by wiping in cleanrooms and in similar controlled areas within manufacturing and industrial settings (e.g.: work benches in a cleanroom) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Use at room temperature. Only use on clean surfaces. Remove one wipe from pack. Close pack. Quarter fold the wiper and refold as needed to use each surface of the wiper. Apply pre-saturated wipe directly to the surface to be disinfected. Ensure complete wetting of the surface. No additional wiping necessary. Allow contact time of 1 min for bacteria and yeast. Use wipe once. Dispose of the wipe immediately after use in a closed container. Do not mix with other products. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5.2 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5.3 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5.4 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5.5 4.2. Use description Table 2 Disinfection of larger hard surface areas using wipes and a mop in cleanrooms and in similar controlled areas within manufacturing and industrial settings (e.g.: floors in a cleanroom) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Use at room temperature. Only use on clean surfaces. Remove wipe(s) from pack. Close pack. Attach 4 layers on the mop head and refold or rotate wipers as needed to maintain a wet surface for a contact time of 1 minute. Apply wipe directly to the surface to be disinfected. Use sufficient wipes in order to maintain a wet surface for a contact time of 1 min. No additional wiping necessary. Allow contact time of 1 min for bacteria and yeast. Use wipe once. Dispose of the wipe immediately after use in a closed container. Do not mix with other products. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See section 5.2 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See section 5.3 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See section 5.4 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See section 5.5 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) 5.1. Instructions for use See section 4.1.1 and 4.2.1 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Avoid contact with eyes. Ensure that application is carried out in areas with a minimum ventilation rate of 20 air changes/hour. Wear protective chemical resistant gloves meeting the requirements of European Standard EN 374 or equivalent during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). This is without prejudice to the application by employers of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See Section 6 for information on the EN standard and the Council Directive. Keep in the original container, kept tightly closed when not in use. Empty containers retain product residue and can be hazardous. Do not reuse container. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for 5 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse.Wash skin with water. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF SWALLOWED: Rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Emergency measures Inform the relevant authorities if the product has caused environmental pollution (sewers, waterways, soil or air). Small spill: Vacuum or sweep up material and place in a designated, labelled waste container. Dispose of via a licensed waste disposal contractor Large spill: Stop leak if without risk. Move containers from spill area. Use spark-proof tools and explosion-proof equipment. Approach the release from upwind. Prevent entry into sewers, soil, water courses, basements or confined areas. Contain and collect spillage with non-combustible, absorbent material e.g. sand, earth, vermiculite or diatomaceous earth and place in container for disposal according to local regulations. Dispose of via a licensed waste disposal contractor. Contaminated absorbent material may pose the same hazard as the spilt product. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The generation of waste should be avoided or minimised wherever possible. Disposal of this product should comply with the requirements of environmental protection and waste disposal legislation and any regional local authority requirements. Dispose of surplus and non-recyclable products via a licensed waste disposal contractor. Waste should not be disposed to the sewer. Do not flush wipes down the toilet. Do not macerate. Disposal of packaging: The generation of waste should be avoided or minimised wherever possible. Waste packaging should be recycled. Incineration or landfill should only be considered when recycling is not feasible. This material and its container must be disposed of in a safe way. Empty containers or liners may retain some product residues. Residual alcohol should be emptied prior to disposal of container. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in a cool, dry, well-ventilated place in original container. Keep container tightly closed. Store at temperatures not exceeding 40 °C. Protect from frost. Store protected from direct sunlight. Shelf-life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains wipes of four types of material impregnated with IPA:water (64,7:35,3 % w/w) solution. The materials are cellulose/polyester (55%/45%), cellulose/polyester (60%/40%), polypropylene (100%) and polyester (100%). The sizes of the wipes range from 13 × 20 cm to 23 × 58 cm. More detailed information on the sizes of the wipes is included under the title “Pack sizes and packaging material” in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Please be aware of the European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the active substance propan-2-ol (CAS No: 67-63-0) which was used for the risk assessment for this product. Full titles of EN standards and legislation mentioned in section 5.2: EN 374 – Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms. Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC). With respect to the “Category(ies) of users” note: Professionals (including industrial users) means trained professionals if this is required by national legislation. ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)