COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2019/2076 of 29 November 2019 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Contec IPA Product Family’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular the first subparagraph of Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0020460-0000 is granted to Contec Europe for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘Contec IPA Product Family’, subject to compliance with the terms and conditions set out in Annex I and in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in Annex II. The Union authorisation is valid from 26 December 2019 until 30 November 2029. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 29 November 2019. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 28 February 2019 on the Union authorisation of ‘Contec IPA Product Family’ (ECHA/BPC/221/2019). ANNEX I TERMS AND CONDITIONS (EU-0020460-0000) The authorisation holder shall conduct a long-term storage test at ambient temperature for wipes in their commercial packaging. By 31 July 2021 the authorisation holder shall submit the results of the test to the Agency. ANNEX II Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Contec IPA Product Family Product type 2 — Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Product type 4 — Food and feed area (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0020460-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0020460-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL — META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 – Professional use 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use Use at room temperature. For visibly soiled surfaces, cleaning prior to disinfection is required. Wiping: Apply/Spray product to a suitable quality cleanroom wipe. Ensure the wipe is sufficiently and uniformly saturated before wiping the surface to be disinfected. Ensure the surface is uniformly covered with the product then wipe to dry with a sterile cleanroom wipe. Contact times: Wiping 1 minute for bacteria and mycobacteria 3 minutes for yeast. Used wipes must be disposed of in a closed container. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wash hands and exposed skin before meals and after use. Avoid contact with eyes ‘For use in cleanrooms, adequate technical/engineering controls to remove airborne residues is mandatory e.g. room ventilation or LEV’ 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Likely direct or indirect adverse effects: Headache, vertigo, hallucinations, respiratory depression, CNS depression or coma. Severe irritation of the eyes and or ocular damage. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and haemorrhagic gastritis. Pulmonary aspiration hazard may induce pneumonitis, hypotension and hypoglycemia. First aid measures: Relocate the individual from the exposure source and remove any contaminated/spattered clothing articles. Eye contact: IF IN EYES: Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. If eye irritation persists: Get medical advice/attention Skin contact; wash affected area with plenty of water and soap. No scrubbing. In case of ingestion: Do NOT induce vomiting and never give anything by mouth to an impaired or unconscious individual; if the individual is unconscious place individual in left sideways (recovery) position with the head lowered and the knees bent. Keep the individual calm and at rest, conserve body temperature and control breathing. If necessary check for pulse and initiate artificial respiration. Take the individual to a healthcare centre and bring packaging or label whenever possible. NEVER LEAVE THE AFFECTED INDIVIDUAL UNATTENDED! Advice for medical and healthcare personnel: Monitor vital signs and provide symptomatic and supportive treatment. Evaluate endoscopic procedure in case of ingestion. Monitor glycaemia and ketones. Ipecac use is contraindicated. WHEN ASKING FOR MEDICAL ADVICE KEEP PACKAGING OR LABEL AT HAND AND CALL YOUR LOCAL POISON CONTROL CENTRE [INSERT LOCAL NUMBER HERE]. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Dispose of contents/container in accordance with local regulations. Do not re-use empty container for any other purpose. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in a cool, dry, well-ventilated place in original container. Keep away from sources of ignition. Keep away from direct sunlight. Keep container tightly closed. Shelf-life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No: 67-63-0), for which an European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 2 Use # 1 – Professional use 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use For soiled surfaces, cleaning prior to disinfection is required. Ensure the surface is uniformly covered with the product, allow to act for a contact time of 1 minute for bactericidal and mycobactericidal action and 3 minutes for yeasticidal action 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wash hands and exposed skin before meals and after use. Avoid contact with eyes ‘For use in cleanrooms, adequate technical/engineering controls to remove airborne residues is mandatory e.g. room ventilation or LEV’ 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Likely direct or indirect adverse effects: Headache, vertigo, hallucinations, respiratory depression, CNS depression or coma. Severe irritation of the eyes and or ocular damage. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and haemorrhagic gastritis. Pulmonary aspiration hazard may induce pneumonitis, hypotension and hypoglycemia. First aid measures: Relocate the individual from the exposure source and remove any contaminated/spattered clothing articles. Eye contact: IF IN EYES: Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. If eye irritation persists: Get medical advice/attention Skin contact; wash affected area with plenty of water and soap, No scrubbing. In case of ingestion; Do NOT induce vomiting and never give anything by mouth to an impaired or unconscious individual; if the individual is unconscious place individual in left sideways (recovery) position with the head lowered and the knees bent. Keep the individual calm and at rest, conserve body temperature and control breathing. If necessary check for pulse and initiate artificial respiration. Take the individual to a healthcare centre and bring packaging or label whenever possible. NEVER LEAVE THE AFFECTED INDIVIDUAL UNATTENDED! Advice for medical and healthcare personnel: Monitor vital signs and provide symptomatic and supportive treatment. Evaluate endoscopic procedure in case of ingestion. Monitor glycaemia and ketones. Ipecac use is contraindicated. WHEN ASKING FOR MEDICAL ADVICE KEEP PACKAGING OR LABEL AT HAND AND CALL YOUR LOCAL POISON CONTROL CENTRE [INSERT LOCAL NUMBER HERE]. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Dispose of contents/container in accordance with local regulations. Do not re-use empty container for any other purpose. Used wipes must be disposed in a closed container Dispose of used wipes by dry waste to landfill 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in a cool, dry, well-ventilated place in original container. Keep away from sources of ignition. Keep away from direct sunlight. Keep container tightly closed. Shelf-life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION Polypropylene, polyester, kitted polyester, 55 % cellulose/45 % polyester or 50 % rayon/50 % polyester wipes, 34-240 gsm, containing 5 - 38 ml product (2,75 – 20,9 g propan-2-ol) The product contains propan-2-ol (CAS No: 67-63-0), for which an European reference value of 129,28 mg/m 3 for the professional user was agreed and used for the risk assessment of the product. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2.