COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2017/1214 of 23 June 2017 establishing the EU Ecolabel criteria for hand dishwashing detergents (notified under document C(2017) 4227) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the EU Ecolabel ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 8(2) thereof, After consulting the European Union Eco-labelling Board, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The product group ‘hand dishwashing detergents’ shall comprise any detergent falling under the scope of Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 3 ) on detergents which is marketed and designed to be used to wash by hand items such as glassware, crockery and kitchen utensils including cutlery, pots, pans and ovenware. The product group shall comprise products for both private and professional use. The products shall be a mixture of chemical substances and shall not contain micro-organisms that have been deliberately added by the manufacturer. Article 2 For the purpose of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 In order to be awarded the EU Ecolabel under Regulation (EC) No 66/2010, a hand dishwashing detergent shall fall within the product group ‘hand dishwashing detergents’, as defined in Article 1 of this Decision and shall comply with the criteria as well as the related assessment and verification requirements set out in the Annex. Article 4 The criteria for the product group ‘hand dishwashing detergents’ and the related assessment and verification requirements shall be valid for six years from the date of notification of this Decision. Article 5 For administrative purposes the code number assigned to the product group ‘hand dishwashing detergents’ shall be ‘019’. Article 6 Decision 2011/382/EU is repealed. Article 7 1. By derogation from Article 6, applications for the EU Ecolabel for products falling within the product group ‘hand dishwashing detergents’ submitted before the date of notification of this Decision shall be evaluated in accordance with the conditions laid down in Decision 2011/382/EU. 2. Applications for the EU Ecolabel for products falling within the product group ‘hand dishwashing detergents’ submitted within two months from the date of notification of this Decision may be based either on the criteria set out in Decision 2011/382/EU or on the criteria set out in this Decision. Those applications shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria on which they are based. 3. EU Ecolabel licenses awarded in accordance with the criteria set out in Decision 2011/382/EU may be used for 12 months from the date of notification of this Decision. Article 8 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 23 June 2017. For the Commission Karmenu VELLA Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 27, 30.1.2010, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision 2011/382/EU of 24 June 2011 on establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the EU Ecolabel to hand dishwashing detergents ( OJ L 169, 29.6.2011, p. 40 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on detergents ( OJ L 104, 8.4.2004, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Commission Recommendation 2011/696/EU of 18 October 2011 on the definition of nanomaterial ( OJ L 275, 20.10.2011, p. 38 ). FRAMEWORK EU ECOLABEL CRITERIA Criteria for awarding the EU Ecolabel to hand dishwashing detergents CRITERIA ASSESSMENT AND VERIFICATION (a) Requirements The specific assessment and verification requirements are indicated within each criterion. Where the applicant is required to provide to the competent bodies with declarations, documentation, analyses, test reports, or other evidence to show compliance with the criteria, these may originate from the applicant and/or their supplier(s), as appropriate. Competent bodies shall preferentially recognise attestations which are issued by bodies accredited in accordance with the relevant harmonised standard for testing and calibration laboratories and verifications by bodies that are accredited in accordance with the relevant harmonised standard for bodies certifying products, processes and services. Accreditation shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ) . Where appropriate, test methods other than those indicated for each criterion may be used if the competent body assessing the application accepts their equivalence. Where appropriate, competent bodies may require supporting documentation and may carry out independent verifications or site visits. As a pre-requisite, the product shall meet all applicable legal requirements of the country or countries in which the product is intended to be placed on the market. The applicant shall declare the product's compliance with this requirement. The ‘Detergent Ingredient Database’ list (DID list), available on the EU Ecolabel website, contains the most widely used ingoing substances in detergents and cosmetics formulations. It shall be used for deriving the data for the calculations of the Critical Dilution Volume (CDV) and for the assessment of the biodegradability of the ingoing substances. For substances not present on the DID list, guidance is given on how to calculate or extrapolate the relevant data. The list of all ingoing substances shall be provided to the competent body, indicating trade name (if existing), the chemical name, the CAS no., the DID no., the ingoing quantity, the function and the form present in the final product formulation (including water-soluble foil, if used). Preservatives, fragrances and colouring agents shall be indicated regardless of concentration. Other ingoing substances shall be indicated at or above the concentration of 0,010 % weight by weight. All ingoing substances present in the form of nanomaterials shall be clearly indicated in the list with the word ‘nano’ written in brackets. For each ingoing substance listed, the Safety Data Sheets (SDS) in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 2 ) shall be provided. Where an SDS is not available for a single substance because it is part of a mixture, the applicant shall provide the SDS of the mixture. (b) Measurement thresholds Compliance with the ecological criteria is required for all ingoing substances as specified in Table 1. Table 1 Threshold levels applicable to ingoing substances by criterion for hand dishwashing detergents (% weight by weight) REFERENCE DOSAGE The following dosage shall be taken as the reference dosage for the calculations aiming at documenting compliance with the EU Ecolabel criteria and for testing of cleaning ability. The highest dosage recommended by the manufacturer for 1 litre of washing water for cleaning normally soiled dishes (indicated in g/l of washing water or ml/l of washing water). Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the product label or user instruction sheet that includes the dosing instructions. Criterion 1 — Toxicity to aquatic organisms The critical dilution volume (CDV chronic ) of the product shall not exceed the following limits for the reference dosage. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the calculation of the CDV chronic of the product. A spreadsheet for calculating the CDV chronic value is available on the EU Ecolabel website. The CDV chronic is calculated for all ingoing substances (i) in the product using the following equation: Where: The values of DF( i ) and TF chronic ( i ) shall be as given in the most updated Part A of the DID list. If an ingoing substance is not included in Part A, the applicant shall estimate the values following the approach described in Part B of that list and attaching the associated documentation. Criterion 2 — Biodegradability (a) Biodegradability of surfactants All surfactants shall be readily degradable (aerobically). All surfactants classified as hazardous to the aquatic environment: Acute Category 1 (H400) or Chronic Category 3 (H412), in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 3 ) shall be in addition anaerobically biodegradable. (b) Biodegradability of organic compounds The content of organic substances in the product that are aerobically non-biodegradable (not readily biodegradable, aNBO) or anaerobically non-biodegradable (anNBO) shall not exceed the following limits for the reference dosage: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide documentation for the degradability of surfactants, as well as the calculation of aNBO and anNBO for the product. A spreadsheet for calculating aNBO and anNBO values is available on the EU Ecolabel website. For both the degradability of surfactants and the aNBO and anNBO values for organic compounds, reference shall be made to the most updated DID list. For ingoing substances that are not included in Part A of the DID list, the relevant information from literature or other sources, or appropriate test results, showing that they are aerobically and anaerobically biodegradable shall be provided, as described in Part B of that list. In the absence of documentation for degradability described above, an ingoing substance other than a surfactant may be exempted from the requirement for anaerobic degradability if one of the following three alternatives is fulfilled: Testing for adsorption/desorption shall be conducted in accordance with OECD Guideline 106. Criterion 3 — Sustainable sourcing of palm oil, palm kernel oil and their derivatives Ingoing substances used in the products which are derived from palm oil or palm kernel oil shall be sourced from plantations that meet the requirements of a certification scheme for sustainable production that is based on multi-stakeholder organizations that has a broad membership, including NGOs, industry and government and that addresses environmental impacts including on soil, biodiversity, organic carbon stocks and conservation of natural resources. Assessment and verification : The applicant shall provide evidence through third-party certificates and chain of custody that palm oil and palm kernel oil used in the manufacturing of the ingoing substances originates from sustainably managed plantations. Certificates accepted shall include Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) (by identity preserved, segregated or mass balance) or any equivalent or stricter sustainable production scheme. For chemical derivatives of palm oil and for palm kernel oil, it shall be acceptable to demonstrate sustainability through book and claim systems such as GreenPalm certificates or equivalent by providing the Annual Communications of Progress (ACOP) declared amounts of procured and redeemed GreenPalm certificates during the most recent annual trading period. Criterion 4 — Excluded and restricted substances (a) Specified excluded and restricted substances (i) Excluded substances The substances indicated below shall not be included in the product formulation regardless of concentration: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance supported by declarations from suppliers, if appropriate, confirming that the listed substances have not been included in the product formulation regardless of concentration. (ii) Restricted substances The substances listed below shall not be included in the product formulation above the concentrations indicated: The total phosphorus (P) content calculated as elemental P shall be limited to 0,08 g/l of washing water. Fragrance substances subject to the declaration requirement provided in Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 shall not be present in quantities ≥ 0,010 % weight by weight per substance. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the following documents: (b) Hazardous substances (i) Final product The final product shall not be classified and labelled as being acutely toxic, a specific target organ toxicant, a respiratory or skin sensitiser, carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction, or hazardous to the aquatic environment, as defined in Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 and in accordance with the list in Table 2. (ii) Ingoing substances The product shall not contain ingoing substances at a concentration limit at or above 0,010 % weight by weight in the final product that meet the criteria for classification as toxic, hazardous to the aquatic environment, respiratory or skin sensitisers, carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction in accordance with Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 and in accordance with the list in Table 2. Where stricter, the generic or specific concentration limits determined in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 shall take precedence. Table 2 Restricted hazard classifications and their categorisation This criterion does not apply to ingoing substances covered by Article 2(7)(a) and (b) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 which set out criteria for exempting substances within Annexes IV and V to that Regulation from the registration, downstream user and evaluation requirements. In order to determine whether that exclusion applies, the applicant shall screen any ingoing substance present at a concentration above 0,010 % weight by weight. Substances and mixtures included in Table 3 are exempted from point (b)(ii) of Criterion 4. Table 3 Derogated substances Assessment and verification : the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with this criterion for the final product and for any ingoing substance present at a concentration greater than 0,010 % weight by weight in the final product. The applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance supported by declarations from suppliers, if appropriate, or SDS confirming that none of these substances meets the criteria for classification with one or more of the hazard statements listed in Table 2 in the form(s) and physical state(s) in which they are present in the product. For substances listed in Annexes IV and V to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, which are exempted from registration obligations under points (a) and (b) of Article 2(7) of that Regulation, a declaration to this effect by the applicant shall suffice to comply. The applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance supported by declarations from suppliers, if appropriate, or SDS confirming the presence of ingoing substances that fulfil the derogation conditions. (c) Substances of very high concern (SVHCs) The final product shall not contain any ingoing substances that have been identified in accordance with the procedure described in Article 59(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1907/2006, which establishes the candidate list for substances of very high concern. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance supported by declarations from their suppliers, if appropriate, or SDS confirming the non-presence of all the candidate list substances. Reference to the latest list of substances of very high concern shall be made on the date of application. (d) Fragrances Any ingoing substance added to the product as a fragrance shall be manufactured and handled following the code of practice of the International Fragrance Association (IFRA) ( 6 ) . The recommendations of the IFRA Standards concerning prohibition, restricted use and specified purity criteria for substances shall be followed by the manufacturer. Fragrances shall not be used in hand dishwashing detergents for professional use. Assessment and verification : the supplier or fragrance manufacturer, as appropriate, shall provide a signed declaration of compliance. (e) Preservatives Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance supported by declarations from suppliers, if appropriate, along with the SDS of any preservative added and information on its BCF or log K ow values. The applicant shall also provide artwork of the packaging. (f) Colouring agents Colouring agents in the product shall not be bio-accumulating. A colouring agent is considered not bio-accumulating if the BCF is < 100 or log K ow is < 3,0. If both the BCF and log K ow values are available, the highest measured BCF value shall be used. In the case of colouring agents approved for use in food, it is not necessary to submit documentation of bio-accumulation potential. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance supported by declarations from suppliers, if appropriate, along with the SDS of any colouring agent added and information on its BCF or log K ow value, or documentation to ensure that the colouring agent is approved for use in food. (g) Enzymes Only enzyme encapsulated (in solid form) and enzyme liquids/slurries shall be used. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance supported by declarations from suppliers, if appropriate, along with the SDS of any enzyme added. (h) Corrosive properties The final product shall not be classified as a ‘Corrosive’ (C) mixture with H314 Causes severe skin burns and eye damage, as a ‘Skin corrosion/irritating, categories 1A, 1B, 1C’ mixture in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008. Assessment and verification : The applicant shall provide the competent body with the exact concentrations of all ingoing substances used in the product, either as part of the formulation or as part of any mixture included in the formulation, that are classified as ‘Corrosive’ (C) with H314 in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008, along with the product SDS. Criterion 5 — Packaging (a) Weight/utility ratio (WUR) The weight/utility ratio (WUR) of the product shall be calculated for the primary packaging only and shall not exceed the following values for the reference dosage. Primary packaging made of more than 80 % of recycled materials is exempted from this requirement. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the calculation of the WUR of the product. If the product is sold in different packaging (i.e. with different volumes), the calculation shall be submitted for each packaging size for which the EU Ecolabel shall be awarded. The WUR is calculated as follows: WUR = Σ (( W i + U i )/( D i * R i )) Where: The applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance confirming the content of post-consumer recycled material, along with relevant documentation. Packaging is regarded as post-consumer recycled if the raw material used to make the packaging has been collected from packaging manufacturers at the distribution stage or at the consumer stage. (b) Design for recycling Plastic packaging shall be designed to facilitate effective recycling by avoiding potential contaminants and incompatible materials that are known to impede separation or reprocessing or to reduce the quality of recyclate. The label or sleeve, closure and, where applicable, barrier coatings shall not comprise, either singularly or in combination the materials and components listed in Table 4. Pump mechanisms (including in sprays) are exempted from this requirement. Table 4 Materials and components excluded from packaging elements Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance specifying the material composition of the packaging including the container, label or sleeve, adhesives, closure and barrier coating, as appropriate, along with photos or technical drawings of the primary packaging. Criterion 6 — Fitness for use The product shall have a satisfactory wash performance at the lowest temperature and dosage recommended by the manufacturer for the water hardness in accordance with the ‘Framework for the performance test for hand dishwashing detergents’ available on the EU Ecolabel website ( 7 ) . Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide documentation demonstrating that the product has been tested under the conditions specified in the framework and that the results showed that the product achieved at least the minimum wash performance required. The applicant shall also provide documentation demonstrating compliance with the laboratory requirements included in the relevant harmonised standards for testing and calibration laboratories, if appropriate. An equivalent test performance may be used if equivalence has been assessed and accepted by the competent body. Criterion 7 — User information The product shall be accompanied by instructions for proper use so as to maximise product performance and minimise waste, and reduce water pollution and use of resources. These instructions shall be legible or include graphical representation or icons and include information on the following: (a) Dosing instructions The applicant shall take suitable steps to help consumers respect the recommended dosage, making available the dosing instructions and a convenient dosage system (e.g. caps). Dosage instructions shall include the recommended dosage for at least two levels of soiling and, if applicable, the impact of the water hardness on the dosing. If applicable, indications of the most prevalent water hardness in the area where the product is intended to be marketed or where this information can be found shall be provided. (b) Packaging disposal information The primary packaging shall include information on the reuse, recycling and correct disposal of packaging. (c) Environmental information A text shall appear on the primary packaging indicating the importance of using the correct dosage and the lowest recommended temperature in order to minimise energy and water consumption and reduce water pollution. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance along with a sample of the product label. Criterion 8 — Information appearing on the EU Ecolabel The logo shall be visible and legible. The EU Ecolabel registration/licence number shall appear on the product and it shall be legible and clearly visible. The applicant may choose to include an optional text box on the label that contains the following text: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a signed declaration of compliance along with a sample of the product label or artwork of the packaging where the EU Ecolabel is placed, together with a signed declaration of compliance. ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 ( OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( *1 ) ‘no limit’ means: regardless of the concentration, all substances intentionally added, by-products and impurities from raw materials (analytical limit of detection). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) A substance is considered to be not bio-accumulating if the BCF is < 100 or log K ow is < 3,0. If both the BCF and log K ow values are available, the highest measured BCF value shall be used. ( 5 ) Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on cosmetic products ( OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 59 ). ( *2 ) Including stabilisers and other auxiliary substances in the preparations ( *3 ) In concentrations lower than 0,2 % in the raw material as long as the total concentration in the final product is lower than 0,10 %. ( 6 ) Available at the IFRA website: ( *4 ) EVA — Ethylene Vinyl Acetate, HDPE — High-density polyethylene, PET — Polyethylene terephtalate, PETG — Polyethylene terephthalate glycol-modified, PP — Polypropylene, PS — Polystyrene, PVC — Polyvinylchloride ( 7 ) Available at: