Resolution of the Council of the European Union and the representatives of the Governments of the Member States meeting within the Council on the EU Youth Strategy Work Plan 2022-2024 (2021/C 504 I/01) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION AND THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE GOVERNMENTS OF THE MEMBER STATES MEETING WITHIN THE COUNCIL, RECALLING THAT: TAKE NOTE THAT: Work Plan for the EU Youth Strategy 2022-2024 ( 1 ) ( 1 ) Compiled by the SI Presidency on the basis of the Commission’s ’Possible actions for a future EU Work Plan for Youth for 2019-2021’ (ST-9264-2018-ADD-1-EN) and the preliminary information received by the trio presidencies FR-CZ-SE and ES-BE-HU. ( 2 ) See the Resolution of the Council and of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States meeting within the Council on the Framework establishing a European Youth Work Agenda (2020/C 415/01). ( 3 ) Background: One third of young people in Europe are at risk of poverty and social exclusion particularly those who are not in employment, education or training (NEET)). Many do not have access to their social rights, experience inequalities within society or are merely left behind. Many continue to face multiple discriminations, experience prejudice and hate crimes. Additionally, new migratory phenomena brought several social and inclusion challenges (including the digital gap) to young new comers. Therefore, it is crucial to work towards the fulfilment of the rights and the social inclusion of all young people in Europe, including the most marginalised and excluded to honour the Union’s commitment to leave no one behind. Goal: Enable, ensure and safeguard the inclusion of all young people in society. Targets: Provide legal protection and enforce international legal instruments to fight against all kinds of discrimination, inequalities and hate-inspired acts, recognising that young people may be subjected to discrimination in all its forms. Strengthen the outreach of information, contact and communication to young people with fewer opportunities or those left behind, to ensure they are aware of and have access to opportunities and activities available to them and of the spaces where they are part of society and can engage. Ensure that all young people with fewer opportunities or those left behind have equal access to formal and non-formal learning/education environments and opportunities, whilst addressing all the dimensions of inclusion. Strengthen the capacities of educators to work with marginalised young people or those left behind. Provide more spaces, opportunities, resources and programmes to foster dialogue, comprehension and social cohesion, and combat discrimination, polarisation and segregation. Extend access and entitlement to relevant and meaningful opportunities and experiences. ( 4 ) The Pool of European Youth Researchers (PEYR) should provide input on the evaluation of the process and the methodology of the previous cycles of the EU Youth Dialogue and on how the EU Youth Goals were covered, in order to better plan and deliver the second half of the Strategy. ( 5 ) Possible step forward in cross-sectoral cooperation with the social, employment, education, health etc. sectors. Support-background documents requested from the PEYR. N.B. Ursula Von der Leyen, in her State of the Union speech, emphasised the need to support those young people who ’ fall into the gaps ’ (spaces and bridges?) – (ENGAGE & CONNECT). ( 6 ) Support requested from the PEYR. ( 7 ) In close cooperation with the Partnership between the European Commission and the Council of Europe in the field of youth and the Community of practice on the European Youth Work Agenda (EYWA). Support also asked from PEYR. ( 8 ) BE understands that there might be a tension between the competence of the EU and the principle of subsidiarity, but the Bonn process is all about how top down meets bottom up and vice versa. The Union can assist local youth work through supporting, coordinated or supplementing actions.