Avis juridique important Council Resolution of 27 June 1997 on renewable sources of energy Official Journal C 210 , 11/07/1997 P. 0001 - 0002 COUNCIL RESOLUTION of 27 June 1997 on renewable sources of energy (97/C 210/01) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Council Resolution of 8 July 1996 on the White Paper 'An energy policy for the European Union` (1), which considers that the promotion of new and renewable sources of energy can make a valuable contribution to a safer and healthier environment and, together with the development of indigenous sources, reduce the Community's energy dependency on external sources and contribute to economic growth and employment, Having regard to the Council conclusions of 3 December 1996 on 'Climate Change - the energy dimension`, which state that energy policy on a European level needs to make an active contribution to the work on climate change, and that the energy sector should engage in active and early participation in relevant policy development including initiatives on renewable energy, Having regard to the White Paper on Growth, Competitiveness and Employment, which demonstrates that clean technologies are a key to future economic prosperity and that it is important to use economic measures and incentives and/or fiscal instruments, if appropriate, to take into account externalities, in particular environmental ones, and thus improve the competitive situation of renewables vis-à-vis other energy sources, Having regard to the fourth framework programme (2) of the European Community activities in the field of research and technological development and demonstration and the Joule (3), Thermie (4) and Altener (5) programmes, Having regard to the Resolution of the European Parliament of 4 July 1996, which stresses the importance of the development of a Community strategy in the field of renewable energy (6), Having regard to the Green Paper for a Community Strategy 'Energy for the future: renewable sources of energy`, which indicates a large potential for renewables, identifies a series of obstacles to short-term competitiveness that can be overcome, and proposes an indicative taret of doubling the overall share of renewables in the Community's energy mix by 2010, (1) REAFFIRMS that the development of renewable sources of energy is an important element in the energy sector's contribution for: - the achievement of sustainable economic growth, since renewables contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gases and to the fight against climate change, - the security of energy supply, - the development of a strong European industrial renewable energy base which can compete successfully in the global market place, - employment creation and regional development, taking into account the competitiveness of renewables in the energy market, - the strengthening of the economic structure of the outermost and isolated regions, to contribute to economic and social cohesion. (2) CONFIRMS that the aim should be to etablish a strategy that would lead to improved competitiveness and a substantial share of renewables in the long term because renewables are of major importance to achieve a sustainable economic growth. Member States and the Community should formulate indicative targets as a guideline for this share in the medium (2010) to long term (2020) to strive for and to measure progress in this field. The indicative target to double the overall share of renewables in the Community by 2010 as mentioned in the Green Paper is ambitious and could give useful guidance for increased efforts at Community as well as at Member State level. (3) NOTES that within the framework of liberalization of energy markets an active governmental policy at the level of Member States and - taking into account the principle of subsidiarity - at Community level is necessary to improve the competitiveness of renewables. (4) CONSIDERS that essential elements with an important Community dimension to be applied in a pragmatic manner according to the level of technological progress are in the following fields: - research, technological development and demonstration (paragraph 5), - market conditions (paragraph 6 to 8), - actions to promote consumer information and confidence (paragraph 6 and 9), - coordination and monitoring (paragraph 10). (5) BELIEVES that in the field of research, technological development and demonstration a strong commitment and continuation of the fourth framework programme and an adequate provision for the support for renewables in the fifth framework programme are required. UNDERLINES the importance of national efforts in the field of research, development and demonstration in respect of the implementation of renewable energy sources in the Member States. (6) CONFIRMS that the harmonization of standards on renewables in the Community would serve the double purpose of facilitating introduction of new technologies into the internal market and boosting confidence in these technologies. INVITES the appropriate standardization bodies in the Community to continue their work in this field. (7) BELIEVES that in order to stimulate the market for renewables, appropriate regulatory measures encouraging market participants to buy energy produced from renewable resources may be introduced. (8) RECALLS that, according to Community Guidelines on State Aid for Environmental Protection (7) and in view of the especially high priority in the Community given to the development of renewables, investment aid for renewables can, in appropriate cases, also be authorized when they exceed the general levels of aid contained in these Guidelines, and that the beneficial effects of such measures to the environment must outweigh the distortive effects on competition. (9) BELIEVES that the dissemination of information will increase market confidence and awareness in renewables, and allow customers to make informed choices. Actions to increase customer choice for renewable energy can prove important for the development of sustainable energy. As a suggestion for action in this field, energy distributors could, by means of special tariffs, grant the possibility to customers to buy electricity produced from renewables. (10) CONSIDERS that to make optimal use of available resources good coordination and monitoring of progress are required and that coordination should be strengthened within the Commission services and between Member States. To formulate a comprehensive and mutually reinforcing strategy, different policies and programmes in various fields must be taken into account. (11) WELCOMES the presentation by the Commission of the Green Paper and INVITES the Commission to develop a comprehensive strategy for the promotion of renewable sources of energy on the basis of the principles outlined above. (1) OJ No C 224, 1. 8. 1996, p. 1. (2) OJ No L 126, 18. 5. 1994, p. 1. Decision as amended by Decision No 616/96/EC (OJ No L 86, 4. 4. 1996, p. 69). (3) OJ No L 98, 11. 4. 1989, p. 13. (4) OJ No L 185, 17. 7. 1990, p. 1. (5) OJ No L 235, 18. 9. 1993, p. 41. (6) OJ No C 211, 22. 7. 1996, p. 27. (7) OJ No C 72, 10. 3. 1994, p. 3.