COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2025/523 of 20 March 2025 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1311 as regards administrative changes to the Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘CVAS Biocidal Product Family based on L(+) Lactic Acid’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 50(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 The Annex to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1311 is replaced by the text set out in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 20 March 2025. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 , ELI: . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1311 of 27 June 2023 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘CVAS Biocidal Product Family based on L(+) Lactic Acid’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 162, 28.6.2023, p. 11 , ELI: ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/2013 of 18 April 2013 on changes of biocidal products authorised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 109, 19.4.2013, p. 4 , ELI: ). ( 4 ) ECHA opinions UAD-C-1688636-18-00/F of 13 October 2023 and UAD-C-1756814-27-00/F of 2/08/2024 on administrative changes of the Union authorisation of the biocidal product family ‘CVAS Biocidal Product Family based on L(+) Lactic Acid’, . Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family CVAS Biocidal Product Family based on L(+) Lactic Acid Product type(s) PT03: Veterinary hygiene PT04: Food and feed area Authorisation number EU-0028957-0000 R4BP asset number EU-0028957-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL - META SPC(S) 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1.1 – Teat-disinfection post-milking by manual or automated dipping 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to a temperature between 20°C and 30°C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill in the dosing pump reservoir with the RTU product. Avoid discharge of surplus fluids. Apply the product by manual or automated dipping. Make sure that the teats are fully covered with disinfectant. Application volumes for cows and buffaloes - 5 ml/treatment and for sheep and goats - 3 ml/treatment. Leave the product on the teats until next milking. Keep the animals standing for at least 5 minutes after treatment. After disinfection clean the application equipment by rinsing with water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: if symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: do not allow product to reach sewage systems or water bodies. Methods and material for containment and cleaning up: absorb with liquid-binding material (sand, diatomite, universal binder). Do not use combustible material like sawdust. Dispose of the material collected in accordance with local regulations. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 2.1 – Teat-disinfection post-milking by manual or automated dipping 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to a temperature between 20°C and 30°C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill in the dosing pump reservoir with the RTU product. Avoid discharge of surplus fluids. Apply the product by manual or automated dipping. Make sure that the teats are fully covered with disinfectant. Application volumes for cows and buffaloes - 5 ml/treatment and for sheep and goats - 3 ml/treatment. Leave the product on the teats until next milking. Keep the animals standing for at least 5 minutes after treatment. After disinfection clean the application equipment by rinsing with water. Keep out of reach of children. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear chemical goggles consistent with the European Standard EN ISO 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN ISO 374 or equivalent. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. Google, gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. This is without prejudice to the application of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. See section 6 for the full reference to this act. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Wash skin with water. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: do not allow product to reach sewage systems or water bodies. Methods and material for containment and cleaning up: absorb with liquid-binding material (sand, diatomite, universal binder). Do not use combustible material like sawdust. Dispose of the material collected in accordance with local regulations. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of EN standards mentioned in the section 5.2 ‘Risk mitigation measures’ are: EN ISO 16321– Eye and face protection for occupational users. EN ISO 374 – Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms. The full reference of the legal act mentioned in the section 5.2 ‘Risk mitigation measures’ is: Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) ( OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, p. 11 ). 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 3.1 – Teat-disinfection post-milking by manual or automated dipping or spraying 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to a temperature between 20°C and 30°C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill in the dosing pump reservoir with the RTU product. Avoid discharge of surplus fluids. Apply the product by manual or automated dipping or spraying. Make sure that the teats are fully covered with disinfectant. Application volumes for cows and buffaloes - 5 ml/treatment and for sheep and goats - 3 ml/treatment. Leave the product on the teats until next milking. Keep the animals standing for at least 5 minutes after treatment. After disinfection clean the application equipment by rinsing with water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: if symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: do not allow product to reach sewage systems or water bodies. Methods and material for containment and cleaning up: absorb with liquid-binding material (sand, diatomite, universal binder). Do not use combustible material like sawdust. Dispose of the material collected in accordance with local regulations. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 4.1 – Teat-disinfection post-milking by manual or automated dipping or spraying 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to a temperature between 20°C and 30°C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill in the dosing pump reservoir with the RTU product. Avoid discharge of surplus fluids. Apply the product by manual or automated dipping or spraying. Make sure that the teats are fully covered with disinfectant. Application volumes for cows and buffaloes - 5 ml/treatment and for sheep and goats - 3 ml/treatment. Leave the product on the teats until next milking. Keep the animals standing for at least 5 minutes after treatment. After disinfection clean the application equipment by rinsing with water. Keep out of reach of children. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear chemical goggles consistent with the European Standard EN ISO 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN ISO 374 or equivalent. Google, gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. This is without prejudice to the application of Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Wash skin with water. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: do not allow product to reach sewage systems or water bodies. Methods and material for containment and cleaning up: absorb with liquid-binding material (sand, diatomite, universal binder). Do not use combustible material like sawdust. Dispose of the material collected in accordance with local regulations. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 5.1 – Teat-disinfection post-milking by manual or automated dipping or spraying 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to a temperature between 20°C and 30°C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill in the dosing pump reservoir with the RTU product. Avoid discharge of surplus fluids. Apply the product by manual or automated dipping or spraying. Make sure that the teats are fully covered with disinfectant. Application volumes for cows and buffaloes - 5 ml/treatment and for sheep and goats - 3 ml/treatment. Leave the product on the teats until next milking. Keep the animals standing for at least 5 minutes after treatment. After disinfection clean the application equipment by rinsing with water. Keep out of reach of children. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear chemical goggles consistent with the European Standard EN ISO 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN ISO 374 or equivalent. Google, gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. This is without prejudice to the application of Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Wash skin with water. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for 5 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: no special environmental measures are necessary. Clean contaminated articles and floor in accordance with the environmental legislation. Methods and material for containment: absorb with liquid-binding material (e.g. sand, diatomaceous earth, acid- or universal binding agents). 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the application, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 6 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 6 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 6 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 6 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 6 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 6 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 6.1 – Teat-disinfection post-milking by manual or automated dipping or spraying 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 6 5.1. Instructions for use The product must be brought to a temperature between 20°C and 30°C before use. The use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. Fill in the dosing pump reservoir with the RTU product. Avoid discharge of surplus fluids. Apply the product by manual or automated dipping or spraying. Make sure that the teats are fully covered with disinfectant. Application volumes for cows and buffaloes - 5 ml/treatment and for sheep and goats - 3 ml/treatment. Leave the product on the teats until next milking. Keep the animals standing for at least 5 minutes after treatment. After disinfection clean the application equipment by rinsing with water. Keep out of reach of children. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear chemical goggles consistent with the European Standard EN ISO 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN ISO 374 or equivalent. Google, gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. This is without prejudice to the application of Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: if symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Wash skin with water. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: no special environmental measures are necessary. Clean contaminated articles and floor in accordance with the environmental legislation. Methods and material for containment: absorb with liquid-binding material (e.g. sand, diatomaceous earth, acid- or universal binding agents). 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the application, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 6 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 7 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 7 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 7 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 7 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 7 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 7 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 7.1 – Hard surface disinfection by manual or automated foaming 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4 .1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 7 5.1. Instructions for use For fixed installations, connect the jerrycan, drum or IBC containing the product with the dosing unit of the satellite station. For mobile versions, place a 20 litres container of the neat product on the trolley and put the suction hose in. Connect water supply to the dosing unit. Dilution is performed automatically via the dosing unit of the fixed or mobile station and monitored by conductivity measurements. Before disinfection remove loose dirt, any further precleaning is not necessary. Apply the foam to the hard surfaces. Application volume is 350 ml of diluted product/m 2 . Make sure that surfaces are well covered with the disinfectant. Minimum contact time is 5 minutes for bacteria and 15 minutes for yeasts. After application, rinse treated surfaces and flush foaming equipment thoroughly with clean water. For flushing of mobile systems, put the suction hose into a container with clean water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear chemical goggles consistent with the European Standard EN ISO 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN ISO 374 or equivalent. Google, gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. Wear respiratory protection when handling the concentrated product. Respiratory protection to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. Avoid standing in areas with aerosol formation. This is without prejudice to the application of Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: do not allow product to reach sewage systems or water bodies. Methods and material for containment and cleaning up: absorb with liquid-binding material (sand, diatomite, universal binder). Do not use combustible material like sawdust. Dispose of the material collected in accordance with local regulations. Ensure adequate ventilation. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the application, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Ensure good ventilation or exhaustion. Do not store together with alkalis (caustic solutions). Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 7 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 8 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 8 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 8 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 8 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 8 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 8 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 8.1 – Hard surface disinfection by automated spraying in closed cleaning in place (CIP) system 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions See general directions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 8 5.1. Instructions for use Connect the jerrycan, drum or IBC containing the product with the dosing unit of the CIP system. Dosing and dilution are performed automatically via the dosing unit of the CIP system and monitored by conductivity measurements. Avoid contact with aluminium, non-ferrous metals and galvanised materials. Precleaning is not necessary. Minimum contact time is 5 minutes for bacteria and 15 minutes for yeasts. After application, rinse the treated system thoroughly with clean water. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Wear chemical goggles consistent with the European Standard EN ISO 16321 or equivalent, protective clothing chemically resistant to the biocidal product, chemical resistant gloves classified under the European Standard EN ISO 374 or equivalent. Google, gloves and coverall material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. Wear respiratory protection when handling the concentrated product. Respiratory protection to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information. Avoid standing in areas with aerosol formation. This is without prejudice to the application of Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Emergency measure to protect the environment Environmental precautions: do not allow product to reach sewage systems or water bodies. Methods and material for containment and cleaning up: absorb with liquid-binding material (sand, diatomite, acid binders, universal binders, sawdust). Dispose of the material collected in accordance with local regulations. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the application, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer depending on local requirements. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Shelf life: 24 months Ensure good ventilation or exhaustion. Do not store together with alkalis (caustic solutions). Do not store at temperatures above 40°C. Keep away from heat and direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Keep container tightly closed. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Not relevant 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 8 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)