Avis juridique important Resolution of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States of the European Communities, meeting within the Council of 24 November 1986 regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes Official Journal C 331 , 23/12/1986 P. 0002 - 0002 RESOLUTIONof the representatives of the Governments of the Member States of the European Communities, meeting within the Councilof 24 November 1986regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes(86/C 331/02) THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE GOVERNMENTS OF THE MEMBER STATES OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, MEETING WITHIN THE COUNCIL, Whereas the Council has adopted Directive 86/609/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes (1) ; Whereas, nevertheless, experiments on animals for certain purposes do not fall within the scope of the above Directive; Whereas such purposes should be clearly defined and limited; Whereas, in particular, in the case of such experiments, the measures to be applied should be no less severe than those provided for in the case of experiments on animals carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Directive, HAVE ADOPTED THIS RESOLUTION: Member States undertake not to permit the use of animals in experiments except for the following purposes: (a) (i) the avoidance or prevention of disease, ill-health or other abnormality, or their effects, in man, vertebrate or invertebrate animals or plants, including the production and the quality, effectiveness and safety testing of drugs, substances or products; (ii) the diagnosis or treatment of disease, ill-health or other abnormality, or their effects, in man, vertebrate or invertebrate animals or plants; (b) the assessment, detection, regulation or modification of physiological conditions in man, vertebrate and invertebrate animals or plants; (c) the protection of the natural environment in the interests of the health or welfare of man or animal; (d) scientific research; (e) education and training; (f) forensic inquiries. Where the purposes of such experiments are not covered by the Directive, Member States will apply national provisions which are no less severe than those of the Directive. In particular, as far as education and training are concerned, Member States agree that experiments for teaching purposes should principally be carried out in universities or other educational institutions of equivalent level. Experiments conducted in secondary schools and in other education and training institutions of equivalent level should be limited to the minimum strictly necessary for the education and vocational training concerned. Member States will seek to ensure that experiments for teaching purposes are carried out as far as possible on bred animals by or under the supervision of a competent person. Whenever possible, audiovisual or other suitable methods should be used instead of experiments. Furthermore, Member States agree that experiments that involve setting the animal free shall not be permitted solely for educational or training purposes. (1) OJ No L 358, 18. 12. 1986, p. 1.