COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2017/2117 of 21 November 2017 establishing best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, for the production of large volume organic chemicals (notified under document C(2017) 7469) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for the production of large volume organic chemicals, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 21 November 2017. For the Commission Karmenu VELLA Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 establishing a forum for the exchange of information pursuant to Article 13 of the Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions ( OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 ). BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES (BAT) CONCLUSIONS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF LARGE VOLUME ORGANIC CHEMICALS These BAT conclusions concern the production of the following organic chemicals, as specified in Section 4.1 of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU: These BAT conclusions also cover the production of hydrogen peroxide as specified in Section 4.2(e) of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU. These BAT conclusions cover combustion of fuels in process furnaces/heaters, where this is part of the abovementioned activities. These BAT conclusions cover production of the aforementioned chemicals in continuous processes where the total production capacity of those chemicals exceeds 20 kt/year. These BAT conclusions do not address the following: Other BAT conclusions which are complementary for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions include: Other BAT conclusions and reference documents which may be of relevance for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Averaging periods and reference conditions for emissions to air Unless stated otherwise, the emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to values of concentration, expressed as mass of emitted substance per volume of waste gas under standard conditions (dry gas at a temperature of 273,15 K, and a pressure of 101,3 kPa), and expressed in the unit mg/Nm 3 . Unless stated otherwise, the averaging periods associated with the BAT-AELs for emissions to air are defined as follows. Where BAT-AELs refer to specific emission loads, expressed as load of emitted substance per unit of production output, the average specific emission loads l s are calculated using Equation 1: where: Reference oxygen level For process furnaces/heaters, the reference oxygen level of the waste gases ( O R ) is 3 vol-%. Conversion to reference oxygen level The emission concentration at the reference oxygen level is calculated using Equation 2: where: Averaging periods for emissions to water Unless stated otherwise, the averaging periods associated with the environmental performance levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AEPLs) for emissions to water expressed in concentrations are defined as follows. Flow-weighted average concentrations of the parameter ( c w ) are calculated using Equation 3: where: Where BAT-AEPLs refer to specific emission loads, expressed as load of emitted substance per unit of production output, the average specific emission loads are calculated using Equation 1. Acronyms and definitions For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following acronyms and definitions apply. 1. GENERAL BAT CONCLUSIONS The sector-specific BAT conclusions included in Sections 2 to 11 apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in this section. 1.1. Monitoring of emissions to air 1.2. Emissions to air 1.2.1. Emissions to air from process furnaces/heaters 1.2.2. Emissions to air from the use of SCR or SNCR 1.2.3. Emissions to air from other processes/sources 1.2.3.1. Techniques to reduce emissions from other processes/sources 1.2.3.2. Techniques to reduce emissions from a thermal oxidiser 1.3. Emissions to water 1.4. Resource efficiency 1.5. Residues 1.6. Other than normal operating conditions 2. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR LOWER OLEFINS PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply to the production of lower olefins using the steam cracking process, and apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 2.1. Emissions to air 2.1.1. BAT-AELs for emissions to air from a lower olefins cracker furnace Table 2.1 BAT-AELs for emissions to air of NO X and NH 3 from a lower olefins cracker furnace The associated monitoring is in BAT 1. 2.1.2. Techniques to reduce emissions from decoking 2.2. Emissions to water 3. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR AROMATICS PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply to the production of benzene, toluene, ortho-, meta- and para-xylene (commonly known as BTX aromatics) and cyclohexane from the pygas by-product of steam crackers and from reformate/naphtha produced in catalytic reformers; and apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 3.1. Emissions to air 3.2. Emissions to water 3.3. Resource efficiency 3.4. Energy efficiency 3.5. Residues 4. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR ETHYLBENZENE AND STYRENE MONOMER PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply to the production of ethlybenzene using either the zeolite or AlCl 3 catalysed alkylation process; and the production of styrene monomer either by ethylbenzene dehydrogenation or co-production with propylene oxide; and apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 4.1. Process selection 4.2. Emissions to air 4.3. Emissions to water 4.4. Resource efficiency 4.5. Residues 5. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR FORMALDEHYDE PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 5.1. Emissions to air 5.2. Emissions to water 5.3. Residues 6. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR ETHYLENE OXIDE AND ETHYLENE GLYCOLS PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 6.1. Process selection 6.2. Emissions to air 6.3. Emissions to water 6.4. Residues 7. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR PHENOL PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply to the production of phenol from cumene, and apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 7.1. Emissions to air 7.2. Emissions to water 7.3. Residues 8. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR ETHANOLAMINES PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 8.1. Emissions to air 8.2. Emissions to water 8.3. Raw material consumption 9. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR TOLUENE DIISOCYANATE (TDI) AND METHYLENE DIPHENYL DIISOCYANATE (MDI) PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section cover the production of: and apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 9.1. Emissions to air 9.2. Emissions to water 9.3. Residues 10. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR ETHYLENE DICHLORIDE AND VINYL CHLORIDE MONOMER PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 10.1. Emissions to air 10.1.1. BAT-AEL for emissions to air from an EDC cracker furnace Table 10.1 BAT-AELs for emissions to air of NO X from an EDC cracker furnace The associated monitoring is in BAT 1. 10.1.2. Techniques and BAT-AEL for emissions to air from other sources 10.2. Emissions to water 10.3. Energy efficiency 10.4. Residues 11. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR HYDROGEN PEROXIDE PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 11.1. Emissions to air 11.2. Emissions to water 12. DESCRIPTIONS OF TECHNIQUES 12.1. Process off-gas and waste gas treatment techniques 12.2. Waste water treatment techniques All of the techniques listed below can also be used to purify water streams in order to enable reuse/recycling of water. Most of them are also used to recover organic compounds from process water streams. 12.3. Techniques to reduce emissions to air from combustion ( 1 ) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations, 30-minute sampling is inappropriate, a suitable sampling period is employed. ( 2 ) For PCDD/F, a sampling period of 6 to 8 hours is used. ( 3 ) Time-proportional composite samples can be used provided that sufficient flow stability can be demonstrated. ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Decision 2012/119/EU of 10 February 2012 laying down rules concerning guidance on the collection of data and on the drawing up of BAT reference documents and on their quality assurance referred to in Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions ( OJ L 63, 2.3.2012, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Generic EN standards for continuous measurements are EN 15267-1, -2, and -3, and EN 14181. EN standards for periodic measurements are given in the table. ( 6 ) Refers to the total rated thermal input of all process furnaces/heaters connected to the stack where emissions occur. ( 7 ) In the case of process furnaces/heaters with a total rated thermal input of less than 100 MW th operated less than 500 hours per year, the monitoring frequency may be reduced to at least once every year. ( 8 ) The minimum monitoring frequency for periodic measurements may be reduced to once every 6 months, if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 9 ) Monitoring of dust does not apply when combusting exclusively gaseous fuels. ( 10 ) Monitoring of NH 3 only applies when SCR or SNCR is used. ( 11 ) In the case of process furnaces/heaters combusting gaseous fuels and/or oil with a known sulphur content and where no flue-gas desulphurisation is carried out, continuous monitoring can be replaced either by periodic monitoring with a minimum frequency of once every 3 months or by calculation ensuring the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. ( 12 ) The monitoring applies where the pollutant is present in the waste gas based on the inventory of waste gas streams specified by the CWW BAT conclusions. ( 13 ) The minimum monitoring frequency for periodic measurements may be reduced to once every year, if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 14 ) All (other) processes/sources where the pollutant is present in the waste gas based on the inventory of waste gas streams specified by the CWW BAT conclusions. ( 15 ) EN 15058 and the sampling period need adaptation so that the measured values are representative of the whole decoking cycle. ( 16 ) EN 13284-1 and the sampling period need adaptation so that the measured values are representative of the whole decoking cycle. ( 17 ) The monitoring applies where the chlorine and/or chlorinated compounds are present in the waste gas and thermal treatment is applied ( 18 ) Where the flue gases of two or more furnaces are discharged through a common stack, the BAT-AEL applies to the combined discharge from the stack. ( 19 ) The BAT-AELs do not apply during decoking operations. ( 20 ) No BAT-AEL applies for CO. As an indication, the CO emission level will generally be 10–50 mg/Nm 3 expressed as a daily average or an average over the sampling period. ( 21 ) The BAT-AEL only applies when SCR or SNCR are used. ( 22 ) The lower end of the range is achieved when using a thermal oxidiser in the silver process. ( 23 ) The BAT-AEL is expressed as an average of values obtained during 1 year. ( 24 ) In the case of significant methane content in the emission, methane monitored according to EN ISO 25140 or EN ISO 25139 is subtracted from the result. ( 25 ) EO produced is defined as the sum of EO produced for sale and as an intermediate. ( 26 ) The BAT-AEL only applies to combined waste gas streams with flow rates of > 1 000 Nm 3 /h. ( 27 ) The BAT-AEL is expressed as a daily average or an average over the sampling period. ( 28 ) The BAT-AEL is expressed as an average of values obtained during 1 year. TDI and/or MDI produced refers to the product without residues, in the sense used to define the capacity of the plant. ( 29 ) In the case of NO X values above 100 mg/Nm 3 in the sample, the BAT-AEL may be higher and up to 3 mg/Nm 3 due to analytical interferences. ( 30 ) In the case of discontinuous waste water discharges, the minimum monitoring frequency is once per discharge. ( 31 ) The BAT-AEPL refers to the product without residues, in the sense used to define the capacity of the plant. ( 32 ) Where the flue-gases of two or more furnaces are discharged through a common stack, the BAT-AEL applies to the combined discharge from the stack. ( 33 ) The BAT-AELs do not apply during decoking operations. ( 34 ) No BAT-AEL applies for CO. As an indication, the CO emission level will generally be 5–35 mg/Nm 3 expressed as a daily average or an average over the sampling period. ( 35 ) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every month if adequate performance of the solids and copper removal is controlled by frequent monitoring of other parameters (e.g. by continuous measurement of turbidity). ( 36 ) The average of values obtained during 1 month is calculated from the averages of values obtained during each day (at least three spot samples taken at intervals of at least half an hour). ( 37 ) The lower end of the range is typically achieved when the fixed-bed design is used. ( 38 ) The average of values obtained during one year is calculated from the averages of values obtained during each day (at least three spot samples taken at intervals of at least half an hour). ( 39 ) Purified EDC is the sum of EDC produced by oxychlorination and/or direct chlorination and of EDC returned from VCM production to purification. ( 40 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply when the emission is below 150 g/h. ( 41 ) When adsorption is used, the sampling period is representative of a complete adsorption cycle. ( 42 ) In the case of significant methane content in the emission, methane monitored according to EN ISO 25140 or EN ISO 25139 is subtracted from the result.