DIRECTIVE 2009/128/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for Community action to achieve the sustainable use of pesticides (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Article 175(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions ( 2 ) , Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251 of the Treaty ( 3 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Directive establishes a framework to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides by reducing the risks and impacts of pesticide use on human health and the environment and promoting the use of integrated pest management and of alternative approaches or techniques such as non-chemical alternatives to pesticides. Article 2 1. This Directive shall apply to pesticides that are plant protection products as defined in point 10(a) of Article 3. 2. This Directive shall apply without prejudice to any other relevant Community legislation. 3. The provisions of this Directive shall not prevent Member States from applying the precautionary principle in restricting or prohibiting the use of pesticides in specific circumstances or areas. Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply: Article 4 National Action Plans 1. Member States shall adopt National Action Plans to set up their quantitative objectives, targets, measures and timetables to reduce risks and impacts of pesticide use on human health and the environment and to encourage the development and introduction of integrated pest management and of alternative approaches or techniques in order to reduce dependency on the use of pesticides. These targets may cover different areas of concern, for example worker protection, protection of the environment, residues, use of specific techniques or use in specific crops. The National Action Plans shall also include indicators to monitor the use of plant protection products containing active substances of particular concern, especially if alternatives are available. Member States shall give particular attention to the plant protection products containing active substances approved in accordance with Council Directive 91/414/EEC of 15 July 1991 concerning the placing of plant products on the market ( 20 ) which, when subject to renewal of approval under Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 will not fulfil the criteria relevant for approval laid down in Annex II, points 3.6 to 3.8 of that Regulation. On the basis of such indicators and taking into account where applicable the risk or use reduction targets achieved already prior to the application of this Directive, timetables and targets for the reduction of use shall also be established, in particular if the reduction of use constitutes an appropriate means to achieve risk reduction with regard to priority items identified under Article 15(2)(c). These targets may be intermediate or final. Member States shall use all necessary means designed to achieve these targets. When drawing up and revising their National Action Plans, Member States shall take account of the health, social, economic and environmental impacts of the measures envisaged, of specific national, regional and local conditions and all relevant stakeholder groups. Member States shall describe in their National Action Plans how they will implement measures pursuant to Articles 5 to 15 in order to achieve the objectives referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. The National Action Plans shall take into account plans under other Community legislation on the use of pesticides, such as planned measures under Directive 2000/60/EC. 2. By 14 December 2012, Member States shall communicate their National Action Plans to the Commission and to other Member States. National Action Plans shall be reviewed at least every five years and any substantial changes to National Action Plans shall be reported to the Commission without undue delay. 3. By 14 December 2014, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the information communicated by the Member States in relation to the National Action Plans. The report shall contain methods used and the implications concerning the establishment of different types of targets to reduce the risks and use of pesticides. By 14 December 2018, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the experience gained by Member States on the implementation of national targets established in accordance with paragraph 1 in order to achieve the objectives of this Directive. It may be accompanied, if necessary, by appropriate legislative proposals. 4. The Commission shall make information communicated in accordance with paragraph 2 available to the public on a website. 5. The provisions on public participation laid down in Article 2 of Directive 2003/35/EC shall apply to the preparation and the modification of the National Action Plans. CHAPTER II TRAINING, SALES OF PESTICIDES, INFORMATION AND AWARENESS-RAISING Article 5 Training 1. Member States shall ensure that all professional users, distributors and advisors have access to appropriate training by bodies designated by the competent authorities. This shall consist of both initial and additional training to acquire and update knowledge as appropriate. The training shall be designed to ensure that such users, distributors and advisors acquire sufficient knowledge regarding the subjects listed in Annex I, taking account of their different roles and responsibilities. 2. By 14 December 2013, Member States shall establish certification systems and designate the competent authorities responsible for their implementation. These certificates shall, as a minimum, provide evidence of sufficient knowledge of the subjects listed in Annex I acquired by professional users, distributors and advisors either by undergoing training or by other means. Certification systems shall include requirements and procedures for the granting, renewal and withdrawal of certificates. 3. Measures designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive relating to amending Annex I in order to take account of scientific and technical progress shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 21(2). Article 6 Requirements for sales of pesticides 1. Member States shall ensure that distributors have sufficient staff in their employment holding a certificate referred to in Article 5(2). Such persons shall be available at the time of sale to provide adequate information to customers as regards pesticide use, health and environmental risks and safety instructions to manage those risks for the products in question. Micro distributors selling only products for non-professional use may be exempted if they do not offer for sale pesticide formulations classified as toxic, very toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction pursuant to Directive 1999/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 1999 concerning the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations ( 21 ) . 2. Member States shall take necessary measures to restrict sales of pesticides authorised for professional use to persons holding a certificate referred to in Article 5(2). 3. Member States shall require distributors selling pesticides to non-professional users to provide general information regarding the risks for human health and the environment of pesticide use, in particular on hazards, exposure, proper storage, handling, application and safe disposal in accordance with Community legislation on waste, as well as regarding low-risk alternatives. Member States may require pesticide producers to provide such information. 4. The measures provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be established by 14 December 2015. Article 7 Information and awareness-raising 1. Member States shall take measures to inform the general public and to promote and facilitate information and awareness-raising programmes and the availability of accurate and balanced information relating to pesticides for the general public, in particular regarding the risks and the potential acute and chronic effects for human health, non-target organisms and the environment arising from their use, and the use of non-chemical alternatives. 2. Member States shall put in place systems for gathering information on pesticide acute poisoning incidents, as well as chronic poisoning developments where available, among groups that may be exposed regularly to pesticides such as operators, agricultural workers or persons living close to pesticide application areas. 3. To enhance the comparability of information, the Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, shall develop by 14 December 2012 a strategic guidance document on monitoring and surveying of impacts of pesticide use on human health and the environment. CHAPTER III PESTICIDE APPLICATION EQUIPMENT Article 8 Inspection of equipment in use 1. Member States shall ensure that pesticide application equipment in professional use shall be subject to inspections at regular intervals. The interval between inspections shall not exceed five years until 2020 and shall not exceed three years thereafter. 2. By 14 December 2016, Member States shall ensure that pesticide application equipment has been inspected at least once. After this date only pesticide application equipment having successfully passed inspection shall be in professional use. New equipment shall be inspected at least once within a period of five years after purchase. 3. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2 and, following a risk assessment for human health and the environment including an assessment of the scale of the use of the equipment, Member States may: 4. The inspections shall verify that pesticide application equipment satisfies the relevant requirements listed in Annex II, in order to achieve a high level of protection for human health and the environment. Pesticide application equipment complying with harmonised standards developed in accordance with Article 20(1) shall be presumed to comply with the essential health and safety and environmental requirements. 5. Professional users shall conduct regular calibrations and technical checks of the pesticide application equipment in accordance with the appropriate training received as provided for in Article 5. 6. Member States shall designate bodies responsible for implementing the inspection systems and inform the Commission thereof. Each Member State shall establish certificate systems designed to allow the verification of inspections and recognise the certificates granted in other Member States following the requirements referred to in paragraph 4 and where the time period since the last inspection carried out in another Member State is equal to or shorter than the time period of the inspection interval applicable in its own territory. Member States shall endeavour to recognise the certificates issued in other Member States provided that the inspection intervals referred to in paragraph 1 are complied with. 7. Measures designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive relating to amending Annex II in order to take account of scientific and technical progress shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 21(2). CHAPTER IV SPECIFIC PRACTICES AND USES Article 9 Aerial spraying 1. Member States shall ensure that aerial spraying is prohibited. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1 aerial spraying may only be allowed in special cases provided the following conditions are met: 3. Member States shall designate the authorities competent for establishing the specific conditions by which aerial spraying may be carried out, for examining requests pursuant to paragraph 4 and for making public information on crops, areas, circumstances and particular requirements for application including weather conditions where aerial spraying may be allowed. In the approval the competent authorities shall specify the measures necessary for warning residents and bystanders in due time and to protect the environment in the vicinity of the area sprayed. 4. A professional user wishing to apply pesticides by aerial spraying shall submit a request for approval of an application plan to the competent authority accompanied by evidence to show that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 are fulfilled. The request for application of aerial spraying in accordance with the approved application plan shall be submitted in due time to the competent authority. It shall contain information about the provisional time of spraying and the amounts and the type of pesticides applied. Member States may provide that requests for applications of aerial spraying in accordance with an approved application plan, for which no answer was received on the decision taken within the time period laid down by the competent authorities, shall be deemed to be approved. In particular circumstances such as emergency or specific difficult situations, single requests for application of aerial spraying may also be submitted for approval. Where justified, competent authorities shall have a possibility to apply an accelerated procedure in order to verify that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 are fulfilled before the application of aerial spraying. 5. Member States shall ensure that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 are met by conducting appropriate monitoring. 6. The competent authorities shall keep records of the requests and approvals as referred to in paragraph 4 and shall make available to the public the relevant information contained therein such as the area to be sprayed, the provisional day and time of the spraying and the type of pesticide, in accordance with the applicable national or Community law. Article 10 Information to the public Member States may include in their National Action Plans provisions on informing persons who could be exposed to the spray drift. Article 11 Specific measures to protect the aquatic environment and drinking water 1. Member States shall ensure that appropriate measures to protect the aquatic environment and drinking water supplies from the impact of pesticides are adopted. Those measures shall support and be compatible with relevant provisions of Directive 2000/60/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009. 2. The measures provided in paragraph 1 shall include: Article 12 Reduction of pesticide use or risks in specific areas Member States shall, having due regard for the necessary hygiene and public health requirements and biodiversity, or the results of relevant risk assessments, ensure that the use of pesticides is minimised or prohibited in certain specific areas. Appropriate risk management measures shall be taken and the use of low-risk plant protection products as defined in Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 and biological control measures shall be considered in the first place. The specific areas in question are: Article 13 Handling and storage of pesticides and treatment of their packaging and remnants 1. Member States shall adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the following operations by professional users and where applicable by distributors do not endanger human health or the environment: 2. Member States shall take all necessary measures regarding pesticides authorised for non-professional users to avoid dangerous handling operations. These measures may include use of pesticides of low toxicity, ready to use formulations and limits on sizes of containers or packaging. 3. Member States shall ensure that storage areas for pesticides for professional use are constructed in such a way as to prevent unwanted releases. Particular attention shall be paid to location, size and construction materials. Article 14 Integrated pest management 1. Member States shall take all necessary measures to promote low pesticide-input pest management, giving wherever possible priority to non-chemical methods, so that professional users of pesticides switch to practices and products with the lowest risk to human health and the environment among those available for the same pest problem. Low pesticide-input pest management includes integrated pest management as well as organic farming according to Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 of 28 June 2007 on organic production and labelling of organic products ( 22 ) . 2. Member States shall establish or support the establishment of necessary conditions for the implementation of integrated pest management. In particular, they shall ensure that professional users have at their disposal information and tools for pest monitoring and decision making, as well as advisory services on integrated pest management. 3. By 30 June 2013, Member States shall report to the Commission on the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2 and, in particular, whether the necessary conditions for implementation of integrated pest management are in place. 4. Member States shall describe in their National Action Plans how they ensure that the general principles of integrated pest management as set out in Annex III are implemented by all professional users by 1 January 2014. Measures designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive relating to amending Annex III in order to take account of scientific and technical progress shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 21(2). 5. Member States shall establish appropriate incentives to encourage professional users to implement crop or sector-specific guidelines for integrated pest management on a voluntary basis. Public authorities and/or organisations representing particular professional users may draw up such guidelines. Member States shall refer to those guidelines that they consider relevant and appropriate in their National Action Plans. CHAPTER V INDICATORS, REPORTING AND INFORMATION EXCHANGE Article 15 Indicators 1. Harmonised risk indicators as referred to in Annex IV shall be established. However, Member States may continue to use existing national indicators or adopt other appropriate indicators in addition to the harmonised ones. Measures designed to amend non-essential elements of this Directive relating to amending Annex IV in order to take account of scientific and technical progress shall be adopted in accordance with the regulatory procedure with scrutiny referred to in Article 21(2). 2. Member States shall: 3. Member States shall communicate the results of the evaluations carried out pursuant to paragraph 2 to the Commission and to other Member States and shall make this information available to the public. 4. The Commission shall calculate risk indicators at Community level by using statistical data collected in accordance with the Community legislation concerning statistics on plant protection products and other relevant data, in order to estimate trends in risks from pesticide use. The Commission shall also use these data and this information to assess progress in achieving the objectives of other Community policies aimed at reducing the impact of pesticides on human health and on the environment. The results shall be made available to the public on the website referred to in Article 4(4). Article 16 Reporting The Commission shall regularly submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on progress in the implementation of this Directive, accompanied where appropriate by proposals for amendments. CHAPTER VI FINAL PROVISIONS Article 17 Penalties Member States shall determine penalties applicable to infringements of the national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall notify those provisions to the Commission by 14 December 2012 and shall notify it without delay of any subsequent amendment. Article 18 Exchange of information and best practice The Commission shall put forward as a priority for discussion in the expert group on the thematic strategy on the sustainable use of pesticides the exchange of information and best practice in the field of sustainable use of pesticides and integrated pest management. Article 19 Fees and charges 1. Member States may recover the costs associated with any work pursuant to obligations under this Directive by means of a fee or charge. 2. Member States shall ensure that the fee or charge referred to in paragraph 1 is established in a transparent manner and corresponds to the actual cost of the work involved. Article 20 Standardisation 1. The standards referred to in Article 8(4) of this Directive shall be established in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 6(3) of Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services ( 23 ) . The request for developing these standards may be established in consultation with the Committee referred to in Article 21(1). 2. The Commission shall publish the 3. When a Member State or the Commission considers that a harmonised standard does not entirely satisfy the requirements which it covers and which are set out in Annex II, the Commission or the Member State concerned shall bring the matter before the Committee set up by Article 5 of Directive 98/34/EC, giving its arguments. The Committee shall, having consulted the relevant European standardisation bodies, deliver its opinion without delay. In the light of the Committee’s opinion, the Commission shall decide to publish, not to publish, to publish with restriction, to maintain, to maintain with restriction or to withdraw the The Commission shall inform the European standardisation body concerned and, if necessary, request the revision of the harmonised standards concerned. Article 21 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health established by Article 58 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety ( 24 ) . 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5a(1) to (4) and Article 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof. Article 22 Expenditure In order to support the establishment of a harmonised policy and systems in the field of sustainable use of pesticides, the Commission may finance: Article 23 Transposition 1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 14 December 2011. When Member States adopt these measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The method of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States. 2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 24 Entry into force This Directive shall enter into force on the day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 25 Addressees This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 21 October 2009. For the European Parliament The President J. BUZEK For the Council The President C. MALMSTRÖM ( 1 ) OJ C 161, 13.7.2007, p. 48 . ( 2 ) OJ C 146, 30.6.2007, p. 48 . ( 3 ) Opinion of the European Parliament of 23 October 2007 ( OJ C 263 E, 16.10.2008, p. 158 ), Council Common Position of 19 May 2008 ( OJ C 254 E, 7.10.2008, p. 1 ) and Position of the European Parliament of 13 January 2009 (not yet published in the Official Journal). Council Decision of 24 September 2009. ( 4 ) OJ L 242, 10.9.2002, p. 1 . ( 5 ) OJ L 103, 25.4.1979, p. 1 . ( 6 ) OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 . ( 7 ) OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1 . ( 8 ) OJ L 70, 16.3.2005, p. 1 . ( 9 ) See page 1 of this Official Journal. ( 10 ) OJ L 277, 21.10.2005, p. 1 . ( 11 ) OJ L 156, 25.6.2003, p. 17 . ( 12 ) OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, p. 11 . ( 13 ) OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 50 . ( 14 ) OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 24 . ( 15 ) OJ L 114, 27.4.2006, p. 9 . ( 16 ) OJ L 377, 31.12.1991, p. 20 . ( 17 ) OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23 . ( 18 ) OJ C 321, 31.12.2003, p. 1 . ( 19 ) OJ L 123, 24.4.1998, p. 1 . ( 20 ) OJ L 230, 19.8.1991, p. 1 . ( 21 ) OJ L 200, 30.7.1999, p. 1 . ( 22 ) OJ L 189, 20.7.2007, p. 1 . ( 23 ) OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37 . ( 24 ) OJ L 31, 1.2.2002, p. 1 . ANNEX I Training subjects referred to in Article 5 ANNEX II Health and safety and environmental requirements relating to the inspection of pesticide application equipment The inspection of pesticide application equipment shall cover all aspects important to achieve a high level of safety and protection of human health and the environment. Full effectiveness of the application operation should be ensured by proper performance of devices and functions of the equipment to guarantee the following objectives are met. The pesticide application equipment must function reliably and be used properly for its intended purpose ensuring that pesticides can be accurately dosed and distributed. The equipment must be in such a condition as to be filled and emptied safely, easily and completely and prevent leakage of pesticides. It must permit easy and thorough cleaning. It must also ensure safe operations, and be controlled and capable of being immediately stopped from the operator’s seat. Where necessary, adjustments must be simple, accurate and capable of being reproduced. Particular attention should be paid to: 1. Power transmission parts The power take-off driveshaft guard and the guard of the power input connection shall be fitted and in good condition and the protective devices and any moving or rotating power transmission parts shall not be affected in their function so as to ensure protection of the operator. 2. Pump The pump capacity shall be suited to the needs of the equipment and the pump must function properly in order to ensure a stable and reliable application rate. There shall be no leakages from the pump. 3. Agitation Agitation devices must ensure a proper recirculation in order to achieve an even concentration of the whole volume of the liquid spray mixture in the tank. 4. Spray liquid tank Spray tanks including indicator of tank content, filling devices, strainers and filters, emptying and rinsing systems, and mixing devices shall operate in such a way as to minimise accidental spillage, uneven concentration distribution, operator exposure and residual content. 5. Measuring systems, control and regulation systems All devices for measuring, switching on and off and adjusting pressure and/or flow rate shall be properly calibrated and work correctly and there shall be no leakages. Control of pressure and operation of pressure adjustment devices shall be easily possible during application. Pressure adjustment devices shall maintain a constant working pressure at constant revolutions of the pump, in order to ensure that a stable volume application rate is applied. 6. Pipes and hoses Pipes and hoses shall be in proper condition to avoid disturbance of liquid flow or accidental spillage in case of failure. There shall be no leakages from pipes or hoses when run with the maximum obtainable pressure for the system. 7. Filtering In order to avoid turbulence and heterogeneity in spray patterns, filters shall be in good condition and the mesh size of the filters shall correspond to the size of nozzles fitted on the sprayer. Where applicable the filter blockage indication system shall operate correctly. 8. Spray boom (for equipment spraying pesticides by means of a horizontally positioned boom, located close to the crop or the material to be treated). The spray boom must be in good condition and stable in all directions. The fixation and adjustment systems and the devices for damping unintended movements and slope compensation must work correctly. 9. Nozzles Nozzles must work properly to control dripping when spraying stops. To ensure homogeneity of the spray pattern, the flow rate of each individual nozzle shall not deviate significantly from the data of the flow rate tables provided by the manufacturer. 10. Distribution The transverse and vertical (in case of applications in vertical crops) distribution of the spray mixture in the target area must be even, where relevant. 11. Blower (for equipment distributing pesticides by air assistance) The blower must be in good condition and must ensure a stable and reliable air stream. ANNEX III General principles of integrated pest management ANNEX IV Harmonised risk indicators