REGULATION (EU) 2024/573 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 7 February 2024 on fluorinated greenhouse gases, amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , After consulting the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I General provisions Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation: Article 2 This Regulation applies to: Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: CHAPTER II Containment Article 4 Prevention of emissions 1. The intentional release of fluorinated greenhouse gases into the atmosphere shall be prohibited where the release is not technically necessary for the intended use. If an intentional release is technically necessary for the intended use, operators of equipment that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases or of facilities where fluorinated greenhouse gases are used shall take all measures that are technically and economically feasible to prevent, to the extent possible, their release into the atmosphere, including by recapturing the gases emitted. 2. In the case of fumigation with sulfuryl fluoride, operators shall document the use of capturing and collection measures or specify the reasons for which capturing and collection measures were not technically or economically feasible. Operators shall keep the supporting evidence for 5 years and make it available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. 3. Operators and manufacturers of equipment that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases or operators of facilities where fluorinated greenhouse gases are used, as well as undertakings in possession of such equipment during its transport or storage, shall take all necessary precautions to prevent the unintentional release of such gases. They shall take all measures that are technically and economically feasible to minimise leakage of the gases. 4. During the production, storage, transport and transfer of fluorinated greenhouse gases from one container or system to another, to equipment or to a facility, the undertaking concerned shall take all necessary precautions to limit release of fluorinated greenhouse gases to the greatest extent possible. This paragraph shall also apply where fluorinated greenhouse gases are produced as by-products. 5. Where a leakage of fluorinated greenhouse gases is detected, the operators and manufacturers of equipment and the operators of facilities where fluorinated greenhouse gases are used, and the undertakings in possession of such equipment during its transport or storage, shall ensure that the equipment or facility where fluorinated greenhouse gases are used is repaired without undue delay. Where the equipment is subject to leak checks under Article 5(1) and a leak in the equipment has been repaired, the operators of the equipment shall ensure that the equipment is checked by a natural person who is certified in accordance with Article 10 at the earliest after an operating time of 24 hours has elapsed but not later than 1 month after the repair to verify that the repair has been effective. For mobile equipment listed in Article 5(3), points (a), (b) and (c), a leak check may be carried out directly after a repair. 6. Without prejudice to Article 11(1), first subparagraph, the placing on the market of fluorinated greenhouse gases shall be prohibited, unless producers or importers provide evidence to the competent authority of a Member State at the time of such placing on the market, that any trifluoromethane, produced as a by-product during the production process of the fluorinated greenhouse gases, including during the production of feedstock for the production of those gases, has been destroyed or recovered for subsequent use, using best available techniques. For the purpose of providing that evidence, producers and importers shall draw up a declaration of conformity, accompanied by supporting documentation: Producers and importers shall keep the declaration of conformity and supporting documentation for a period of at least 5 years from the placing on the market and make them available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the detailed arrangements relating to the declaration of conformity and supporting documentation referred to in the second subparagraph. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 7. Natural persons carrying out the activities referred to in Article 10(1), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), shall be certified in accordance with Article 10 and shall take precautionary measures to prevent leakage of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II and, when fluorinated greenhouse gases are used in electrical switchgear, also in Annex III. Legal persons carrying out the installation, maintenance or servicing, repair or decommissioning of the equipment listed in Article 5(2), points (a) to (e), and Article 5(3), points (a) and (b), shall be certified in accordance with Article 10 and shall take precautionary measures to prevent leakage of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and Section 1 of Annex II. Natural persons carrying out the maintenance or servicing and repair of air-conditioning equipment containing fluorinated greenhouse gases in motor vehicles falling within the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 25 ) and of mobile equipment listed in Article 5(3), point (c), of this Regulation shall hold at least a training attestation in accordance with Article 10(1), second subparagraph, of this Regulation. Article 5 Leak checks 1. Operators and manufacturers of equipment that contains 5 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I or 1 kilogram or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex II that is not contained in foams, shall ensure that the equipment is checked for leaks. Hermetically sealed equipment shall not be checked for leaks provided that it is labelled as hermetically sealed equipment and that it complies with one of the following conditions: By way of derogation from the second subparagraph, where hermetically sealed equipment is installed in residential buildings, it shall not be checked for leaks where that equipment contains less than 3 kilograms of fluorinated greenhouse gases provided that it is labelled as hermetically sealed. Electrical switchgear shall not be checked for leaks provided that it complies with one of the following conditions: 2. Paragraph 1 shall apply to operators and manufacturers of the following stationary equipment that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I or in Section 1 of Annex II: 3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to operators and manufacturers of the following mobile equipment that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I or in Section 1 of Annex II: As regards the equipment referred to in paragraph 2, points (a) to (e), and points (a) and (b) of this paragraph, the checks shall be carried out by natural persons certified in accordance with Article 10. 4. As regards the mobile equipment referred to in paragraph 3, point (c), the checks shall be carried out by natural persons holding at least a training attestation in accordance with Article 10(1), second subparagraph. 5. Paragraphs 1 and 6 shall not apply to operators of mobile equipment under paragraph 3, points (b) and (c), until 12 March 2027. 6. The leak checks referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out with the following frequency: 7. The obligations set out in paragraph 1 for fire protection equipment as referred to in paragraph 2, point (d), shall be deemed to be fulfilled provided that the following conditions are met: The obligations set out in paragraph 1, for mobile air-conditioning equipment and heat pumps, as referred to in paragraph 3, point (c), shall be deemed to be fulfilled provided that the mobile air-conditioning equipment and the heat pumps are subject to a regular inspection regime that includes leak checks. 8. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, specify requirements for the leak checks to be carried out in accordance with paragraph 1 for each type of equipment referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 and identify those parts of the equipment most likely to leak. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). Article 6 Leakage detection systems 1. Operators of stationary equipment listed in Article 5(2), points (a) to (d), that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I in quantities of 500 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more or 100 kilograms or more of gases listed in Section 1 of Annex II, shall ensure that the equipment has a leakage detection system which alerts the operator or a service company of any leakage. 2. Operators of stationary equipment listed in Article 5(2), points (e) and (f), that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I in quantities of 500 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more and installed from 1 January 2017, shall ensure that the equipment has a leakage detection system which alerts the operator or a service company of any leakage. 3. Operators of stationary equipment listed in Article 5(2), points (a) to (e), that is subject to paragraphs 1 or 2 of this Article shall ensure that leakage detection systems are checked at least once every 12 months to ensure their proper functioning. 4. Operators of stationary equipment listed in Article 5(2), point (f), that is subject to paragraph 2 of this Article shall ensure that leakage detection systems are checked at least once every 6 years to ensure their proper functioning. Article 7 Record-keeping 1. Operators of equipment which is required to be checked for leaks pursuant to Article 5(1) shall establish and keep records for each piece of such equipment, specifying the following information: 2. Unless the records referred to in paragraph 1 are stored in a database set up by the competent authorities of the Member States, the following rules apply: The records referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. 3. For the purposes of Article 11(6), undertakings supplying fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I or in Section 1 of Annex II, shall establish records of relevant information on the purchasers of those fluorinated greenhouse gases that includes the following details: The undertakings supplying the gases shall keep the records for at least 5 years and make those records available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. 4. For the purpose of Article 11(7), the undertakings which sell non-hermetically sealed equipment charged with fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II shall keep records of the equipment sold and of the certified undertakings that will carry out the installation. The undertakings selling the equipment referred to in Article 11(7) shall keep the records for a period of at least 5 years and shall make those records available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned. 5. Undertakings that produce, including as by-product, place on the market, supply or receive substances listed in Section 1 of Annex I intended for exempted uses referred to in Article 16(2), shall keep records containing at least the following information, as applicable: The undertakings shall keep the records referred to in the first subparagraph for at least 5 years after production, placing on the market, supply or receipt, and shall make them available, upon request, to the competent authorities of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. Those competent authorities and the Commission shall ensure the confidentiality of information contained in those records. 6. The Commission may, by means of an implementing act, determine the format of the records referred to in paragraphs 1, 3, 4 and 5 and specify how they should be established and kept. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). Article 8 Recovery and destruction 1. Operators of equipment that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases, not contained in foams, shall ensure that those substances are recovered and, after the decommissioning of the equipment, they are recycled, reclaimed or destroyed. The recovery of those substances shall be carried out by natural persons who hold the relevant certificates provided for in Article 10. 2. The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 shall apply to operators of any of the following stationary equipment: 3. The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 shall apply to operators of any of the following mobile equipment: 4. For the recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases from air-conditioning equipment in motor vehicles which fall within the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC and from mobile equipment referred to in paragraph (3), points (b) and (c), only natural persons holding at least a training attestation in accordance with Article 10(1), second subparagraph, of this Regulation, shall be considered to be appropriately qualified. 5. The obligation laid down in paragraph 1 shall apply to operators of the mobile equipment under paragraph 3, points (b) and (c), from 12 March 2027. 6. Any recovered fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II shall not be used for filling or refilling equipment unless the gas has been recycled or reclaimed. 7. An undertaking that uses a container with fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II shall, immediately prior to its disposal, arrange for the recovery of any residual gases to make sure they are recycled, reclaimed or destroyed. 8. From 1 January 2025, building owners and contractors shall ensure that, during renovation, refurbishing or demolition activities implying the removal of foam panels that contain foams with fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II, emissions are avoided to the extent possible by handling the foams or the gases contained therein in a way that ensures the destruction of those gases. In the case of recovery of those gases, the recovery shall be carried out only by appropriately qualified natural persons. 9. From 1 January 2025, building owners and contractors shall ensure that, during renovation, refurbishing or demolition activities implying the removal of foams in laminated boards installed in cavities or built-up structures that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II, emissions are avoided to the extent possible by handling the foams or the gases contained therein in a way that ensures the destruction of those gases. In the case of recovery of those gases, the recovery shall be carried out only by appropriately qualified natural persons. Where removal of the foams referred to in the first subparagraph is not technically feasible, the building owner or contractor shall draw up documentation providing evidence on the infeasibility of the removal in the specific case. Such documentation shall be kept for 5 years and shall be made available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. 10. Operators of products and equipment not listed in paragraph 2, 3, 8 or 9 that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II shall arrange for the recovery of the gases, unless it can be established that it is not technically feasible or entails disproportionate costs. The operators shall ensure that the recovery is carried out by appropriately qualified natural persons, so that the gases are recycled, reclaimed or destroyed or shall arrange for their destruction without prior recovery. The recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II from air-conditioning equipment in road vehicles outside the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC shall be carried out only by natural persons holding at least a training attestation in accordance with Article 10(1), second subparagraph, of this Regulation. 11. Fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I, and products and equipment containing such gases, shall be destroyed only by destruction technology that has been approved by the Parties to the Protocol. Other fluorinated greenhouse gases for which the destruction technology has not been approved shall be destroyed only by destruction technology that complies with Union and national law on waste and where additional requirements under such law are met. 12. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to supplement this Regulation by establishing a list of products and equipment for which the recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II or destruction of products and equipment containing such gases without prior recovery of those gases shall be considered technically and economically feasible, specifying, if appropriate, the technology to be applied. 13. Member States shall promote the recovery, recycling, reclamation and destruction of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II. Article 9 Extended producer responsibility schemes Without prejudice to existing extended producer responsibility schemes, Member States shall ensure that by 31 December 2027, the financing obligations for waste electrical and electronic equipment referred to in Articles 12 and 13 of Directive 2012/19/EU include the financing of the recovery, and the recycling, reclamation or destruction, of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II to this Regulation from the products and equipment, containing those gases, which are electrical and electronic equipment within the meaning of Directive 2012/19/EU and that have been placed on the market from 11 March 2024. Member States shall inform the Commission about the actions undertaken. Article 10 Certification and training 1. Natural persons shall be certified to carry out the following activities involving fluorinated greenhouse gases within the meaning of Article 4(7), Article 5(1) and Article 8(2), covering the fluorinated greenhouse gases specified therein, or involving relevant alternatives to fluorinated greenhouse gases, including natural refrigerants, where relevant: Natural persons shall hold at least a training attestation to carry out the following activities involving fluorinated greenhouse gases within the meaning of Article 4(7), Article 5(1) and Article 8(3), covering the fluorinated greenhouse gases specified therein, or involving relevant alternatives to fluorinated greenhouse gases, including natural refrigerants, where relevant: 2. Legal persons shall be certified within the meaning of Article 4(7), covering the fluorinated greenhouse gases specified therein, to carry out the installation, maintenance or servicing, repair or decommissioning of the equipment listed in Article 5(2), points (a) to (e), and in Article 5(3), points (a) and (b), involving fluorinated greenhouse gases or relevant alternatives to fluorinated greenhouse gases, including natural refrigerants, where relevant. 3. Within 1 year following the entry into force of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 8, Member States shall establish or adapt certification programmes, including evaluation processes, and ensure that training on practical skills and theoretical knowledge is available for natural persons carrying out the activities referred to in paragraph 1. Member States shall also ensure that training programmes for obtaining training attestations in accordance with paragraph 1, second subparagraph, are available. 4. Within 1 year following the entry into force of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 8, Member States shall establish or adapt certification programmes for legal persons referred to in paragraph 2. 5. The certification programmes and training on practical skills and theoretical knowledge provided for in paragraph 3 shall cover the following: 6. The certification programmes and training on practical skills and theoretical knowledge provided for in paragraph 3 that concern aircraft shall be reflected in the process of updating the certification specifications and other detailed specifications, acceptable means of compliance and guidance material issued by the European Aviation Safety Agency pursuant to Article 76(3) and Article 115 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1139. 7. Certificates under the certification programmes referred to in paragraph 3 shall be subject to the condition that the applicant has successfully completed an evaluation process as referred to in that paragraph. 8. By 12 March 2026, the Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish the minimum requirements for certification programmes and training attestations referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 for the activities referred to in paragraph 1. Those minimum requirements shall specify, for each type of equipment referred to in paragraph 1, the required practical skills and theoretical knowledge, differentiating, where appropriate, between different activities to be covered, the arrangements of the certification or attestation as well as the conditions for mutual recognition of certificates and training attestations. The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, adapt, where necessary, such minimum requirements. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 9. Existing certificates and training attestations issued in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 shall remain valid, in accordance with the conditions under which they were originally issued. By 12 March 2027, Member States shall ensure that certified natural persons are required to participate in refreshment training courses or complete an evaluation process referred to in paragraph 3, at least every 7 years. Member States shall ensure that natural persons who hold a certificate or training attestation under Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 shall participate in such refreshment training courses or complete such evaluation processes for the first time no later than 12 March 2029. 10. Within 1 year following the entry into force of the implementing act under paragraph 8, Member States shall notify the Commission of their certification and training programmes. Member States shall recognise certificates and training attestations issued in another Member State in accordance with this Article. They shall not restrict the freedom to provide services or the freedom of establishment because a certificate was issued in another Member State. 11. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the format of the notification referred to in paragraph 10. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 12. An undertaking shall only assign an activity referred to in paragraph 1 or 2 to another undertaking after verification that the latter holds the necessary certificates for the required activities referred to in paragraph 1 or 2, respectively. 13. Where the obligations under this Article relating to the provision of certification and training would impose disproportionate burdens on a Member State because of the small size of its population and the consequent lack of demand for such certification and training, compliance may be achieved through the recognition of certificates issued in other Member States. Member States which apply the first subparagraph shall inform the Commission. The Commission shall thereafter inform the other Member States. 14. This Article shall not prevent Member States from setting up further certification and training programmes in respect of equipment and activities other than those referred to in paragraph 1. CHAPTER III Restrictions and control of use Article 11 Restrictions on placing on the market and sale 1. The placing on the market of products and equipment, including parts thereof, listed in Annex IV, with an exemption for military equipment, shall be prohibited from the date specified in that Annex, differentiating, where applicable, according to the type or global warming potential of the gas contained. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the placing on the market of parts of products and equipment required for repair and servicing of existing equipment listed in Annex IV is allowed provided that the repair or servicing does not result in: Products and equipment, including parts thereof, unlawfully placed on the market after the date referred to in the first subparagraph, shall not be subsequently used, supplied, or made available to other persons within the Union for payment or free of charge, or exported. Re-export of such products and equipment is allowed when the non-compliance with this Regulation has been established prior to the release for free circulation of goods for the purpose of import, in accordance with the measures referred to in Article 23(12). Such products and equipment may only be stored or transported for subsequent disposal and for the recovery of the gas prior to the disposal pursuant to Article 8 or for their re-export. The re-export of products and equipment for which the non-compliance with this Regulation has been established prior to their release for free circulation is allowed. In such cases, Article 22(3) shall not apply. One year following the individual dates listed in Annex IV, the subsequent supply or making available to another person in the Union for payment or free of charge of products or equipment lawfully placed on the market prior to the date referred to in the first subparagraph shall be allowed only if evidence is provided that the product or equipment was placed lawfully on the market prior to that date. 2. The prohibition set out in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, shall not apply to equipment for which it has been established, pursuant to ecodesign requirements adopted under Directive 2009/125/EC, that its lifecycle CO 2 equivalent emissions would be lower than those of equivalent equipment which meets those relevant ecodesign requirements. 3. In addition to the placing on the market prohibitions set out in point 1 of Annex IV, the import, any subsequent supply or making available to other persons within the Union for payment or free of charge, use or export of non-refillable containers for fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II empty, or fully or partially filled, shall be prohibited. Such containers may only be stored or transported for subsequent disposal. This paragraph does not apply to containers for laboratory or analytical uses of fluorinated greenhouse gases. The first subparagraph shall apply to non-refillable containers, namely: 4. Undertakings which place on the market refillable containers for fluorinated greenhouse gases shall produce a declaration of conformity that includes evidence confirming that there are binding arrangements in place for the return of those containers for the purpose of refilling, in particular identifying the relevant actors, their obligatory commitments and the relevant logistical arrangements. Those arrangements shall be made binding on the distributors of the refillable containers for fluorinated greenhouse gases to the end user. The undertakings referred to in the first subparagraph shall keep the declaration of conformity for a period of at least 5 years from the placing on the market of the refillable containers for fluorinated greenhouse gases and shall make that declaration available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. Suppliers of refillable containers for fluorinated greenhouse gases to end users shall keep evidence of compliance with the binding arrangements referred to in the first subparagraph for a period of at least 5 years from supply to the end user and shall make that evidence available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the requirements for including the elements that are essential for the binding arrangements referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in the declaration of conformity. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 5. Following a substantiated request by a competent authority of a Member State and taking into account the objectives of this Regulation, the Commission may, exceptionally, by means of implementing acts, authorise an exemption for up to 4 years to allow the placing on the market of products and equipment listed in Annex IV, or, by way of derogation from Article 13(9), the putting into operation of new or extended electrical switchgear, including parts thereof, containing fluorinated greenhouse gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases, where it is demonstrated that: Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 6. Only natural persons who hold a certificate required under Article 10(1), first subparagraph, point (a), or undertakings that employ natural persons who hold a certificate required under Article 10(1), first subparagraph, point (a), or a training attestation required under Article 10(1), second subparagraph, shall be allowed to purchase fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I or in Section 1 of Annex II for the purpose of carrying out the installation, maintenance or servicing, or repair of the equipment containing those gases, or whose functioning relies upon those gases, referred to in Article 5(2), points (a) to (f), and Article 5(3), points (a) and (b), and covered by Article 10(1), second subparagraph. Sellers shall sell or offer for sale, directly or indirectly, such gases exclusively to the undertakings referred to in this paragraph. This paragraph shall not prevent non-certified undertakings that do not carry out the activities referred to in the first subparagraph from collecting, transporting or delivering fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II. 7. Non-hermetically sealed equipment charged with fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II may only be sold to an end user where evidence is provided that the installation is to be carried out by an undertaking certified in accordance with Article 10. 8. Only undertakings with an establishment within the Union, or that have appointed an only representative with an establishment within the Union that assumes full responsibility for compliance with this Regulation, shall be allowed to place on the market and subsequently supply bulk fluorinated greenhouse gases. The only representative may be the representative appointed pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. Article 12 Labelling and product and equipment information 1. The following products and equipment that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases shall only be placed on the market, subsequently supplied or made available to any other person, if they are labelled as: 2. Products or equipment that are subject to an exemption as referred to in Article 11(5) as well as products or equipment containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I that are subject to an exemption as referred to in Article 16(4) shall be labelled accordingly, specifying the end date of the exemption, and shall include a reference that those products or equipment may only be used for the purpose for which an exemption under that Article was granted. 3. The label required pursuant to paragraph 1 shall indicate the following information: The label shall indicate the following information, where applicable: Where products or equipment have been retrofitted and the fluorinated greenhouse gases have been changed, those products or equipment shall be relabelled with updated information as referred to in this paragraph. 4. The label required pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be clearly legible and indelible and shall be placed either: The label shall be written in the official languages of the Member State in which the good is to be placed on the market, made available or supplied. 5. Foams and pre-blended polyols that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II shall not be placed on the market, made available or supplied unless the fluorinated greenhouse gases are identified with a label using the accepted industry designation or, if no such designation is available, the chemical name. The label shall clearly indicate that the foam or pre-blended polyol contains fluorinated greenhouse gases. In the case of foam panels and laminated boards, that information shall be clearly and indelibly stated on the panels or boards. 6. Where relevant, refilled containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases shall be relabelled with updated information as referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 3. 7. Containers containing reclaimed or recycled fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II shall be labelled with an indication that the substance has been reclaimed or recycled. In the case of reclamation, information on the batch number and the name and address of the reclamation facility in the Union shall be included. 8. Containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and placed on the market, made available or supplied for destruction shall be labelled with an indication that the contents of the container are for destruction only. 9. Containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and intended for direct export shall be labelled with an indication that the contents of the container are for direct export only. 10. Containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and placed on the market, made available or supplied for use in military equipment shall be labelled with an indication that the contents of the container are to be used for that purpose only. 11. Containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II and placed on the market, made available or supplied for etching of semiconductor material or cleaning of chemicals vapour deposition chambers within the semiconductor manufacturing sector shall be labelled with an indication that the contents of the container are to be used for that purpose only. 12. Containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and placed on the market, made available or supplied for feedstock use shall be labelled with an indication that the contents of the container are to be used as feedstock only. 13. Containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I and placed on the market, made available or supplied for producing metered dose inhalers for the delivery of pharmaceutical ingredients shall be labelled with an indication that the contents of the container are to be used for that purpose only. 14. In the case of containers containing fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I, the label referred to in paragraphs 8 to 12 shall include the indication ‘exempted from quota under Regulation (EU) 2024/573 of the European Parliament and of the Council’. In the absence of the labelling requirements referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph and in paragraphs 8 to 12, the hydrofluorocarbons shall be subject to the quota requirements pursuant to Article 16(1). 15. In the cases referred to in points 2(b), 4, 5(c), 7(b), (c) and (d), 8(b) to (e), 9(b) to (f), 11(c), 16, 17(a), (b) and (c), and 19(a) and (b) of Annex IV, the product or equipment shall be labelled with an indication that it shall be used only where required by the safety requirements or national safety standards, as applicable. Those requirements or standards shall be specified on the label. In the cases referred to in points 19 and 21 of Annex IV, the product or equipment shall be labelled with an indication that the product or equipment is to be used only where required by the medical application specified on the label. 16. The information referred to in paragraphs 3 and 5 shall be included in instruction manuals for the products and equipment concerned. In the case of products and equipment that contain fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annexes I and II with a global warming potential of 150 or more, that information shall also be included in descriptions used for advertising. 17. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the format of the labels referred to in paragraph 1 and paragraphs 4 to 15 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 18. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend the labelling requirements set out in paragraphs 4 to 15 of this Article where appropriate in view of commercial or technological development. Article 13 Control of use 1. The use of SF 6 in magnesium die-casting and in the recycling of magnesium die-casting alloys shall be prohibited. 2. The use of SF 6 to fill vehicle tyres shall be prohibited. 3. The use of fluorinated greenhouse gases, with a global warming potential of 2 500 or more, for the maintenance or servicing of refrigeration equipment with a charge size of 40 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more, shall be prohibited. From 1 January 2025, the use of fluorinated greenhouse gases, with a global warming potential of 2 500 or more, for the maintenance or servicing of any refrigeration equipment shall be prohibited. The prohibitions referred to in the first subparagraph shall not apply to military equipment or equipment intended for applications designed to cool products to temperatures below – 50 °C. The prohibitions referred to in the first subparagraph shall not apply to the following categories of fluorinated greenhouse gases until 1 January 2030: The prohibitions referred to in the first subparagraph shall not apply to refrigeration equipment for which an exemption has been authorised in accordance with Article 11(5). 4. From 1 January 2026, the use of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I, with a global warming potential of 2 500 or more, for the maintenance or servicing of air-conditioning equipment and heat pumps shall be prohibited. The prohibition referred to in the first subparagraph shall not apply to the following categories of fluorinated greenhouse gases until 1 January 2032: 5. From 1 January 2032, the use of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I, with a global warming potential of 750 or more, for the maintenance or servicing of stationary refrigeration equipment, with the exclusion of chillers, shall be prohibited. The prohibition referred to in the first subparagraph shall not apply to military equipment or equipment intended for applications designed to cool products to temperatures below – 50 °C or equipment intended for applications designed to cool nuclear power stations. The prohibition referred to in the first subparagraph shall not apply to the following categories of fluorinated greenhouse gases: 6. Following a substantiated request by a competent authority of a Member State and taking into account the objectives of this Regulation, the Commission shall assess the availability of reclaimed and recycled fluorinated greenhouse gases falling within the scope of paragraphs 4 and 5. Where the Commission’s assessment points to a verified shortage of a reclaimed and recycled fluorinated greenhouse gas, the Commission may, exceptionally, by means of implementing acts, authorise an exemption from the prohibitions set out in paragraph 4 or 5, for up to 4 years, to the extent needed to address the shortage identified. 7. From 1 January 2035, the use of SF 6 for the maintenance or servicing of electrical switchgear equipment shall be prohibited unless it is reclaimed or recycled, except if it is proved that reclaimed or recycled SF 6 : In such cases, the user shall provide evidence, upon request, setting out the justification for use to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. This paragraph shall not apply to military equipment. 8. The use of desflurane as an inhalation anaesthetic shall be prohibited from 1 January 2026, except where such use is strictly required and no other anaesthetic can be used on medical grounds. The healthcare institution shall keep evidence of the medical justification, and provide it, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. 9. The putting into operation of the following electrical switchgear using, or whose functioning relies upon, fluorinated greenhouse gases in insulating or breaking medium shall be prohibited as follows: 10. The taking out of operation of an electrical switchgear which is operating within the Union and the subsequent putting into operation of that electrical switchgear at a different site in the Union shall not be considered as putting into operation for the purposes of this Article. 11. By way of derogation from paragraph 9, the putting into operation of electrical switchgear using or whose functioning relies upon insulating or breaking medium with a global warming potential lower than 1 000 is allowed if, following a procurement procedure that considers the technical specificities of the equipment required for the specific use concerned one of the following situations applies: 12. By way of derogation from paragraph 11, the putting into operation of electrical switchgear with insulating or breaking medium with a global warming potential of 1 000 or more is allowed if, following a procurement procedure that considers the technical specificities of the equipment required for the specific use concerned, no bid was received for electrical switchgear with insulating or breaking medium with a global warming potential of less than 1 000. 13. Paragraph 9 shall not apply to electrical switchgear for which it has been established pursuant to ecodesign requirements adopted under Directive 2009/125/EC that its life cycle CO 2 equivalent emissions would be lower than those of equivalent equipment which meets the relevant ecodesign requirements and would comply with the global warming potential limits in paragraph 9. 14. Paragraph 9 shall not apply where the operator can provide evidence that the order for the electrical switchgear has been placed before 11 March 2024. 15. Paragraph 9 shall not apply where the devices to extend existing electrical switchgear that use fluorinated greenhouse gases with a lower global warming potential than the fluorinated greenhouse gases used in the existing electrical switchgear are not compatible with the existing electrical switchgear, and the use of those devices would require the replacement of the existing entire electrical switchgear. 16. Where a derogation listed in paragraph 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 or 15 applies, the operator shall keep documentation establishing the evidence for the derogation for at least 5 years and shall make it available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. 17. The operator shall notify the competent authority in the Member State where the electrical switchgear is put into operation when applying a derogation listed in paragraph 11, 12, 14 or 15. 18. Parts of equipment may be installed for repair or servicing of existing electrical switchgear provided that there is no change of the type of fluorinated greenhouse gas used that leads to an increase of the global warming potential of the fluorinated greenhouse gas used or an increase in the amount of fluorinated greenhouse gases contained in the equipment. 19. The putting into operation of any equipment or utilisation of any product listed in points 2(b), 4, 5(c), 7(b), (c) and (d), 8(b) to (e), 9(b) to (f), 11(c), 17(c) and 19(b) of Annex IV after the respective prohibition date specified in those points shall be prohibited unless the operator can provide evidence that: 20. The operator shall keep documentation establishing the evidence referred to in paragraph 19 for at least 5 years and shall make it available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. CHAPTER IV Production schedule and reduction of the quantity of hydrofluorocarbons placed on the market Article 14 Production of hydrofluorocarbons 1. For the purposes of this Article, Article 15 and Annex V, the production of hydrofluorocarbons is the amount of hydrofluorocarbons produced minus the amount destroyed by technology approved by the Parties to the Protocol, and minus the amount entirely used as feedstock in the manufacture of other chemicals, but including hydrofluorocarbons generated as a by-product, unless not captured or unless that by-product is destroyed as part of or after the production process by the producer or handed over to another undertaking for destruction. No amount of reclaimed hydrofluorocarbons shall be considered in the calculation of the production of hydrofluorocarbons. 2. The production of hydrofluorocarbons shall be allowed to the extent that producers have been allocated production rights by the Commission in accordance with this Article. 3. Before 1 January 2025, the Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, allocate production rights on the basis of Annex V for producers that produced hydrofluorocarbons in 2022, based on data reported under Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 4. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, at the request of the competent authority of a Member State, amend the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 3 in order to allocate additional production rights to the producers referred to in paragraph 3 or any other undertakings established in the Union, unless the production limits of the Member State under the Protocol are exceeded. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 5. In the absence of an implementing act being effective before 1 January 2025, producers may continue to produce hydrofluorocarbons without production rights being allocated. The hydrofluorocarbons produced during such period shall count towards the allocation of production rights once issued in accordance with the implementing act referred to in paragraph 3. 6. Three years following the adoption of the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 3, and every 3 years thereafter, the Commission shall review and, if needed, amend those implementing acts, taking into account the changes to the production rights pursuant to Article 15 during the preceding 3 years. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). Article 15 Transfer and authorisation of production rights for industrial rationalisation 1. For the purpose of industrial rationalisation within a Member State, producers may transfer totally or partially their production rights to any other undertaking in that Member State, provided that the calculated levels of production of Parties to the Protocol are respected. Transfers shall be approved by the Commission and the relevant competent authorities and carried out via the F-gas Portal. 2. For the purpose of industrial rationalisation between Member States, the Commission may, in agreement with both the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer’s relevant production is situated, and the competent authority of the Member State in which excess calculated levels of production under the Protocol are available, authorise via the F-gas Portal that producer to exceed its production rights referred to in Article 14(3) by a specified amount, considering the conditions set out in the Protocol. 3. The Commission may, in agreement with both the competent authority of the Member State in which a producer’s relevant production is situated and the competent authority of the third country Party concerned, authorise a producer to combine the production rights referred to in Article 14 with the calculated levels of production allowed to a producer in a third country Party under the Protocol and that producer’s national law for the purpose of industrial rationalisation with a third country Party, provided that the combined production by the two producers do not lead to an exceedance of calculated levels of production of the two Parties to the Protocol and any relevant national law is respected. Article 16 Reduction of the quantity of hydrofluorocarbons placed on the market 1. The placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons shall be allowed only to the extent that producers and importers have been allocated quota by the Commission as set out in Article 17. Producers and importers placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market shall not exceed the quota available to them at the moment of placing on the market. 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to hydrofluorocarbons that are: 3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend paragraph 2 and exclude from the quota requirement laid down in paragraph 1 hydrofluorocarbons in accordance with decisions of the Parties to the Protocol. 4. Following a substantiated request by a competent authority of a Member State and taking into account the objectives of this Regulation, and in light of any data provided by the European Medicines Agency, the Commission may, exceptionally, by means of implementing acts, authorise an exemption for up to 4 years to exclude from the quota requirement laid down in paragraph 1 hydrofluorocarbons for use in specific applications, or specific categories of products or equipment, where it is demonstrated in the request that: Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 5. The emission of hydrofluorocarbons during production shall be considered as being placed on the market the year in which they occur. 6. This Article and Articles 17, 20 to 29 and 31 shall also apply to hydrofluorocarbons contained in pre-blended polyols. Article 17 Determination of reference values and quota allocations for the placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons 1. By 31 October 2024 and at least every 3 years thereafter, the Commission shall determine reference values for producers and importers in accordance with Annex VII for the placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons. The Commission shall determine those reference values for all producers and importers that placed on the market hydrofluorocarbons during the previous 3 years, by means of an implementing act that determines 2. An producer or importer may notify the Commission of a permanent succession or acquisition of the part of its business relevant to this Article that results in a change of the attribution of its reference values and those of its legal successor. The Commission may request relevant documentation to that effect. The adjusted reference values shall be made accessible in the F-gas Portal. 3. By 1 June 2024 and by 1 April 2027 and at least every 3 years thereafter, producers and importers may make a declaration for receiving quota from the reserve referred in Annex VIII via the F-gas Portal. 4. By 31 December 2024 and every year thereafter, the Commission shall allocate quota for each producer and importer for placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons, pursuant to Annex VIII. Quota shall be notified via the F-gas Portal to producers and importers. 5. The quota allocations shall be subject to the payment of the amount due which equals EUR 3 for each tonne of CO 2 equivalent of quota to be allocated. Producers and importers shall be notified via the F-gas Portal of the total amount due for their calculated maximum quota allocation for the following calendar year and of the deadline for completing the payment. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the detailed arrangements for the payment of the amount due. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). Producers and importers may pay only for a part of the calculated maximum quota allocation offered to them. In such a case, those producers and importers shall be allocated the quota corresponding to the payment made by the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph. Until 31 December 2027, the Commission shall redistribute the quota for which a payment has not been made by the set deadline, free of charge, to only those producers and importers that have paid the total amount due for their calculated maximum quota allocation referred to in the first subparagraph and that have made a declaration as referred to in paragraph 3. That redistribution shall be made on the basis of each producer’s or importer's share of the sum of all the maximum calculated quota offered to and paid for in full by those producers and importers. From 1 January 2028, the quota for which a payment has not been made by the set deadline shall be cancelled. The Commission shall be authorised not to fully allocate the maximum quantity referred to in Annex VII or allocate additional quota, as contingency for implementation issues during the allocation period. 6. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend paragraph 5 of this Article as regards the amounts due for the quota allocation and the mechanism to allocate remaining quota, in order to compensate for inflation. 7. Every year, or more often following a substantiated request by a competent authority of a Member State, the Commission shall, after consultation of relevant stakeholders, assess the impact of the quota phase-down system laid down in Annex VII on the Union’s heat pump market considering relevant factors in particular, the development of prices of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I the growth rate of heat pumps still requiring such gases, the market uptake of alternative technology and the state of the heat pump deployment rate target provided under the REPowerEU Plan. The Commission shall include the conclusions from those assessments in the relevant Annual Activity Report on Climate Action. Where the assessment demonstrates a severe shortage of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I for the deployment of heat pumps which could endanger the attainment of the REPowerEU heat pump deployment targets, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend Annex VII in order to allow the placing on the market of a quantity of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I, in addition to the quota under Annex VII, respectively up to 4 410 247 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent, per year, for the period 2025-2026 and up to 1 425 536 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent, per year, for the period 2027-2029. Where the Commission adopts a delegated act as referred to in the second subparagraph of this Article, the additional quota shall be distributed to producers and importers that have reported under Article 26, in the previous year, on heat pump use as one of the main categories of application in which the substance is used, following their request submitted via the F-gas Portal. 8. The revenue generated from the quota allocation amount shall constitute external assigned revenue in accordance with Article 21(5) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 26 ) . That revenue shall be assigned to the LIFE programme and to Heading 7 of the multiannual financial framework (European Public Administration), to cover the costs of external staff working on the management of the quota allocation, IT services, and licensing systems for the purpose of implementation of this Regulation and for ensuring compliance with the Protocol. The revenue used to cover those costs shall not exceed the maximum annual amount of EUR 3 million. Any revenue remaining after covering these costs shall be entered into the general budget of the Union. Article 18 Conditions for registration and receiving quota allocations 1. Quota shall be allocated only to producers or importers that have an establishment within the Union, or which have appointed an only representative with an establishment within the Union that assumes the full responsibility for compliance with this Regulation and with the requirements of Title II of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. The only representative may be the same as the one appointed pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. 2. Only producers and importers that have experience in trading activities of chemicals or in servicing refrigeration, air-conditioning or fire protection equipment or heat pumps for 3 consecutive years prior to the quota allocation period, may submit a declaration referred to in Article 17(3) or receive a quota allocation on that basis, pursuant to Article 17(4). The producers and importers shall submit evidence to that effect to the Commission, upon request. 3. For the purpose of registration in the F-gas Portal, producers and importers shall provide a physical address where the undertaking is located and from where it conducts its business. Only one undertaking shall be registered under the same physical address. For the purpose of submitting a quota declaration pursuant to Article 17(3) and receiving a quota allocation pursuant to Article 17(4), as well as for the purpose of determining reference values pursuant to Article 17(1), all undertakings that share the same beneficial owner shall be considered as a single undertaking. Only that single undertaking, which is the one registered first in the F-gas Portal unless indicated otherwise by the beneficial owner, shall be entitled to a reference value pursuant to Article 17(1) and to a quota allocation pursuant to Article 17(4). Article 19 Products or equipment pre-charged with hydrofluorocarbons 1. Refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment, heat pumps and metered dose inhalers pre-charged with substances listed in Section 1 of Annex I shall not be placed on the market unless those substances with which the products or equipment have been pre-charged are accounted for within the quota system referred to in this Chapter. The prohibition set out in the first subparagraph shall apply to such metered dose inhalers from 1 January 2025. 2. When placing on the market pre-charged products or equipment as referred to in paragraph 1, manufacturers and importers of products or equipment shall ensure that compliance with paragraph 1 is fully documented and shall draw up a declaration of conformity in this respect. By drawing up the declaration of conformity, manufacturers and importers of products or equipment shall assume responsibility for compliance with this paragraph and paragraph 1. Manufacturers and importers of products or equipment shall keep the documentation and the declaration of conformity for a period of at least 5 years from the placing on the market of those products or equipment and shall make them available, upon request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned or to the Commission. 3. Where hydrofluorocarbons contained in the products or equipment referred to in paragraph 1 have not been placed on the market prior to the charging of the products or equipment, importers of those products or equipment shall ensure that, by 30 April 2025 and every year thereafter, the accuracy of the documentation, the declaration of conformity and the veracity of their report pursuant to Article 26(7) is confirmed, for the preceding calendar year, at a reasonable level of assurance by an independent auditor registered in the F-gas Portal. The independent auditor shall be either: 4. The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, determine the detailed arrangements relating to the declaration of conformity referred to in paragraph 2, the verification by the independent auditor and the accreditation of auditors. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 5. An importer of products or equipment referred to in paragraph 1, which has no establishment in the Union, shall appoint an only representative with an establishment within the Union that assumes the full responsibility of complying with this Regulation. The only representative may be the same as the one appointed pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. 6. This Article shall not apply to undertakings that placed on the market less than 10 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent of hydrofluorocarbons, per year, contained in the products or equipment referred to in paragraph 1. Article 20 F-gas Portal 1. The Commission shall set up and ensure the operation of an electronic system for the management of the quota system, licensing requirements of imports and exports, and reporting obligations on fluorinated greenhouse gases (the ‘F-gas Portal’). 2. The Commission shall ensure the interconnection of the F-gas Portal with the EU Single Window Environment for Customs through the European Union Customs Single Window – Certificates Exchange System (EU CSW-CERTEX) established by Regulation (EU) 2022/2399. 3. Member States shall ensure the interconnection of their national single window environments for customs with the EU CSW-CERTEX for the purpose of exchanging information with the F-gas Portal. 4. Undertakings shall have a valid registration in the F-gas Portal prior to carrying out any of the following activities: Registration in the F-gas Portal shall be valid only once the Commission validates it and for as long as it is not suspended or revoked by the Commission or withdrawn by the undertaking. 5. A valid registration in the F-Gas Portal at the moment of import or export constitutes a licence required under Article 22. 6. The Commission shall, to the extent necessary, by means of implementing acts, clarify the rules of registration in the F-gas Portal to ensure the smooth functioning of the F-gas Portal and compatibility with the EU Single Window Environment for Customs. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 7. The competent authorities, including customs authorities, of the Member States shall have access to the F-gas Portal to enable the implementation of the relevant requirements and controls. Access to the F-gas Portal by customs authorities shall be ensured via the EU Single Window Environment for Customs. The competent authorities of Member States and the Commission shall ensure the confidentiality of the data included in the F-gas Portal. The Commission shall make publicly available, no later than 3 months after the allocation is completed for a given year, the following: 8. Any requests by producers and importers to correct the information they recorded in the F-gas Portal concerning transfers of quota referred to in Article 21(1), authorisations to use quota referred to in Article 21(2) or delegations of authorisations referred to in Article 21(3), shall be communicated, with the consent of all undertakings involved in the transaction, to the Commission without undue delay and at the latest by 31 March of the year following that of the recording of the transfer of quota or the authorisation to use quota, or the delegation of the authorisation, as appropriate. The request shall be substantiated with evidence establishing that it concerns a clerical error. Notwithstanding the first subparagraph, requests to correct data that negatively affect the entitlements of other producers and importers not involved in the underlying transaction shall be refused. Article 21 Transfer of quota and authorisation to use quota for the placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons in imported equipment 1. Any producer or importer for whom a reference value has been determined pursuant to Article 17(1) may transfer in the F-gas Portal its quota allocation on the basis of Article 17(4), for all or any quantities, to another producer or importer in the Union or to another producer or importer which is represented in the Union by an only representative referred to in Article 18(1). Quota that is transferred under the first subparagraph shall not be transferred a second time. 2. Any producer or importer for whom a reference value has been determined pursuant to Article 17(1), may authorise in the F-gas Portal an undertaking in the Union or represented in the Union by an only representative referred to in Article 19(5), to use all or part of its quota for the purpose of importing pre-charged equipment referred to in Article 19. The respective quantities of hydrofluorocarbons shall be deemed to be placed on the market by the authorising producer or importer at the moment of the authorisation. 3. Any undertaking receiving authorisations may delegate that authorisation to use quota received in accordance with paragraph 2 in the F-gas Portal to an undertaking for the purpose of importing pre-charged equipment referred to in Article 19. A delegated authorisation shall not be delegated a second time. 4. Transfers of quota, authorisations to use quota and delegations of authorisations carried out via the F-gas Portal shall only be valid if the receiving undertaking accepts it via the F-gas Portal. CHAPTER V Article 22 Imports and exports 1. The import and export of fluorinated greenhouse gases, and products and equipment containing those gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases shall be subject to the presentation of a valid licence to customs authorities issued by the Commission pursuant to Article 20(4) and (5), except in the case of temporary storage. This paragraph does not apply to products and equipment that are personal effects. 2. Fluorinated greenhouse gases imported into the Union shall be considered as virgin gases. 3. From 12 March 2025 the export of foams, technical aerosols, stationary refrigeration and stationary air-conditioning equipment and stationary heat pumps as referred to in Annex IV that contain, or whose functioning relies upon, fluorinated greenhouse gases with a GWP of 1 000 or more shall be prohibited. The prohibition set out in the first subparagraph shall not apply to military equipment or to products and equipment that can be placed on the market in the Union in accordance with Annex IV. 4. By way of derogation from paragraph 3, the Commission may, by means of implementing acts, for cases of an exceptional nature, following a substantiated request by the competent authority of the Member State concerned, and taking into account the objectives of this Regulation, authorise the export of the products and equipment referred to paragraph 3, where it is demonstrated that in view of the economic value and the expected remaining lifetime of the specific good, the prohibition of export would impose a disproportionate burden on the exporter. Such exports shall only be allowed if they are in accordance with the national law of the country of destination. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 5. Undertakings with an establishment within the Union shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the export of refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment and of heat pumps, does not violate import restrictions that the importing state has notified under the Protocol. Article 23 Trade controls 1. Customs authorities and market surveillance authorities shall enforce the prohibitions and other restrictions set out in this Regulation with regard to imports and exports. 2. For the purposes of release for free circulation, the undertaking holding quota or authorisations to use quota as required under this Regulation, and registered in the F-gas Portal pursuant to Article 20 shall be the importer indicated in the customs declaration. For the purpose of imports other than release for free circulation, the undertaking registered in the F-gas Portal pursuant to Article 20 shall be the declarant indicated in the customs declaration who is the holder of the authorisation for a special procedure other than transit, unless there is a transfer of rights and obligations pursuant to Article 218 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 to allow another person to be the declarant. In the case of transit procedure, the undertaking holding quota or authorisations to use quota as required under this Regulation shall be the holder of the procedure. For the purposes of exports, the undertaking registered in the F-gas Portal pursuant to Article 20 shall be the exporter indicated in the customs declaration. 3. In cases of imports of fluorinated greenhouse gases, and products and equipment containing those gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases, the importer or, where not available, the declarant, indicated in the customs declaration or in the temporary storage declaration, and in cases of exports the exporter indicated in the customs declaration, shall provide to customs authorities the following information, where relevant, in the customs declaration: 4. Customs authorities shall verify, in particular, whether in cases of release for free circulation the importer indicated in the customs declaration has quota or authorisations to use quota as required under this Regulation before releasing the goods for free circulation. Customs authorities shall ensure that in cases of imports the importer indicated in the customs declaration, or where not available, the declarant, and in cases of exports the exporter indicated in the customs declaration is registered in the F-gas Portal pursuant to Article 20. 5. Where relevant, customs authorities shall communicate information regarding the customs clearance of goods to the F-gas Portal via the EU Single Window Environment for Customs. 6. Importers of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I and in Section 1 of Annex II in refillable containers shall make available to customs authorities at the time when the customs declaration related to the release for free circulation is submitted a declaration of conformity as referred to in Article 11(4), including evidence confirming the arrangements in place for the return of the container for the purpose of refilling. 7. Importers of fluorinated greenhouse gases shall make available to customs authorities at the time when the customs declaration related to the release for free circulation is submitted the evidence referred to in Article 4(6). 8. The declaration of conformity and the documentation referred to in Article 19(2) shall be made available to customs authorities at the time when the customs declaration related to the release for free circulation is submitted. 9. Customs authorities shall verify compliance with the rules on imports and exports set out in this Regulation, when carrying out the controls based on risk analysis in the context of the Customs Risk Management System and in accordance with Article 46 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013. That risk analysis shall take into account, in particular, any available information on the likelihood of illegal trade in fluorinated greenhouse gases and the compliance history of the undertaking concerned. 10. Based on risk analysis, when carrying out physical customs controls on the substances, products and equipment covered by this Regulation, the customs authority shall, in particular, verify the following on imports and exports: The importer or where the importer is not available, the declarant, or the exporter, as appropriate, shall make the licence available to customs authorities during the controls in accordance with Article 15 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013. 11. Customs authorities or market surveillance authorities shall take all necessary measures to prevent attempts to import or export the substances, products and equipment covered by this Regulation that were already not allowed to enter or exit the territory. 12. Customs authorities shall confiscate or seize non-refillable containers as referred to in Article 11(3), second subparagraph, point (a), of this Regulation, that are prohibited by this Regulation for disposal by destruction in accordance with Articles 197 and 198 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 or shall inform the competent authorities in order to ensure the confiscation and seizure of such containers for disposal by destruction. Market surveillance authorities shall also withdraw or recall from the market such containers in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. In other cases, not referred to in the first subparagraph, of unlawful import, subsequent supply, or export carried out in violation of this Regulation, in particular where fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I are placed on the market in bulk or charged in products and equipment in violation of the quota and authorisation requirements set out in this Regulation, customs authorities or market surveillance authorities may take alternative measures. Such measures may include auctioning provided that the subsequent placing on the market is in accordance with this Regulation. The export of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Section 1 of Annex I for which the non-compliance has been established after their release for free circulation, shall be prohibited. 13. Member States shall designate or approve customs offices or other places and shall specify the route to those offices and places, in accordance with Articles 135 and 267 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, for the presentation to customs authorities of the fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I to, and of the products and equipment referred to in Article 19 of this Regulation, at their entry into or at their exit from the customs territory of the Union. Controls shall be carried out by customs office personnel or by other authorised persons in accordance with national rules, who are knowledgeable about matters related to the prevention of illegal activities covered by this Regulation and have access to suitable equipment to carry out the relevant physical controls based on risk analysis. Only the designated or approved customs offices or other places referred to in the first subparagraph shall be authorised to open or end a transit procedure of the gases and products or equipment covered by this Regulation. Article 24 Measures to monitor illegal trade 1. On the basis of regular monitoring of trade in fluorinated greenhouse gases and assessment of the potential risks of illegal trade linked to the movements of fluorinated greenhouse gases, and products and equipment containing those gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to: 2. When adopting a delegated act under paragraph 1, the Commission shall take into account the environmental benefits and socio-economic impacts of the methodology to be established under points (a), (b) and (c) of that paragraph. Article 25 Trade with States or regional economic integration organisations and territories not covered by the Protocol 1. Import and export of hydrofluorocarbons and of products and equipment containing hydrofluorocarbons or whose functioning relies upon those gases, from and to any State or regional economic integration organisation that has not agreed to be bound by the provisions of the Protocol applicable to those gases, shall be prohibited from 1 January 2028. 2. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to supplement this Regulation by establishing the rules applicable to the release for free circulation and export of products and equipment imported from and exported to any State or regional economic integration organisation within the meaning of paragraph 1, which were produced using hydrofluorocarbons but do not contain gases which can be positively identified as hydrofluorocarbons, as well as rules on the identification of such products and equipment. When adopting those delegating acts, the Commission shall take into account the relevant decisions taken by the Parties to the Protocol and, as regards the rules on the identification of such products and equipment, any periodic technical advice given to the Parties to the Protocol. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, trade with any State or regional economic integration organisation within the meaning of paragraph 1 in hydrofluorocarbons, and in products and equipment containing hydrofluorocarbons or whose functioning relies upon those gases or which are produced by means of one or more such gases, may be authorised by the Commission, by means of implementing acts, to the extent that the State or regional economic integration organisation is determined by a meeting of the Parties to the Protocol pursuant to Article 4(8) of the Protocol to be in full compliance with the Protocol and has submitted data to that effect as specified in Article 7 of the Protocol. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 4. Subject to any decision taken by the Parties to the Protocol, as referred to in paragraph 2, paragraph 1 shall apply to any territory not covered by the Protocol in the same way as such decisions apply to any State or regional economic integration organisation within the meaning of paragraph 1. 5. Where the authorities of a territory not covered by the Protocol are in full compliance with the Protocol and have submitted data to that effect as specified in Article 7 of the Protocol, the Commission may decide, by means of implementing acts, that some or all of the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply in respect of that territory. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). CHAPTER VI Reporting and collection of emission data Article 26 Reporting by undertakings 1. By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each producer, importer and exporter that produced, imported or exported hydrofluorocarbons or quantities exceeding one metric tonne or 100 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent of other fluorinated greenhouse gases during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year. This paragraph shall also apply to all undertakings receiving quota pursuant to Article 21(1). By 31 March 2024 and every year thereafter, each producer or importer that has been allocated quota pursuant to Article 17(4), or to whom quota has been transferred pursuant to Article 21(1), but has not placed any quantities of hydrofluorocarbons on the market during the preceding calendar year, shall report to the Commission by submitting a ‘nil-report’. 2. By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that destroyed hydrofluorocarbons or quantities of other fluorinated greenhouse gases exceeding one metric tonne or 100 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year. 3. By 31 March 2025, each undertaking that used 1 000 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more of fluorinated greenhouse gases listed in Annex I as feedstock during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year. 4. By 31 March 2025, each undertaking that placed 10 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more of hydrofluorocarbons, or 100 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more of other fluorinated greenhouse gases, contained in products or equipment on the market during the preceding calendar year shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year. 5. By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that received any quantities of hydrofluorocarbons referred to in Article 16(2) shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year. By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each producer or importer that placed on the market hydrofluorocarbons for the purpose of producing metered dose inhalers for the delivery of pharmaceutical ingredients shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX. The manufacturers of such metered dose inhalers shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on the hydrofluorocarbons received. 6. By 31 March 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking that reclaimed quantities exceeding 1 metric tonne or 100 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent of fluorinated greenhouse gases shall report to the Commission the data specified in Annex IX on each of those substances for that calendar year. 7. By 30 April 2025, each importer of equipment that placed on the market pre-charged equipment as referred to in Article 19 containing at least 1 000 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent hydrofluorocarbons, and where those hydrofluorocarbons have not been placed on the market prior to the charging of the equipment, shall submit to the Commission a verification report issued pursuant to Article 19(3). 8. By 30 April 2025 and every year thereafter, each undertaking which, under paragraph 1, reports on the placing on the market of 1 000 tonnes of CO 2 equivalent or more of hydrofluorocarbons during the preceding calendar year shall, in addition, ensure that the veracity of its report is confirmed, at a reasonable level of assurance, by an independent auditor. The auditor shall be registered in the F-gas Portal and shall be accredited: The transactions referred to in Article 16(2), point (c), shall be verified regardless of the quantities involved. The Commission may request an undertaking to ensure that the veracity of its report is confirmed by an independent auditor at a reasonable level of assurance, regardless of the quantities involved, where it is needed to confirm that undertaking’s compliance with this Regulation. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, specify the details of the verification of reports and of the accreditation of auditors. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). 9. All reporting and verification referred to in this Article shall be carried out via the F-gas Portal. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, determine the format of submitting the reports referred to in this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(2). Article 27 Collection of emissions data Member States shall establish reporting systems for the relevant sectors referred to in this Regulation, with the objective of acquiring emissions data. Member States shall, where appropriate, enable the recording of the information collected in accordance with Article 7 via a centralised electronic system. The Commission may provide guidance for the design of the centralised electronic system by Member States. CHAPTER VII Enforcement Article 28 Cooperation and exchange of information 1. Where required to ensure compliance with this Regulation, the competent authorities of each Member State, including customs authorities, market surveillance authorities, environmental authorities and any other competent authority with inspection functions, shall cooperate with each other, with the competent authorities of other Member States, with the Commission and, if necessary, with administrative authorities of third countries. Where cooperation with customs authorities is needed to ensure a proper implementation of the Customs Risk Management System, competent authorities of Member States shall provide all necessary information to customs authorities in accordance with Article 47(2) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013. 2. Where the customs authorities, the market surveillance authorities or any other competent authority of a Member State detect an infringement of this Regulation, that competent authority shall notify the environmental authority or, if not relevant, any other authority responsible for the enforcement of penalties in accordance with Article 31. 3. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities are able to efficiently have access to and exchange between them any information necessary for the enforcement of this Regulation. Such information shall include customs related data, information on ownership and financial status, any violation of environmental law, as well as data recorded in the F-gas Portal. The information referred to in the first subparagraph shall also be made available to competent authorities of other Member States and to the Commission when needed to ensure the enforcement of this Regulation. Competent authorities shall immediately inform the Commission of infringements of Article 16(1). 4. Competent authorities shall alert competent authorities of other Member States when they detect an infringement of this Regulation that may affect more than one Member State. Competent authorities shall, in particular, inform competent authorities of other Member States when they detect a relevant product on the market that does not comply with this Regulation, to enable that it is seized, confiscated, withdrawn or recalled from the market for disposal. The Customs Risk Management System shall be used for the exchange of customs risk-related information. Customs authorities shall also exchange any relevant information related to infringements of this Regulation in accordance with Council Regulation (EC) No 515/97 ( 28 ) and shall request assistance from the other Member States and the Commission where necessary. Article 29 Obligation to carry out checks 1. The competent authorities of Member States shall carry out checks to establish whether undertakings comply with their obligations under this Regulation. 2. The checks shall be carried out following a risk-based approach, which takes into consideration, in particular, the history of compliance of undertakings, the risk of non-compliance of a specific product with this Regulation, and any other relevant information received from the Commission, customs authorities, market surveillance authorities, environmental authorities and other authorities with inspection functions of the Member States, or from competent authorities of third countries. The competent authorities of Member States shall also carry out checks when they are in possession of evidence or other relevant information, including based on substantiated concerns provided by third parties or the Commission, concerning potential non-compliance with this Regulation. 3. The checks referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall include: Without prejudice to Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 29 ) , where an online platform, falling within the scope of Chapter III, Section 4, of that Regulation, allows distance contracts to be concluded with undertakings offering fluorinated greenhouse gases or products and equipment that contain such gases, competent authorities of Member States shall verify whether the undertaking, the fluorinated greenhouse gases, the products or the equipment offered comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation. Competent authorities of Member States shall inform and cooperate with the Commission and with the relevant competent authorities referred to in Article 49 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 for the purpose of ensuring compliance with that Regulation. Checks shall be carried out without prior warning given to the undertaking, except where prior notification is necessary in order to ensure the effectiveness of the checks. Member States shall ensure that undertakings provide the competent authorities with all necessary assistance to enable those authorities to carry out the checks provided for in this Article. 4. The competent authorities of Member States shall keep records of the checks, indicating in particular their nature and results, and of the measures taken in the event of non-compliance. Records of all checks shall be kept for at least 5 years. 5. At the request of another Member State, a Member State may carry out checks or other formal investigations of undertakings suspected of being engaged in the illegal movement of gases, products or equipment covered by this Regulation and which are operating on the territory of that Member State. The requesting Member State shall be informed about the result of the check or of the investigation. 6. In carrying out the tasks assigned to it by this Regulation, the Commission may request all necessary information from competent authorities of Member States and from undertakings. When requesting information from an undertaking, the Commission shall at the same time forward a copy of the request to the competent authority of the Member State within the territory of which the undertaking’s seat is situated. 7. The Commission shall take appropriate steps to promote an adequate exchange of information and cooperation between competent authorities of Member States and between those competent authorities and the Commission. The Commission shall take appropriate steps to protect the confidentiality of information obtained under this Article. Article 30 Reporting of breaches and protection of persons reporting such breaches Directive (EU) 2019/1937 shall apply to the reporting of breaches of this Regulation and the protection of persons reporting such breaches. CHAPTER VIII Penalties, Consultation Forum, committee procedure and exercise of the delegation Article 31 Penalties 1. Without prejudice to the obligations of Member States under Directive 2008/99/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 30 ) , Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties applicable to infringements of this Regulation and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that those penalties are implemented. Before 1 January 2026, Member States shall notify the Commission of those rules and of those measures and shall notify it, without delay, of any subsequent amendment affecting them. 2. The penalties shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive, and shall be determined while having due regard to the following, as applicable: 3. The penalties shall include: 4. Administrative financial penalties referred to in paragraph 3, point (a), shall be proportionate to the environmental damage, where applicable, and effectively deprive those responsible of the economic benefits derived from their infringements. The level of administrative financial penalties shall gradually increase for repeated infringements. In the case of unlawful production, import, export, placing on the market or use of fluorinated greenhouse gases, or of products and equipment containing those gases or whose functioning relies upon those gases, the maximum amount of the administrative financial penalty shall be at least five times the market value of the gases or products and equipment concerned. Where such infringements are repeated within a five-year period, the maximum amount of the administrative financial penalty shall be at least eight times the market value of the gases or products and equipment concerned. 5. In addition to the penalties referred to in paragraph 1, undertakings that have exceeded their quota for placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market, allocated in accordance with Article 17(4), or transferred to them in accordance with Article 21(1), may only be allocated a reduced quota allocation for the allocation period after the excess has been detected. The amount of reduction shall be calculated as 200 % of the amount by which the quota was exceeded. If the amount of the reduction is higher than the amount to be allocated in accordance with Article 17(4) as a quota for the allocation period after the excess has been detected, no quota shall be allocated for that allocation period and the quota for the following allocation periods shall be reduced likewise until the full amount has been deducted. The reductions shall be recorded in the F-gas Portal. Article 32 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 8(12), Article 12(18), Article 16(3), Article 17(6), Article 24(1), Article 25(2), Article 35(1) and Article 35(2) shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from 11 March 2024. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 8(12), Article 12(18), Article 16 (3), Article 17(6), Article 24(1), Article 25(2), Article 35(1) and Article 35(2) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making. 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 8(12), Article 12(18), Article 16(3), Article 17(6), Article 24(1), Article 25(2), Article 35(1) and Article 35(2) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 33 Consultation Forum The Commission shall establish a Consultation Forum for providing advice and expertise in relation to the implementation of this Regulation. The rules of procedure of the Consultation Forum shall be established by the Commission and shall be published. The Consultation Forum shall, where relevant, involve the European Medicines Agency. Article 34 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee on fluorinated greenhouse gases. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. CHAPTER IX Transitional and final provisions Article 35 Review 1. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend Annexes I, II, III and VI as regards the global warming potential of the gases listed therein, where it is necessary in the light of new Assessment Reports adopted by the IPCC or new reports of the Scientific Assessment Panel (SAP) of the Protocol. 2. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 32 to amend the lists of gases in Annexes I, II and III, where it has been found by the SAP or by another authority of equivalent stature that such gases have a significant impact on the climate and where such gases are exported, imported, produced or placed on the market in significant quantities. 3. By 1 July 2027, the Commission shall publish a report assessing whether cost-effective, technically feasible, energy-efficient and reliable alternatives exist, which make the replacement of fluorinated greenhouse gases possible in mobile refrigeration and mobile air-conditioning equipment, and where appropriate, put forward a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council to amend the list set out in Annex IV. 4. By 1 July 2028, the Commission shall publish a report assessing the impact of this Regulation on the health sector, particularly the availability of metered dose inhalers for the delivery of pharmaceutical ingredients, as well as the impact on the market of cooling equipment used in conjunction with batteries. 5. By 1 January 2030, the Commission shall publish a report on the effects of this Regulation. The report shall include an evaluation of the following: The Commission shall submit, if appropriate, a legislative proposal, which may include amendments to Annex IV, to the European Parliament and Council. 6. Before 1 January 2040, the Commission shall review the needs for hydrofluorocarbons in the sectors where they are still used and the phase-out of HFC quota set out in Annex VII for the year 2050, in particular, taking into account technological developments, the availability of alternatives to hydrofluorocarbons for the relevant applications and the Union’s climate targets. Where appropriate, the review shall be accompanied by a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and Council. 7. The European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change, established under Article 10a of Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 31 ) , may, on its own initiative, provide scientific advice and issue reports on the coherence of this Regulation with the objectives of Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 and the Union’s international commitments under the Paris Agreement. Article 36 Amendment to Directive (EU) 2019/1937 In Part I, Section E, point 2, of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/1937, the following point is added: Article 37 Repeal and transitional provisions 1. Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 is repealed. 2. Article 12 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 as applicable on 10 March 2024 shall continue to apply until 31 December 2024. 3. Article 14(2), second subparagraph, and Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 as applicable on 10 March 2024 shall continue to apply with regard to the reporting period from 1 January 2023 to 31 December 2023. 4. The quota allocated in accordance with Article 16(5) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 shall remain valid for the purpose of compliance with this Regulation. The exemption of hydrofluorocarbons referred to in Article 15(2), second subparagraph, point (f), of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 shall apply until 31 December 2024. 5. Article 38 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 12 and Article 17(5) shall apply from 1 January 2025. Article 20(2), Article 20(3) and Article 23(5) shall apply from 3 March 2025 for release for free circulation referred to in Article 201 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 and for all other import procedures and for export. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 7 February 2024. For the European Parliament The President R. METSOLA For the Council The President H. LAHBIB ( 1 ) OJ C 365, 23.9.2022, p. 44 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 16 January 2024 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 23 January 2024. ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) ( OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Decision (EU) 2022/591 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 April 2022 on a General Union Environment Action Programme to 2030 ( OJ L 114, 12.4.2022, p. 22 ). ( 5 ) OJ L 282, 19.10.2016, p. 4 . ( 6 ) Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on fluorinated greenhouse gases and repealing Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 ( OJ L 150, 20.5.2014, p. 195 ). ( 7 ) Council Decision (EU) 2017/1541 of 17 July 2017 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer ( OJ L 236, 14.9.2017, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) ( OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38 ). ( 10 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2018 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Union Aviation Safety Agency, and amending Regulations (EC) No 2111/2005, (EC) No 1008/2008, (EU) No 996/2010, (EU) No 376/2014 and Directives 2014/30/EU and 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 552/2004 and (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91 ( OJ L 212, 22.8.2018, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products ( OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on substances that deplete the ozone layer ( OJ L 286, 31.10.2009, p. 1 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) 2022/2399 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 November 2022 establishing the European Union Single Window Environment for Customs and amending Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 ( OJ L 317, 9.12.2022, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises ( OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36 ). ( 15 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1 ). ( 16 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on market surveillance and compliance of products and amending Directive 2004/42/EC and Regulations (EC) No 765/2008 and (EU) No 305/2011 ( OJ L 169, 25.6.2019, p. 1 ). ( 17 ) Commission Decision 1999/352/EC, ECSC, Euratom of 28 April 1999 establishing the European Anti-fraud Office (OLAF) ( OJ L 136, 31.5.1999, p. 20 ). ( 18 ) Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1 ). ( 19 ) Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2019 on the protection of persons who report breaches of Union law ( OJ L 305, 26.11.2019, p. 17 ). ( 20 ) OJ L 124, 17.5.2005, p. 4 . ( 21 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ( 22 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ( 23 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) ( OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1 ). ( 24 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC ( OJ L 295, 21.11.2018, p. 39 ). ( 25 ) Directive 2006/40/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 relating to emissions from air conditioning systems in motor vehicles and amending Council Directive 70/156/EEC ( OJ L 161, 14.6.2006, p. 12 ). ( 26 ) Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 July 2018 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union, amending Regulations (EU) No 1296/2013, (EU) No 1301/2013, (EU) No 1303/2013, (EU) No 1304/2013, (EU) No 1309/2013, (EU) No 1316/2013, (EU) No 223/2014, (EU) No 283/2014, and Decision No 541/2014/EU and repealing Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 ( OJ L 193, 30.7.2018, p. 1 ). ( 27 ) Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC ( OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 ). ( 28 ) Council Regulation (EC) No 515/97 of 13 March 1997 on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on customs and agricultural matters ( OJ L 82, 22.3.1997, p. 1 ). ( 29 ) Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 October 2022 on a Single Market For Digital Services and amending Directive 2000/31/EC (Digital Services Act) ( OJ L 277, 27.10.2022, p. 1 ). ( 30 ) Directive 2008/99/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on the protection of the environment through criminal law ( OJ L 328, 6.12.2008, p. 28 ). ( 31 ) Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the European Environment Agency and the European Environment Information and Observation Network ( OJ L 126, 21.5.2009, p. 13 ). ANNEX I FLUORINATED GREENHOUSE GASES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 2, POINT (A) ( 1 ) – HYDROFLUOROCARBONS, PERFLUOROCARBONS AND OTHER FLUORINATED COMPOUNDS ( 1 ) As per Article 2, point (a), mixtures containing the substances listed in this Annex are considered as fluorinated greenhouse gases covered by this Regulation. ( 2 ) Based on the Fourth Assessment Report adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, unless otherwise indicated. ( 3 ) Based on the Sixth Assessment Report adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, unless otherwise indicated. ( 4 ) Based on the Sixth Assessment Report adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, unless otherwise indicated. ( 5 ) Droste et al. (2019). Trends and Emissions of Six Perfluorocarbons in the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics. ( *1 ) Global warming potential not yet available. ANNEX II Fluorinated greenhouse gases referred to in Article 2, point (a) ( 1 ) – unsaturated hydro(chloro)fluorocarbons, fluorinated substances used as inhalation anaesthetics and other fluorinated substances ( 1 ) As per Article 2, point (a), mixtures containing the substances listed in this Annex are considered as fluorinated greenhouse gases covered by this Regulation. ( 2 ) Based on the Sixth Assessment Report adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, unless otherwise indicated. ( 3 ) Tokuhashi, K., T. Uchimaru, K. Takizawa, & S. Kondo (2018): Rate Constants for the Reactions of OH Radical with the (E)/(Z) Isomers of CF 3 CF=CHCl and CHF 2 CF=CHCl. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 122:3120–3127. ( *1 ) Global warming potential not yet available. ( 4 ) Default value, global warming potential not yet available. ANNEX III Fluorinated greenhouse gases referred to in Article 2, point (a) ( 1 ) – fluorinated ethers, ketones and alcohols and other fluorinated compounds ( 1 ) As per Article 2, point (a), mixtures containing the substances listed in this Annex are considered as fluorinated greenhouse gases covered by this Regulation. ( 2 ) Based on the Sixth Assessment Report adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, unless otherwise indicated. ( 3 ) Ren et al. (2019). Atmospheric Fate and Impact of Perfluorinated Butanone and Pentanone. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019, 53, 15, 8862–8871 ( *1 ) Not yet available. ( 4 ) WMO et al. (2018). Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion. ( 5 ) REACH registration dossier. ANNEX IV Placing on the market prohibitions referred to in Article 11(1) Point 1 applies to non-refillable containers, namely: ( 1 ) For the purpose of this Regulation, fixed double duct heat pump and air-conditioning equipment shall be considered split (category number 9) and be subject to the same requirements. ANNEX V Production rights for placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market The production rights for hydrofluorocarbons, expressed in tonnes of CO 2 equivalents, referred to in Article 14(3) for each producer are calculated as follows: ANNEX VI Method of calculating the GWP referred to in Article 3, point (1), of a mixture The GWP of a mixture is calculated as a weighted average, derived from the sum of the weight fractions of the individual substances multiplied by their GWP, unless otherwise specified, including substances that are not fluorinated greenhouse gases. Σ (Substance × % × GWP) + (Substance Y % × GWP) + … (Substance N % × GWP), where % is the contribution by weight with a weight tolerance of +/– 1 %. For example: applying the formula to a mixture of gases consisting of 60 % dimethyl ether, 10 % HFC-152a and 30 % isobutane: The GWP of the following non-fluorinated substances are used to calculate the GWP of mixtures. For other substances not listed in this annex a default value of 0 applies. Only emissible components that fulfil broadly the same function are relevant for the calculation of the GWP. ( 1 ) Based on the Sixth Assessment Report adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, unless otherwise indicated. ( 2 ) Based on the Fourth Assessment Report adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. ( 3 ) WMO et al. (2018). Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, where value is given as <<1. ( 4 ) WMO et al. (2018). Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion. ANNEX VII Maximum quantities and calculation of reference values and quota for placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market referred to in Article 17 The 2015 base-value for the maximum quantity is set to be: 176 700 479 tonnes CO 2 equivalent. Reference values and quota for placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market referred to in Articles 16 and 17 shall be calculated as the aggregated quantities of all hydrofluorocarbons, expressed in tonne(s) of CO 2 equivalent rounded to the nearest tonne. ANNEX VIII Allocation mechanism referred to in Article 17 Each undertaking for which reference values have been established receives a quota, which is calculated as follows: Where, after allocating the full amount of quota as referred to in the second subparagraph, the maximum quantity is exceeded, all quota will be reduced proportionally. The total sum of the quota allocated under point 1 is subtracted from the maximum quantity for the given year set out in Annex VII to determine the reserve amount to be allocated to undertakings, which have submitted a declaration under Article 17(3). Each undertaking receives an allocation corresponding to a pro-rata share of the reserve. The pro-rata share is calculated by dividing 100 by the number of undertakings that have submitted a declaration. Penalties established in accordance with Article 31 are taken into account in the calculations referred to above. ( 1 ) This number is the maximum quantity established for 2015 at the beginning of the phase-down, taking into account the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union. ANNEX IX Data to be reported pursuant to Article 26 Each exporter referred to in Article 26(1), first subparagraph, shall report on the quantities of each substance listed in Annexes I, II and III that it has exported from the Union, specifying whether from own production or import or whether purchased from other undertakings within the Union, including the amounts of hydrofluorocarbons contained in pre-blended polyols. Each undertaking referred to in Article 26(3) shall report on the quantities of each substance listed in Annex I used as feedstock. The manufacturer of metered dose inhalers for the delivery of pharmaceutical ingredients shall report on the type of hydrofluorocarbons and the quantities used. ANNEX X Correlation Table ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)