COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2017/2374 of 15 December 2017 setting out conditions for movement, storage and processing of certain fruits and their hybrids originating in third countries to prevent the introduction into the Union of certain harmful organisms (notified under document C(2017) 8395) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community ( 1 ) , and in particular points 16.2(e) and 16.4(e) of Section I of Part A of Annex IV thereto, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Subject matter This Decision lays down conditions for the movement, storage and processing of fruits of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf., Microcitrus Swingle, Naringi Adans. and Swinglea Merr. and their hybrids, originating in third countries for the purposes of points 16.2(e) and 16.4(e) of Section I of Part A of Annex IV to Directive 2000/29/EC. Article 2 Definitions For the purpose of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 Movement of the specified fruits within the Union 1. The specified fruits may only be moved within the Union if the importer has notified details of each container to the responsible official body in the Member State in which the point of entry is situated and, where applicable, to the responsible official body of the Member State where the industrial processing will take place. That notification shall include the following information: 2. The importers shall inform the responsible official bodies referred to in paragraph 1 of any changes to the information included in that notification, as soon as they are known. 3. Specified fruits may only be moved to a Member State, other than the Member State through which they have been introduced into the Union, if the responsible official bodies of the Member States concerned agree that such movement may take place. 4. The specified fruits shall be directly and without delay transported into the processing premises referred to in Article 4 or to a storage facility as referred to in Article 5. Movements of the specified fruits shall be under the supervision of the responsible official body of the Member State where that movement is taking place. 5. The Member States concerned with the movements shall cooperate to ensure that this Article is complied with. Article 4 Requirements concerning industrial processing of the specified fruits 1. The specified fruits shall be processed at premises situated in an area where no specified fruit is produced. The premises shall be officially registered and approved for that purpose by the responsible official body of the Member State in which the premises are situated. 2. Waste and by-products of the specified fruits shall be used or destroyed in an area where no specified fruit is produced, located within the Member State where those fruits have been processed. 3. The waste and by-products shall be destroyed by any technically justified method approved by the responsible official body of the Member State where the specified fruits have been processed and under the supervision of that official body, in a way to prevent any potential risk for spreading the specified organisms. 4. The processors shall keep records for at least 3 years of the processed specified fruits and make them available on request to the responsible official body of the Member State where the processing takes place. Those records shall indicate the numbers and distinguishing marks of containers, the volumes of the specified fruits received and the volumes and other detailed information on the use or destruction of waste and by-products. Article 5 Requirements concerning storage of the specified fruits 1. Where the specified fruits are not processed immediately, they shall be stored at a facility registered and approved for that purpose by the responsible official body of the Member State where the facility is situated. 2. The batches of the specified fruits shall remain separately identifiable. 3. The specified fruits shall be stored in a way which prevents any potential risk of spreading of the specified organisms. Article 6 Date of application This Decision shall apply from 1 January 2018. Article 7 Addressees This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 15 December 2017. For the Commission Vytenis ANDRIUKAITIS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Directive (EU) 2017/1279 of 14 July 2017 amending Annexes I to V to Council Directive 2000/29/EC on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community ( OJ L 184, 15.7.2017, p. 33 ).