REGULATION (EU) 2020/740 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 25 May 2020 on the labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency and other parameters, amending Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1222/2009 THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 114 and Article 194(2) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , After consulting the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes a framework for the provision of harmonised information on tyre parameters through labelling to allow end-users to make an informed choice when purchasing tyres, for the purpose of increasing safety, the protection of health, and the economic and environmental efficiency of road transport, by promoting fuel‐efficient, long‐lasting and safe tyres with low noise levels. Article 2 1. This Regulation applies to C1 tyres, C2 tyres and C3 tyres that are placed on the market. Requirements for re‐treaded tyres apply once a suitable testing method to measure the performance of such tyres is available in accordance with Article 13. 2. This Regulation does not apply to: Article 3 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: Article 4 Obligations of tyre suppliers 1. Suppliers shall ensure that C1 tyres, C2 tyres and C3 tyres that are placed on the market are accompanied free of charge: 2. For tyres sold or offered for sale by distance selling, suppliers shall ensure that the tyre label is displayed close to the price indication and that the product information sheet can be accessed, including, upon request from the end-user, in printed form. The size of the tyre label shall be such that it is clearly visible and legible and shall be proportionate to the size specified in point 2.1 of Annex II. For tyres sold or offered for sale on the internet, suppliers may make the tyre label for a specific tyre type available in a nested display. 3. Suppliers shall ensure that any visual advertisement for a specific tyre type shows the tyre label. If the visual advertisement indicates the price of that tyre type, the tyre label shall be displayed close to the price indication. For visual advertisements on the internet, suppliers may make the tyre label available in a nested display. 4. Suppliers shall ensure that any technical promotional material concerning a specific tyre type displays the tyre label of that tyre type and includes the information set out in Annex IV. 5. Suppliers shall provide to a relevant national authority as defined in point (37) of Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2018/858 the values used to determine the related classes and any additional performance information that the supplier declares on the tyre label of tyre types in accordance with Annex I to this Regulation, as well as the tyre label that complies with the requirements set out in Annex II to this Regulation. That information shall be submitted to the relevant national authority on the basis of Article 5(1) and (2) of this Regulation before the placing on the market of the tyre types in question, so that the authority may verify the accuracy of the tyre label. 6. Suppliers shall ensure the accuracy of the tyre labels and product information sheets that they provide. 7. Suppliers may make technical documentation available to the authorities of Member States other than those authorities indicated in paragraph 5 or to relevant national accredited bodies on request. 8. Suppliers shall cooperate with market surveillance authorities and shall take immediate action to remedy any case of non‐compliance with this Regulation for which they are responsible, at their own initiative or when required to do so by market surveillance authorities. 9. Suppliers shall not provide or display other labels, marks, symbols or inscriptions that do not comply with this Regulation and that would be likely to mislead or confuse end-users with respect to the parameters set out in Annex I. 10. Suppliers shall not provide or display labels that mimic the tyre label provided for under this Regulation. Article 5 Obligations of tyre suppliers in relation to the product database 1. From 1 May 2021, suppliers shall enter the information set out in Annex VII into the product database before placing on the market a tyre produced after that date. 2. For tyres that are produced between 25 June 2020 and 30 April 2021, the supplier shall enter the information set out in Annex VII into the product database by 30 November 2021. 3. For tyres that are placed on the market before 25 June 2020, the supplier may enter the information set out in Annex VII into the product database. 4. Until the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been entered into the product database, the supplier shall make an electronic version of the technical documentation available for inspection within 10 working days of receiving a request from a market surveillance authority. 5. Where type‐approval authorities or market surveillance authorities need information other than that set out in Annex VII in order to carry out their tasks under this Regulation, the supplier shall provide them with that information on request. 6. A tyre for which changes are made that are relevant for the tyre label or the product information sheet shall be considered to be a new tyre type. The supplier shall indicate in the product database when it has ceased to place on the market units of a certain tyre type. 7. After the final unit of a tyre type has been placed on the market, the supplier shall keep the information concerning that tyre type in the compliance part of the product database for a period of five years. Article 6 Obligations of tyre distributors 1. Distributors shall ensure that: 2. Distributors shall ensure that any visual advertisement for a specific tyre type shows the tyre label. If the visual advertisement indicates the price of that tyre type, the tyre label shall be displayed close to the price indication. For visual advertisements on the internet for a specific tyre type, distributors may make the tyre label available in a nested display. 3. Distributors shall ensure that any technical promotional material concerning a specific tyre type displays the tyre label and includes the information set out in Annex IV. 4. Distributors shall ensure that where tyres offered for sale are not visible to the end-user at the time of sale, they provide the end-user with a copy of the tyre label before the sale. 5. Distributors shall ensure that any paper‐based distance selling shows the tyre label and that end-users can access the product information sheet through a free access website, and can request a printed copy of the product information sheet. 6. Distributors that use telemarketing‐based distance selling shall inform end-users of the classes for each of the parameters on the tyre label, and inform end-users that they can access the tyre label and the product information sheet through a free access website, and by requesting a printed copy. 7. For tyres sold or offered for sale on the internet, distributors shall ensure that the tyre label is displayed close to the price indication and that the product information sheet can be accessed. The size of the tyre label shall be such that it is clearly visible and legible and shall be proportionate to the size specified in point 2.1 of Annex II. Distributors may make the tyre label for a specific tyre type available in a nested display. Article 7 Obligations of vehicle suppliers and vehicle distributors Where end-users intend to acquire a new vehicle, vehicle suppliers and vehicle distributors shall provide, before the sale, those end-users with the tyre label for the tyres offered with or fitted on the vehicle and any relevant technical promotional material, and shall ensure that the product information sheet is available. Article 8 Obligations of hosting service providers Where a service provider as referred to in Article 14 of Directive 2000/31/EC allows the selling of tyres through its internet site, that service provider shall enable the display of the tyre label and the product information sheet provided by the supplier close to the price indication and shall inform the distributor of the obligation to display the tyre label and the product information sheet. Article 9 Testing and measurement methods The information to be provided under Articles 4, 6 and 7 on the parameters indicated on the tyre label shall be obtained in accordance with the testing methods referred to in Annex I and the laboratory alignment procedure referred to in Annex V. Article 10 Verification procedure For each of the parameters set out in Annex I, Member States shall apply the verification procedure set out in Annex VI when assessing the conformity of the declared classes with this Regulation. Article 11 Obligations of Member States 1. Member States shall not impede the placing on the market or putting into service of tyres within their territories, where such tyres comply with this Regulation. 2. Where Member States provide incentives with regard to tyres, such incentives shall target only tyres in class A or B with respect to rolling resistance or wet grip within the meaning of Parts A and B of Annex I, respectively. Taxation and fiscal measures shall not constitute incentives for the purposes of this Regulation. 3. Without prejudice to Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, where the relevant national authority as defined in point (37) of Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2018/858 has sufficient reason to believe that a supplier has not ensured the accuracy of the tyre label in accordance with Article 4(6) of this Regulation, it shall verify that the classes and any additional performance information declared on the tyre label correspond to the values and to the documentation submitted by the supplier, in accordance with Article 4(5) of this Regulation. 4. In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, Member States shall ensure that the national market surveillance authorities establish a system of routine and ad hoc inspections of points of sale for the purposes of ensuring compliance with this Regulation. 5. Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties and enforcement mechanisms applicable to infringements of this Regulation and of the delegated acts adopted pursuant thereto, and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall, by 1 May 2021, notify the Commission of those rules and of those measures that have not previously been notified to the Commission, and shall notify it, without delay, of any subsequent amendment affecting them. Article 12 Union market surveillance and control of products entering the Union market 1. Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply to the tyres covered by this Regulation and the relevant delegated acts adopted pursuant thereto. 2. The Commission shall encourage and support cooperation and the exchange of information on market surveillance relating to the labelling of tyres between the authorities of the Member States that are responsible for market surveillance or are in charge of the control of tyres entering the Union market, and between those authorities and the Commission, in particular by involving the Administrative Cooperation Group for the Labelling of Tyres more closely. 3. Member States’ national market surveillance strategies established pursuant to Article 13 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall include actions to ensure the effective enforcement of this Regulation. 4. Market surveillance authorities may recover the costs of document inspection and physical product testing from the supplier in cases of non‐compliance by the supplier with this Regulation or the relevant delegated acts adopted pursuant thereto. Article 13 Delegated acts 1. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 14 in order to amend: 2. By 26 June 2022, the Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 14 in order to supplement this Regulation by introducing new information requirements for re‐treaded tyres in the Annexes, provided that a suitable testing method is available. 3. The Commission is also empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 14 in order to include parameters or information requirements for tyre abrasion and mileage, as soon as reliable, accurate and reproducible methods to test and measure tyre abrasion and mileage are available for use by European or international standardisation organisations and provided that the following conditions are met: 4. Where appropriate, when preparing delegated acts, the Commission shall test the content and format of tyre labels with representative groups of Union customers to ensure that the tyre labels are clearly understandable, and shall publish the results. Article 14 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 13 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 25 June 2020. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five‐year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 13 may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law‐Making. 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 13 shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 15 Evaluation and report By 1 June 2025, the Commission shall carry out an evaluation of this Regulation and submit a report to the European Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee. That report shall assess how effectively this Regulation and the delegated acts adopted pursuant thereto have led end-users to choose higher‐performing tyres, taking into account the impact of this Regulation and the delegated acts adopted pursuant thereto on business, fuel consumption, safety, greenhouse gas emissions, consumer awareness and market surveillance activities. The report shall also assess the costs and benefits of mandatory independent third‐party verification of the information provided in the tyre label, taking into account experience gained with regard to the broader framework provided by Regulation (EC) No 661/2009. Article 16 Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 In Article 12(2) of Regulation (EU) 2017/1369, point (a) is replaced by the following: Article 17 Repeal of Regulation (EC) No 1222/2009 Regulation (EC) No 1222/2009 is repealed with effect from 1 May 2021. Article 18 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 1 May 2021. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 25 May 2020. For the European Parliament The President D. M. SASSOLI For the Council The President A. METELKO-ZGOMBIĆ ( 1 ) OJ C 62, 15.2.2019, p. 280 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 26 March 2019 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and position of the Council at first reading of 25 February 2020 ( OJ C 105, 31.3.2020, p. 1 ). Position of the European Parliament of 13 May 2020 (not yet published in the Official Journal). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 1222/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency and other essential parameters ( OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 46 ). ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles, their trailers and systems, components and separate technical units intended therefor ( OJ L 200, 31.7.2009, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise ( OJ L 189, 18.7.2002, p. 12 ). ( 6 ) Regulation No 117 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UNECE) – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of tyres with regard to rolling sound emissions and/or to adhesion on wet surfaces and/or to rolling resistance [2016/1350] ( OJ L 218, 12.8.2016, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2017 setting a framework for energy labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU ( OJ L 198, 28.7.2017, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 June 2018 on the monitoring and reporting of CO 2 emissions from and fuel consumption of new heavy-duty vehicles ( OJ L 173, 9.7.2018, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1242 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 setting CO 2 emission performance standards for new heavy-duty vehicles and amending Regulations (EC) No 595/2009 and (EU) 2018/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Directive 96/53/EC ( OJ L 198, 25.7.2019, p. 202 ). ( 10 ) Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (Directive on electronic commerce) ( OJ L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the approval and market surveillance of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No 595/2009 and repealing Directive 2007/46/EC ( OJ L 151, 14.6.2018, p. 1 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on market surveillance and compliance of products and amending Directive 2004/42/EC and Regulations (EC) No 765/2008 and (EU) No 305/2011 ( OJ L 169, 25.6.2019, p. 1 ). ( 13 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ANNEX I TESTING, GRADING AND MEASUREMENT OF TYRE PARAMETERS Part A: Fuel efficiency classes and rolling resistance coefficient The fuel efficiency class shall be determined and illustrated on the tyre label on the basis of the rolling resistance coefficient ( RRC in N/kN) according to the ‘A’ to ‘E’ scale specified in the table below and measured in accordance with Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117 and aligned in accordance with the laboratory alignment procedure set out in Annex V. If a tyre type belongs to more than one tyre class (e.g. C1 and C2), the grading scale used to determine the fuel efficiency class of that tyre type shall be that which is applicable to the highest tyre class (e.g. C2, not C1). Part B: Wet grip classes Part C: External rolling noise classes and measured value The external rolling noise measured value ( N , in dB(A)) shall be declared in decibels and calculated in accordance with Annex 3 to UNECE Regulation No 117. The external rolling noise class shall be determined and illustrated on the tyre label on the basis of the limit values ( LV ) set out in Part C of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 661/2009 as follows: Part D: Snow grip The snow grip performance shall be tested in accordance with Annex 7 to UNECE Regulation No 117. A tyre which satisfies the minimum snow grip index values set out in UNECE Regulation No 117 shall be classified as a tyre for use in severe snow conditions and the following pictogram shall be included on the tyre label. Part E: Ice grip The ice grip performance shall be tested in accordance with reliable, accurate and reproducible methods, including, where appropriate, international standards, which take into account the generally recognised state of the art. The tyre label of a tyre which satisfies the relevant minimum ice grip index values shall include the following pictogram. ANNEX II CONTENT AND FORMAT OF THE TYRE LABEL Content of the tyre label Format of the tyre label 2.1.1. 2.1.2. 2.1.3. 2.1.4. ( 1 ) Regulation No 30 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UN/ECE) – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of pneumatic tyres for motor vehicles and their trailers ( OJ L 201, 30.7.2008, p. 70 ). ( 2 ) Regulation No 54 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UNECE) – Uniform provisions concerning the approval of pneumatic tyres for commercial vehicles and their trailers ( OJ L 183, 11.7.2008, p. 41 ). ANNEX III PRODUCT INFORMATION SHEET The information in the product information sheet of tyres shall be included in the product brochure or other literature provided with the tyre and shall include the following: ANNEX IV INFORMATION PROVIDED IN TECHNICAL PROMOTIONAL MATERIAL Suppliers and distributors shall also, where relevant, make available on their websites a statement highlighting the fact that ice grip tyres are specifically designed for road surfaces covered with ice and compact snow, and should only be used in very severe climate conditions (e.g. cold temperatures) and that using ice grip tyres in less severe climate conditions (e.g. wet conditions or warmer temperatures) could result in sub‐optimal performance, in particular for wet grip, handling and wear. ANNEX V LABORATORY ALIGNMENT PROCEDURE FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF ROLLING RESISTANCE 1. Definitions For the purposes of the laboratory alignment procedure for the measurement of rolling resistance, the following definitions apply: 2. General provisions 2.1. Principle The measured ( m ) rolling resistance coefficient obtained in a reference laboratory ( l ), ( RRC m,l ), shall be aligned to the assigned values of the network of reference laboratories. The measured ( m ) rolling resistance coefficient obtained by a machine in a candidate laboratory ( c ), ( RRC m,c ), shall be aligned through one reference laboratory of the network of its choice. 2.2. Tyre selection requirements Alignment tyre sets shall be selected for the laboratory alignment procedure in accordance with the following criteria. One alignment tyre set shall be selected for C1 tyres and C2 tyres together, and one set for C3 tyres: Each alignment tyre shall be checked prior to use and shall be replaced when: 2.3. Measurement method The reference laboratory shall measure each alignment tyre four times and retain the three last results for further analysis, in accordance with paragraph 4 of Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117 and under the conditions set out in paragraph 3 of Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117. The candidate laboratory shall measure each alignment tyre ( n + 1) times, with n being specified in Section 5 of this Annex and retain the n last results for further analysis, in accordance with paragraph 4 of Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117 and applying the conditions set out in paragraph 3 of Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117. Each time an alignment tyre is measured, the tyre/wheel assembly shall be removed from the machine and the entire test procedure referred to in paragraph 4 of Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117 shall be followed again from the start. The candidate or reference laboratory shall calculate: 2.4. Data formats to be used for the computations and results The measured RRC values corrected from drum diameter and temperature shall be rounded to two decimal places. Then the computations shall be made with all digits: there shall be no further rounding except on the final alignment equations. All standard deviation values shall be displayed to three decimal places. All RRC values will be displayed to two decimal places. All alignment coefficients (A1 l , B1 l , A2 c and B2 c ) shall be rounded and displayed to four decimal places. 3. Requirements applicable to the reference laboratories and determination of the assigned values The assigned values of each alignment tyre shall be determined by a network of reference laboratories. Every second year the network shall assess the stability and validity of the assigned values. Each reference laboratory participating in the network shall comply with the specifications of Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117 and have a standard deviation ( σ m ) as follows: The alignment tyre sets that have been selected in accordance with Section 2.2 shall be measured in accordance with Section 2.3 by each reference laboratory of the network. The assigned value of each alignment tyre is the average of the measured values given by the reference laboratories of the network for this alignment tyre. 4. Procedure for the alignment of a reference laboratory to the assigned values Each reference laboratory ( l ) shall align itself to each new set of assigned values and always after any significant machine change or any drift in machine control tyre monitoring data. The alignment shall use a linear regression technique on all individual data. The regression coefficients, A1 l and B1 l , shall be calculated as follows: RRC = A1 l × RRC m,l + B1 l where: 5. Requirements applicable to candidate laboratories Candidate laboratories shall repeat the alignment procedure at least once every second year for every machine and always after any significant machine change or any drift in machine control tyre monitoring data. A common set of five different tyres that have been selected in accordance with Section 2.2 shall be measured in accordance with Section 2.3 first by the candidate laboratory and then by one reference laboratory. More than five alignment tyres may be tested at the request of the candidate laboratory. The candidate laboratory shall provide the alignment tyre set to the selected reference laboratory. The candidate laboratory ( c ) shall comply with the specifications of Annex 6 to UNECE Regulation No 117 and preferably have standard deviations ( σ m ) as follows: If the standard deviation ( σ m ) of the candidate laboratory is higher than those values after four measurements, the last three being used for the computations, then the number n + 1 of measurement repetitions shall be increased as follows for the entire batch: where: 6. Procedure for the alignment of a candidate laboratory One reference laboratory ( l ) of the network shall calculate the linear regression function on all individual data of the candidate laboratory ( c ). The regression coefficients, A2 c and B2 c , shall be calculated as follows: RRC m,l = A2 c × RRC m,c + B2 c where: If the coefficient of determination R 2 is lower than 0,97, the candidate laboratory shall not be aligned. The aligned RRC of tyres tested by the candidate laboratory shall be calculated as follows: RRC = ( A1 l × A2 c ) × RRC m,c + (A1 l × B2 c + B1 l ) ANNEX VI VERIFICATION PROCEDURE The conformity with this Regulation of the declared fuel efficiency, wet grip and external rolling noise classes, as well as the declared values, and any additional performance information on the tyre label, shall be assessed for each tyre type or each grouping of tyres as determined by the supplier, according to one of the following procedures: Assessments of the measurement data obtained from the conformity of production tests shall take into account the verification tolerances referred to in the table below. ANNEX VII INFORMATION TO BE ENTERED INTO THE PRODUCT DATABASE BY THE SUPPLIER ANNEX VIII CORRELATION TABLE