Corrigendum to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1379/2007 of 26 November 2007 amending Annexes IA, IB, VII and VIII of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on shipments of waste, for the purposes of taking into account of technical progress and changes agreed under the Basel Convention ( Official Journal of the European Union L 309 of 27 November 2007 ) On page 9, Annex I (Annex IA — Notification document for transboundary movements/shipments of waste) and on page 14, Annex II (Annex IB — Movement document for transboundary movements/shipments of waste), the model forms are replaced, respectively, by the following models: ‘Notification document for transboundary movements/shipments of waste 1. Exporter — notifier Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: 3. Notification No: Notification concerning A. (i) Individual shipment: (ii) Multiple shipments: B. (i) Disposal ( 1 ): (ii) Recovery: C.Pre-consented recovery facility ( 2 ) ( 3 ) 4. Total intended number of shipments: 5. Total intended quantity ( 4 ): Tonnes (Mg): 2. Importer — consignee Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: 6. Intended period of time for shipment(s) ( 4 ): First departure: Last departure: 7. Packaging type(s) ( 5 ): Special handling requirements ( 6 ): 11. Disposal/recovery operation(s) ( 2 ) 8. Intended carrier(s) Registration No: Name ( 7 ): Address: Contact person: E-mail: Means of transport ( 5 ): D-code/R-code ( 5 ): Technology employed ( 6 ): Reason for export ( 1 ) ( 6 ): 12. Designation and composition of the waste ( 6 ): 9. Waste generator(s) — producer(s) ( 1 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: Site and process of generation ( 6 ) 13. Physical characteristics ( 5 ): 14. Waste identification (fill in relevant codes) (i) Basel Annex VIII (or IX if applicable): (ii) OECD code (if different from (i)): (iii) EC list of wastes: (iv) National code in country of export: (v) National code in country of import: (vi) Other (specify): (vii) Y-code: (viii) H-code ( 5 ): (ix) UN class ( 5 ): (x) UN number: (xi) UN shipping name: (xii) Customs code(s) (HS): 10. Disposal facility ( 2 ): or recovery facility ( 2 ): Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: Actual site of disposal/recovery: 15. (a) Countries/States concerned, (b) code No of competent authorities where applicable, (c) specific points of exit or entry (border crossing or port) State of export — dispatch State(s) of transit (entry and exit) State of import — destination 16. Customs offices of entry and/or exit and/or export (European Community): Entry: Export: 17. Exporter's — notifier's/generator's — producer's ( 1 ) declaration: I certify that the information is complete and correct to my best knowledge. I also certify that legally enforceable written contractual obligations have been entered into and that any applicable insurance or other financial guarantee is or shall be in force covering the transboundary movement. 18. Number of annexes attached Exporter's — notifier's name: Signature: Generator's — producer's name: Signature: FOR USE BY COMPETENT AUTHORITIES 19. Acknowledgement from the relevant competent authority of countries of import — destination/transit ( 1 )/export — dispatch ( 9 ): 20. Written consent ( 1 ) ( 8 ) to the movement provided by the competent authority of (country): Country: Notification received on: Acknowledgement sent on: Name of competent authority: Stamp and/or signature: Consent given on: Consent valid from: until: Specific conditions: If Yes, see block 21 ( 6 ): Name of competent authority: Stamp and/or signature: 21. Specific conditions on consenting to the movement or reasons for objecting ( 1 ) Required by the Basel Convention. ( 2 ) In the case of an R12/R13 or D13-D15 operation, also attach corresponding information on any subsequent R12/R13 or D13-D15 facilities and on the subsequent R1-R11 or D1-D12 facilit(y)ies when required. ( 3 ) To be completed for movements within the OECD area and only if B(ii) applies. ( 4 ) Attach detailed list if multiple shipments. ( 5 ) See list of abbreviations and codes on the next page. ( 6 ) Attach details if necessary. ( 7 ) Attach list if more than one. ( 8 ) If required by national legislation. ( 9 ) If applicable under the OECD Decision. List of abbreviations and codes used in the notification document DISPOSAL OPERATIONS (block 11) D1 Deposit into or onto land (e.g. landfill, etc.) D2 Land treatment (e.g., biodegradation of liquid or sludgy discards in soils, etc.) D3 Deep injection (e.g. injection of pumpable discards into wells, salt domes or naturally occurring repositories, etc.) D4 Surface impoundment (e.g. placement of liquid or sludge discards into pits, ponds or lagoons, etc.) D5 Specially engineered landfill (e.g. placement into lined discrete cells which are capped and isolated from one another and the environment, etc.) D6 Release into a water body except seas/oceans D7 Release into seas/oceans including sea-bed insertion D8 Biological treatment not specified elsewhere in this list which results in final compounds or mixtures which are discarded by means of any of the operations in this list D9 Physico-chemical treatment not specified elsewhere in this list which results in final compounds or mixtures which are discarded by means of any of the operations in this list (e.g. evaporation, drying, calcination, etc.) D10 Incineration on land D11 Incineration at sea D12 Permanent storage (e.g. emplacement of containers in a mine, etc.) D13 Blending or mixing prior to submission to any of the operations in this list D14 Repackaging prior to submission to any of the operations in this list D15 Storage pending any of the operations in this list RECOVERY OPERATIONS (block 11) R1 Use as a fuel (other than in direct incineration) or other means to generate energy (Basel/OECD) — Use principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy (EU) R2 Solvent reclamation/regeneration R3 Recycling/reclamation of organic substances which are not used as solvents R4 Recycling/reclamation of metals and metal compounds R5 Recycling/reclamation of other inorganic materials R6 Regeneration of acids or bases R7 Recovery of components used for pollution abatement R8 Recovery of components from catalysts R9 Used oil re-refining or other reuses of previously used oil R10 Land treatment resulting in benefit to agriculture or ecological improvement R11 Uses of residual materials obtained from any of the operations numbered R1-R10 R12 Exchange of wastes for submission to any of the operations numbered R1-R11 R13 Accumulation of material intended for any operation in this list. PACKAGING TYPES (block 7) 1. Drum 2. Wooden barrel 3. Jerrican 4. Box 5. Bag 6. Composite packaging 7. Pressure receptacle 8. Bulk 9. Other (specify) H-CODE AND UN CLASS (block 14) UN Class H-code Characteristics Explosive Flammable liquids Flammable solids Substances or wastes liable to spontaneous combustion Substances or wastes which, in contact with water, emit flammable gases Oxidising Organic peroxides Poisonous (acute) Infectious substances Corrosives Liberation of toxic gases in contact with air or water Toxic (delayed or chronic) Ecotoxic Capable, by any means, after disposal of yielding another material, e.g., leachate, which possesses any of the characteristics listed above MEANS OF TRANSPORT (block 8) R = Road T = Train/rail S = Sea A = Air W = Inland waterways PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS (block 13) 1. Powdery/powder 2. Solid 3. Viscous/paste 4. Sludgy 5. Liquid 6. Gaseous 7. Other (specify) Further information, in particular related to waste identification (block 14), i.e. on Basel Annexes VIII and IX codes, OECD codes and Y-codes, can be found in a Guidance/Instruction Manual available from the OECD and the Secretariat of the Basel Convention.’ ‘Movement document for transboundary movements/shipments of waste 1. Corresponding to notification No: 2. Serial/total number of shipments 3. Exporter — notifier Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: 4. Importer — consignee Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: 5. Actual quantity: Tonnes (Mg): 6. Actual date of shipment: 7. Packaging Type(s) ( 1 ): Number of packages: Special handling requirements: ( 2 ) 8.(a) 1 st carrier ( 3 ): Registration No: Address: E-mail: 8.(b) 2 nd carrier ( 3 ): Registration No: Address: E-mail: 8.(c) Last carrier ( 3 ): Registration No: Address: E-mail: - - - - - - - To be completed by carrier’s representative - - - - - - - More than three carriers ( 2 ) Means of transport ( 1 ): Date of transfer: Signature: Means of transport ( 1 ): Date of transfer: Signature: Means of transport ( 1 ): Date of transfer: Signature: 9. Waste generator(s) — producer(s) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ): Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: Site of generation ( 2 ): 12. Designation and composition of the waste ( 2 ): 13. Physical characteristics ( 1 ): 14. Waste identification (fill in relevant codes) (i) Basel Annex VIII (or IX if applicable): (ii) OECD code (if different from (i)): (iii) EC list of wastes: (iv) National code in country of export (v) National code in country of import: (vi) Other (specify): (vii) Y-code: (viii) H-code ( 1 ): (ix) UN class ( 1 ): (x) UN number: (xi) UN shipping name: (xii) Customs code(s) (HS): 10. Disposal facility or recovery facility Registration No: Address: Contact person: E-mail: Actual site of disposal/recovery ( 2 ) 11. Disposal/recovery operation(s) D-code/R-code ( 1 ): 15. Exporter's — notifier's/generator's — producer's ( 4 ) declaration: I certify that the above information is complete and correct to my best knowledge. I also certify that legally enforceable written contractual obligations have been entered into, that any applicable insurance or other financial guarantee is in force covering the transboundary movement and that all necessary consents have been received from the competent authorities of the countries concerned. Signature: 16. For use by any person involved in the transboundary movement in case additional information is required 17. Shipment received by importer — consignee (if not facility): Signature: TO BE COMPLETED BY DISPOSAL/RECOVERY FACILITY 18. Shipment received at disposal facility or recovery facility Date of reception: Accepted: Rejected (*): Quantity received: Tonnes (Mg): (*) immediately contact competent authorities Approximate date of disposal/recovery: Disposal/recovery operation ( 1 ): Signature: 19. I certify that the disposal/recovery of the waste described above has been completed Signature and stamp: ( 1 ) See list of abbreviations and codes on the next page. ( 2 ) Attach details if necessary. ( 3 ) If more than three carriers, attach information as required in blocks 8 (a, b, c). ( 4 ) Required by the Basel Convention. ( 5 ) Attach list if more than one. ( 6 ) If required by national legislation. FOR USE BY CUSTOMS OFFICES (if required by national legislation) 20. Country of export — dispatch or customs office of exit The waste described in this movement document left the country on: Signature: Stamp: 21. Country of import — destination or customs office of entry The waste described in this movement document entered the country on: Signature: Stamp: 22. Stamps of customs offices of transit countries Name of country: Name of country: Entry: Entry: Name of country: Name of country: Entry: Entry: List of abbreviations and codes used in the movement document DISPOSAL OPERATIONS (block 11) D1 Deposit into or onto land (e.g. landfill, etc.) D2 Land treatment (e.g. biodegradation of liquid or sludgy discards in soils, etc.) D3 Deep injection (e.g., injection of pumpable discards into wells, salt domes or naturally occurring repositories, etc.) D4 Surface impoundment (e.g., placement of liquid or sludge discards into pits, ponds or lagoons, etc.) D5 Specially engineered landfill (e.g. placement into lined discrete cells which are capped and isolated from one another and the environment, etc.) D6 Release into a water body except seas/oceans D7 Release into seas/oceans including sea-bed insertion D8 Biological treatment not specified elsewhere in this list which results in final compounds or mixtures which are discarded by means of any of the operations in this list D9 Physico-chemical treatment not specified elsewhere in this list which results in final compounds or mixtures which are discarded by means of any of the operations in this list (e.g., evaporation, drying, calcination, etc.) D10 Incineration on land D11 Incineration at sea D12 Permanent storage (e.g. emplacement of containers in a mine, etc.) D13 Blending or mixing prior to submission to any of the operations in this list D14 Repackaging prior to submission to any of the operations in this list D15 Storage pending any of the operations in this list RECOVERY OPERATIONS (block 11) R1 Use as a fuel (other than in direct incineration) or other means to generate energy (Basel/OECD) — Use principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy (EU) R2 Solvent reclamation/regeneration R3 Recycling/reclamation of organic substances which are not used as solvents R4 Recycling/reclamation of metals and metal compounds R5 Recycling/reclamation of other inorganic materials R6 Regeneration of acids or bases R7 Recovery of components used for pollution abatement R8 Recovery of components from catalysts R9 Used oil re-refining or other reuses of previously used oil R10 Land treatment resulting in benefit to agriculture or ecological improvement R11 Uses of residual materials obtained from any of the operations numbered R1 to R10 R12 Exchange of wastes for submission to any of the operations numbered R1 to R11 R13 Accumulation of material intended for any operation in this list PACKAGING TYPES (block 7) 1. Drum 2. Wooden barrel 3. Jerrican 4. Box 5. Bag 6. Composite packaging 7. Pressure receptacle 8. Bulk 9. Other (specify) H-CODE AND UN CLASS (block 14) UN Class H-code Characteristics Explosive Flammable liquids Flammable solids Substances or wastes liable to spontaneous combustion Substances or wastes which, in contact with water, emit flammable gases Oxidising Organic peroxides Poisonous (acute) Infectious substances Corrosives Liberation of toxic gases in contact with air or water Toxic (delayed or chronic) Ecotoxic Capable, by any means, after disposal of yielding another material, e.g., leachate, which possesses any of the characteristics listed above MEANS OF TRANSPORT (block 8) R = Road T = Train/rail S = Sea A = Air W = Inland waterways PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS (block 13) 1. Powdery/powder 2. Solid 3. Viscous/paste 4. Sludgy 5. Liquid 6. Gaseous 7. Other (specify) Further information, in particular related to waste identification (block 14), i.e. on Basel Annexes VIII and IX codes, OECD codes and Y-codes, can be found in a Guidance/Instruction Manual available from the OECD and the Secretariat of the Basel Convention.’