COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 566/2011 of 8 June 2011 amending Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 as regards access to vehicle repair and maintenance information (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2007 on type approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions from light passenger and commercial vehicles (Euro 5 and Euro 6) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 4(4), 5(3) and 8 thereof, Having regard to Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles (Framework Directive) ( 2 ) , in particular Article 39(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 is amended as follows: Article 2 Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 is amended as follows: Article 3 This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 8 June 2011. For the Commission The President José Manuel BARROSO ( 1 ) OJ L 171, 29.6.2007, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1 . ( 3 ) OJ L 199, 28.7.2008, p. 1 . ( 4 ) OJ L 262, 27.9.1976, p. 1 . ANNEX I Amendments to certain Annexes to Regulation (EC) No 692/2008 ( *1 ) OJ L 257, 25.9.2008, p. 14 . ( *2 ) OJ L 135, 23.5.2008, p. 1 .’;’ ( 1 ) Where a bi fuel vehicle is combined with a flex fuel vehicle, both test requirements are applicable. ( 2 ) This provision is temporary, further requirements for biodiesel and hydrogen shall be proposed later on. ( 3 ) Test on petrol only before the dates set out in Article 10(6) of Regulation (EC) No 715/2007. The test will be performed on both fuels after these dates. The E75 test reference fuel specified in Annex IX Section B shall be used.’; ( 4 ) The values referred to in the specifications are “true values”. When establishing the value limits, the terms of ISO 4259 Petroleum products — Determination and application of precision data in relation to methods of test were applied. When fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero was taken into account. When fixing a maximum and minimum value, the minimum difference used was 4R (R = reproducibility). Notwithstanding this procedure, which is necessary for technical reasons, fuel manufacturers shall aim for a zero value where the stipulated maximum value is 2R and for the mean value for quotations of maximum and minimum limits. Where it is necessary to clarify whether fuel meets the requirements of the specifications, the ISO 4259 terms shall be applied. ( 5 ) In cases of dispute, the procedures for resolving the dispute and interpretation of the results based on test method precision, described in EN ISO 4259 shall be used. ( 6 ) In cases of national dispute concerning sulphur content, either EN ISO 20846 or EN ISO 20884 shall be called up similar to the reference in the national annex of EN 228. ( 7 ) The actual sulphur content of the fuel used for the Type 6 test shall be reported. ( 8 ) The unleaded petrol content may be determined as 100 minus the sum of the percentage content of water and alcohols. ( 9 ) There shall be no intentional addition of compounds containing phosphorus, iron, manganese, or lead to this reference fuel. ( 10 ) Ethanol to meet specification of EN 15376 is the only oxygenate that shall be intentionally added to this reference fuel.’ ANNEX II ‘ANNEX II IN-SERVICE CONFORMITY 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1. This Annex sets out the tailpipe emissions and OBD (inclusive IUPR M ) in-service conformity requirements for vehicles type approved to this Regulation. 2. AUDIT OF IN-SERVICE CONFORMITY 2.1. The audit of in-service conformity by the approval authority shall be conducted on the basis of any relevant information that the manufacturer has, under the same procedures as those for the conformity of production defined in Article 12(1) and (2) of Directive 2007/46/EC and in points 1 and 2 of Annex X to that Directive. Information from approval authority and Member State surveillance testing may complement the in-service monitoring reports supplied by the manufacturer. 2.2. The figure referred to in point 9 of Appendix 2 to this Annex and Figure 4/2 of Appendix 4 to UN/ECE Regulation No 83 (for tailpipe emissions only) illustrates the procedure for in-service conformity checking. The process for in-service conformity is described in Appendix 3 to this Annex. 2.3. As part of the information provided for the in-service conformity control, at the request of the approval authority, the manufacturer shall report to the type-approval authority on warranty claims, warranty repair works and OBD faults recorded at servicing, according to a format agreed at type-approval. The information shall detail the frequency and substance of faults for emissions-related components and systems. The reports shall be filed at least once a year for each vehicle model for the duration of the period defined in Article 9(4) of this Regulation. 2.4. Parameters defining the tailpipe emissions in-service family The in-service family may be defined by basic design parameters which shall be common to vehicles within the family. Accordingly, vehicle types may be considered as belonging to the same in-service family if they have in common, or within the stated tolerances, the following parameters: 2.5. Information requirements An audit of in-service conformity will be conducted by the approval authority on the basis of information supplied by the manufacturer. Such information shall include in particular, the following: 3. SELECTION OF VEHICLES FOR IN-SERVICE CONFORMITY 3.1. The information gathered by the manufacturer shall be sufficiently comprehensive to ensure that in-service performance can be assessed for normal conditions of use. The manufacturer’s sampling shall be drawn from at least two Member States with substantially different vehicle operating conditions (unless only sold in one Member State). Factors such as differences in fuels, ambient conditions, average road speeds, and urban/highway driving split shall be taken into consideration in the selection of the Member States. For OBD IUPR M testing only vehicles fulfilling the criteria of point 2.2.1 of Appendix 1 shall be included in the test sample. 3.2. In selecting the Member States for sampling vehicles, the manufacturer may select vehicles from a Member State that is considered to be particularly representative. In this case, the manufacturer shall demonstrate to the approval authority which granted the type approval that the selection is representative (e.g. by the market having the largest annual sales of a vehicle family within the Union). When a family requires more than one sample lot to be tested as defined in point 3.5, the vehicles in the second and third sample lots shall reflect different vehicle operating conditions from those selected for the first sample. 3.3. The emissions testing may be done at a test facility which is located in a different market or region from where the vehicles have been selected. 3.4. The in-service tailpipe emissions conformity tests by the manufacturer shall be continuously carried out reflecting the production cycle of applicable vehicles types within a given in-service vehicle family. The maximum time period between commencing two in-service conformity checks shall not exceed 18 months. In the case of vehicle types covered by an extension to the type-approval that did not require an emissions test, this period may be extended up to 24 months. 3.5. Sample size 4. On the basis of the audit referred to in Section 2 the approval authority shall adopt one of the following decisions and actions: If according to the IUPR M audit the test criteria of point 6.1.2 point (a) or (b) of Appendix 1 are met for the vehicles in a sample lot, the type-approval authority must take the further action described in point (d) of this point. 4.1. Where type 1 tests are considered necessary to check the conformity of emission control devices with the requirements for their performance while in service, such tests shall be carried out using a test procedure meeting the statistical criteria defined in Appendix 2. 4.2. The approval authority, in cooperation with the manufacturer, shall select a sample of vehicles with sufficient mileage whose use under normal conditions can be reasonably assured. The manufacturer shall be consulted on the choice of the vehicles in the sample and allowed to attend the confirmatory checks of the vehicles. 4.3. The manufacturer shall be authorised, under the supervision of the approval authority, to carry out checks, even of a destructive nature, on those vehicles with emission levels in excess of the limit values with a view to establishing possible causes of deterioration which cannot be attributed to the manufacturer (e.g. use of leaded petrol before the test date). Where the results of the checks confirm such causes, those test results shall be excluded from the conformity check. ‘Appendix 1 In-service conformity check 1. INTRODUCTION 2. SELECTION CRITERIA The criteria for acceptance of a selected vehicle are defined for tailpipe emissions in points 2.1 to 2.8 and for IUPR M in Sections 2.1 to 2.5. 3. DIAGNOSIS AND MAINTENANCE Diagnosis and any normal maintenance necessary shall be performed on vehicles accepted for testing, prior to measuring exhaust emissions, in accordance with the procedure laid down in points 3.1 to 3.7. 4. IN-SERVICE TESTING 5. EVALUATION OF EMISSION TEST RESULTS 6. PLAN OF REMEDIAL MEASURES ‘Appendix 2 Statistical procedure for tailpipe emissions in-service conformity testing ‘Appendix 3 Responsibilities for in-service conformity Figure 1 Illustration of the in-service conformity process Key features of the in-service conformity check Phase 1 Annex II, section 2 and 3 Information provided by the manufacturer and from surveillance programmes Phase 2 Annex II, section 4 Assessment of the information by the type approval authority Phase 3 Annex II, appendix 1 Selection of vehicles Phase 4 Annex II, appendix 2 Inspection of vehicles Phase 5 Annex II, section 6, appendix 1 Submission and approval of remedial plan ( 1 ) OJ L 350, 28.12.1998, p. 58 .