DIRECTIVE 2011/92/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 13 December 2011 on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (codification) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , After consulting the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: Article 1 1. This Directive shall apply to the assessment of the environmental effects of those public and private projects which are likely to have significant effects on the environment. 2. For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply: 3. Member States may decide, on a case-by-case basis if so provided under national law, not to apply this Directive to projects serving national defence purposes, if they deem that such application would have an adverse effect on those purposes. 4. This Directive shall not apply to projects the details of which are adopted by a specific act of national legislation, since the objectives of this Directive, including that of supplying information, are achieved through the legislative process. Article 2 1. Member States shall adopt all measures necessary to ensure that, before consent is given, projects likely to have significant effects on the environment by virtue, inter alia, of their nature, size or location are made subject to a requirement for development consent and an assessment with regard to their effects. Those projects are defined in Article 4. 2. The environmental impact assessment may be integrated into the existing procedures for consent to projects in the Member States, or, failing this, into other procedures or into procedures to be established to comply with the aims of this Directive. 3. Member States may provide for a single procedure in order to fulfil the requirements of this Directive and the requirements of Directive 2008/1/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control ( 5 ) . 4. Without prejudice to Article 7, Member States may, in exceptional cases, exempt a specific project in whole or in part from the provisions laid down in this Directive. In that event, the Member States shall: The Commission shall immediately forward the documents received to the other Member States. The Commission shall report annually to the European Parliament and to the Council on the application of this paragraph. Article 3 The environmental impact assessment shall identify, describe and assess in an appropriate manner, in the light of each individual case and in accordance with Articles 4 to 12, the direct and indirect effects of a project on the following factors: Article 4 1. Subject to Article 2(4), projects listed in Annex I shall be made subject to an assessment in accordance with Articles 5 to 10. 2. Subject to Article 2(4), for projects listed in Annex II, Member States shall determine whether the project shall be made subject to an assessment in accordance with Articles 5 to 10. Member States shall make that determination through: Member States may decide to apply both procedures referred to in points (a) and (b). 3. When a case-by-case examination is carried out or thresholds or criteria are set for the purpose of paragraph 2, the relevant selection criteria set out in Annex III shall be taken into account. 4. Member States shall ensure that the determination made by the competent authorities under paragraph 2 is made available to the public. Article 5 1. In the case of projects which, pursuant to Article 4, are to be made subject to an environmental impact assessment in accordance with this Article and Articles 6 to 10, Member States shall adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the developer supplies in an appropriate form the information specified in Annex IV inasmuch as: 2. Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, if the developer so requests before submitting an application for development consent, the competent authority shall give an opinion on the information to be supplied by the developer in accordance with paragraph 1. The competent authority shall consult the developer and authorities referred to in Article 6(1) before it gives its opinion. The fact that the authority has given an opinion under this paragraph shall not preclude it from subsequently requiring the developer to submit further information. Member States may require the competent authorities to give such an opinion, irrespective of whether the developer so requests. 3. The information to be provided by the developer in accordance with paragraph 1 shall include at least: 4. Member States shall, if necessary, ensure that any authorities holding relevant information, with particular reference to Article 3, make this information available to the developer. Article 6 1. Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the authorities likely to be concerned by the project by reason of their specific environmental responsibilities are given an opportunity to express their opinion on the information supplied by the developer and on the request for development consent. To that end, Member States shall designate the authorities to be consulted, either in general terms or on a case-by-case basis. The information gathered pursuant to Article 5 shall be forwarded to those authorities. Detailed arrangements for consultation shall be laid down by the Member States. 2. The public shall be informed, whether by public notices or by other appropriate means such as electronic media where available, of the following matters early in the environmental decision-making procedures referred to in Article 2(2) and, at the latest, as soon as information can reasonably be provided: 3. Member States shall ensure that, within reasonable time-frames, the following is made available to the public concerned: 4. The public concerned shall be given early and effective opportunities to participate in the environmental decision-making procedures referred to in Article 2(2) and shall, for that purpose, be entitled to express comments and opinions when all options are open to the competent authority or authorities before the decision on the request for development consent is taken. 5. The detailed arrangements for informing the public (for example by bill posting within a certain radius or publication in local newspapers) and for consulting the public concerned (for example by written submissions or by way of a public inquiry) shall be determined by the Member States. 6. Reasonable time-frames for the different phases shall be provided, allowing sufficient time for informing the public and for the public concerned to prepare and participate effectively in environmental decision-making subject to the provisions of this Article. Article 7 1. Where a Member State is aware that a project is likely to have significant effects on the environment in another Member State or where a Member State likely to be significantly affected so requests, the Member State in whose territory the project is intended to be carried out shall send to the affected Member State as soon as possible and no later than when informing its own public, inter alia: The Member State in whose territory the project is intended to be carried out shall give the other Member State a reasonable time in which to indicate whether it wishes to participate in the environmental decision-making procedures referred to in Article 2(2), and may include the information referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. 2. If a Member State which receives information pursuant to paragraph 1 indicates that it intends to participate in the environmental decision-making procedures referred to in Article 2(2), the Member State in whose territory the project is intended to be carried out shall, if it has not already done so, send to the affected Member State the information required to be given pursuant to Article 6(2) and made available pursuant to points (a) and (b) of Article 6(3). 3. The Member States concerned, each insofar as it is concerned, shall also: 4. The Member States concerned shall enter into consultations regarding, inter alia, the potential transboundary effects of the project and the measures envisaged to reduce or eliminate such effects and shall agree on a reasonable time-frame for the duration of the consultation period. 5. The detailed arrangements for implementing this Article may be determined by the Member States concerned and shall be such as to enable the public concerned in the territory of the affected Member State to participate effectively in the environmental decision-making procedures referred to in Article 2(2) for the project. Article 8 The results of consultations and the information gathered pursuant to Articles 5, 6 and 7 shall be taken into consideration in the development consent procedure. Article 9 1. When a decision to grant or refuse development consent has been taken, the competent authority or authorities shall inform the public thereof in accordance with the appropriate procedures and shall make available to the public the following information: 2. The competent authority or authorities shall inform any Member State which has been consulted pursuant to Article 7, forwarding to it the information referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. The consulted Member States shall ensure that that information is made available in an appropriate manner to the public concerned in their own territory. Article 10 The provisions of this Directive shall not affect the obligation on the competent authorities to respect the limitations imposed by national laws, regulations and administrative provisions and accepted legal practices with regard to commercial and industrial confidentiality, including intellectual property, and the safeguarding of the public interest. Where Article 7 applies, the transmission of information to another Member State and the receipt of information by another Member State shall be subject to the limitations in force in the Member State in which the project is proposed. Article 11 1. Member States shall ensure that, in accordance with the relevant national legal system, members of the public concerned: have access to a review procedure before a court of law or another independent and impartial body established by law to challenge the substantive or procedural legality of decisions, acts or omissions subject to the public participation provisions of this Directive. 2. Member States shall determine at what stage the decisions, acts or omissions may be challenged. 3. What constitutes a sufficient interest and impairment of a right shall be determined by the Member States, consistently with the objective of giving the public concerned wide access to justice. To that end, the interest of any non-governmental organisation meeting the requirements referred to in Article 1(2) shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article. Such organisations shall also be deemed to have rights capable of being impaired for the purpose of point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article. 4. The provisions of this Article shall not exclude the possibility of a preliminary review procedure before an administrative authority and shall not affect the requirement of exhaustion of administrative review procedures prior to recourse to judicial review procedures, where such a requirement exists under national law. Any such procedure shall be fair, equitable, timely and not prohibitively expensive. 5. In order to further the effectiveness of the provisions of this Article, Member States shall ensure that practical information is made available to the public on access to administrative and judicial review procedures. Article 12 1. The Member States and the Commission shall exchange information on the experience gained in applying this Directive. 2. In particular, Member States shall inform the Commission of any criteria and/or thresholds adopted for the selection of the projects in question, in accordance with Article 4(2). 3. On the basis of that exchange of information, the Commission shall if necessary submit additional proposals to the European Parliament and to the Council, with a view to ensuring that this Directive is applied in a sufficiently coordinated manner. Article 13 Member States shall communicate to the Commission the texts of the provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive. Article 14 Directive 85/337/EEC, as amended by the Directives listed in Annex V, Part A, is repealed, without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits for transposition into national law of the Directives set out in Annex V, Part B. Article 15 This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Article 16 This Directive is addressed to the Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 13 December 2011. For the European Parliament The President J. BUZEK For the Council The President M. SZPUNAR ( 1 ) OJ C 248, 25.8.2011, p. 154 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 13 September 2011 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 15 November 2011. ( 3 ) OJ L 175, 5.7.1985, p. 40 . ( 4 ) See Annex VI, Part A. ( 5 ) OJ L 24, 29.1.2008, p. 8 . ( 6 ) OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26 . ANNEX I PROJECTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(1) ( 1 ) Nuclear power stations and other nuclear reactors cease to be such an installation when all nuclear fuel and other radioactively contaminated elements have been removed permanently from the installation site. ( 2 ) For the purposes of this Directive, ‘airport’ means an airport which complies with the definition in the 1944 Chicago Convention setting up the International Civil Aviation Organisation (Annex 14). ( 3 ) For the purposes of this Directive, ‘express road’ means a road which complies with the definition in the European Agreement on Main International Traffic Arteries of 15 November 1975. ( 4 ) OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 . ( 5 ) OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 . ( 6 ) OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 114 . ANNEX II PROJECTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(2) 1. AGRICULTURE, SILVICULTURE AND AQUACULTURE 2. EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY 3. ENERGY INDUSTRY 4. PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING OF METALS 5. MINERAL INDUSTRY 6. CHEMICAL INDUSTRY (PROJECTS NOT INCLUDED IN ANNEX I) 7. FOOD INDUSTRY 8. TEXTILE, LEATHER, WOOD AND PAPER INDUSTRIES 9. RUBBER INDUSTRY Manufacture and treatment of elastomer-based products. 10. INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS 11. OTHER PROJECTS 12. TOURISM AND LEISURE ANNEX III SELECTION CRITERIA REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(3) 1. CHARACTERISTICS OF PROJECTS The characteristics of projects must be considered having regard, in particular, to: 2. LOCATION OF PROJECTS The environmental sensitivity of geographical areas likely to be affected by projects must be considered, having regard, in particular, to: 3. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POTENTIAL IMPACT The potential significant effects of projects must be considered in relation to criteria set out in points 1 and 2, and having regard in particular to: ( 1 ) OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7 . ( 2 ) OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 . ANNEX IV INFORMATION REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 5(1) ( 1 ) This description should cover the direct effects and any indirect, secondary, cumulative, short, medium and long-term, permanent and temporary, positive and negative effects of the project. ANNEX V PART A Repealed Directive with list of its successive amendments (referred to in Article 14) PART B List of time limits for transposition into national law (referred to in Article 14) ANNEX VI Correlation table