COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2019/2031 of 12 November 2019 establishing best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for the food, drink and milk industries, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (notified under document C(2019) 7989) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for the food drink and milk industries, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 12 November 2019. For the Commission Karmenu VELLA Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 establishing a forum for the exchange of information pursuant to Article 13 of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions ( OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 ). ( 3 ) BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES (BAT) CONCLUSIONS FOR THE FOOD, DRINK AND MILK INDUSTRIES These BAT conclusions concern the following activities specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU: These BAT conclusions also cover: These BAT conclusions do not address the following: Other BAT conclusions and reference documents which could be relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions include the following: These BAT conclusions apply without prejudice to other relevant legislation, e.g. on hygiene or food/feed safety. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air Unless otherwise stated, emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations, expressed as mass of emitted substances per volume of waste gas under the following standard conditions: dry gas at a temperature of 273,15 K and a pressure of 101,3 kPa, without correction for oxygen content, and expressed in mg/Nm 3 . The equation for calculating the emission concentration at the reference oxygen level is: where: For averaging periods of BAT-AELs for emissions to air, the following definition applies. When the waste gases of two or more sources (e.g. dryers or kilns) are discharged through a common stack, the BAT-AEL applies to the combined discharge from the stack. Specific hexane losses The emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) related to specific hexane losses refer to yearly averages and are calculated using the following equation: Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water Unless otherwise stated, emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of water), expressed in mg/l. The BAT-AELs expressed as concentrations refer to daily average values, i.e. 24-hour flow-proportional composite samples. Time-proportional composite samples can be used provided that sufficient flow stability is demonstrated. Alternatively, spot samples may be taken, provided that the effluent is appropriately mixed and homogeneous. In the case of total organic carbon (TOC), chemical oxygen demand (COD), total nitrogen (TN) and total phosphorus (TP), the calculation of the average abatement efficiency referred to in these BAT conclusions (see Table 1) is based on the influent and effluent load of the waste water treatment plant. Other environmental performance levels Specific waste water discharge The indicative environmental performance levels related to specific waste water discharge refer to yearly averages and are calculated using the following equation: Specific energy consumption The indicative environmental performance levels related to specific energy consumption refer to yearly averages and are calculated using the following equation: 1. GENERAL BAT CONCLUSIONS 1.1. Environmental management systems BAT 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to elaborate and implement an environmental management system (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Specifically for the food, drink and milk sector, BAT is to also incorporate the following features in the EMS: Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 4 ) establishes the Union eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), which is an example of an EMS consistent with this BAT. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the EMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. BAT 2. In order to increase resource efficiency and to reduce emissions, BAT is to establish, maintain and regularly review (including when a significant change occurs) an inventory of water, energy and raw materials consumption as well as of waste water and waste gas streams, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that incorporates all of the following features: Applicability The level of detail of the inventory will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.2. Monitoring BAT 3. For relevant emissions to water as identified by the inventory of waste water streams (see BAT 2), BAT is to monitor key process parameters (e.g. continuous monitoring of waste water flow, pH and temperature) at key locations (e.g. at the inlet and/or outlet of the pre-treatment, at the inlet to the final treatment, at the point where the emission leaves the installation). BAT 4. BAT is to monitor emissions to water with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 5. BAT is to monitor channelled emissions to air with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. 1.3. Energy efficiency BAT 6. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use BAT 6a and an appropriate combination of the common techniques listed in technique b below. Further sector-specific techniques to increase energy efficiency are given in Sections 2 to 13 of these BAT conclusions. 1.4. Water consumption and waste water discharge BAT 7. In order to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged, BAT is to use BAT 7a and one or a combination of the techniques b to k given below. Further sector-specific techniques to reduce water consumption are given in Section 6.1 of these BAT conclusions. 1.5. Harmful substances BAT 8. In order to prevent or reduce the use of harmful substances, e.g. in cleaning and disinfection, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 9. In order to prevent emissions of ozone-depleting substances and of substances with a high global warming potential from cooling and freezing, BAT is to use refrigerants without ozone depletion potential and with a low global warming potential. Description Suitable refrigerants include water, carbon dioxide or ammonia. 1.6. Resource efficiency BAT 10. In order to increase resource efficiency, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Further sector-specific techniques to reduce waste sent for disposal are given in Sections 3.3, 4.3 and 5.1 of these BAT conclusions. 1.7. Emissions to water BAT 11. In order to prevent uncontrolled emissions to water, BAT is to provide an appropriate buffer storage capacity for waste water. Description The appropriate buffer storage capacity is determined by a risk assessment (taking into account the nature of the pollutant(s), the effects of these pollutants on further waste water treatment, the receiving environment, etc.). The waste water from this buffer storage is discharged after appropriate measures are taken (e.g. monitoring, treatment, reuse). Applicability For existing plants, the technique may not be applicable due to lack of space and/or due to the layout of the waste water collection system. BAT 12. In order to reduce emissions to water, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. The BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water given in Table 1 apply to direct emissions to a receiving water body. The BAT-AELs apply at the point where the emission leaves the installation. Table 1 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for direct emissions to a receiving water body The associated monitoring is given in BAT 4. 1.8. Noise BAT 13. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce noise emissions, BAT is to set up, implement and regularly review a noise management plan, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following elements: Applicability BAT 13 is only applicable to cases where a noise nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. BAT 14. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce noise emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.9. Odour BAT 15. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce odour emissions, BAT is to set up, implement and regularly review an odour management plan, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following elements: Applicability BAT 15 is only applicable to cases where an odour nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. 2. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR ANIMAL FEED The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to animal feed. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 2.1. Energy efficiency 2.1.1. Compound feed/Pet food General techniques to increase energy efficiency are given in Section 1.3 of these BAT conclusions. Indicative environmental performance levels are presented in the table below. Table 2 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific energy consumption 2.1.2. Green fodder BAT 16. In order to increase energy efficiency in green fodder processing, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 6 and of the techniques given below. 2.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. The indicative environmental performance level is presented in the table below. Table 3 Indicative environmental performance level for specific waste water discharge 2.3. Emissions to air BAT 17. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions to air, BAT is to use one of the techniques given below. Table 4 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled dust emissions to air from grinding and pellet cooling in compound feed manufacture The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 3. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR BREWING The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to brewing. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 3.1. Energy efficiency BAT 18. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 6 and of the techniques given below. Table 5 Indicative environmental performance level for specific energy consumption 3.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. The indicative environmental performance level is presented in the table below. Table 6 Indicative environmental performance level for specific waste water discharge 3.3. Waste BAT 19. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal, BAT is to use one or both of the techniques given below. 3.4. Emissions to air BAT 20. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions to air, BAT is to use a bag filter or both a cyclone and a bag filter. Description See Section 14.2. Table 7 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled dust emissions to air from handling and processing of malt and adjuncts The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 4. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR DAIRIES The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to dairies. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 4.1. Energy efficiency BAT 21. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 6 and of the techniques given below. Table 8 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific energy consumption 4.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. Indicative environmental performance levels are presented in the table below. Table 9 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific waste water discharge 4.3. Waste BAT 22. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 4.4. Emissions to air BAT 23. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions to air from drying, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 10 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled dust emissions to air from drying The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 5. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR ETHANOL PRODUCTION The BAT conclusion presented in this section applies to ethanol production. It applies in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 5.1. Waste BAT 24. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal, BAT is to recover and (re)use yeast after fermentation. Description See BAT 19a. The yeast may not be recovered when the stillage is used as animal feed. 6. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR FISH AND SHELLFISH PROCESSING The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to fish and shellfish processing. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 6.1. Water consumption and waste water discharge BAT 25. In order to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 7 and of the techniques given below. 6.2. Emissions to air BAT 26. In order to reduce channelled emissions of organic compounds to air from fish smoking, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 11 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled TVOC emissions to air from a smoke chamber The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 7. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE FRUIT AND VEGETABLE SECTOR The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the fruit and vegetable sector. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 7.1. Energy efficiency BAT 27. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 6 and to cool fruit and vegetables before deep freezing. Description The temperature of the fruit and vegetables is lowered to around 4 °C before they enter the freezing tunnel by bringing them into direct or indirect contact with cold water or cooling air. Water can be removed from the food and then collected for reuse in the cooling process. Table 12 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific energy consumption 7.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. Indicative environmental performance levels are presented in the table below. Table 13 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific waste water discharge 8. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR GRAIN MILLING The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to grain milling. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 8.1. Energy efficiency General techniques to increase energy efficiency are given in Section 1.3 of these BAT conclusions. The indicative environmental performance level is presented in the table below. Table 14 Indicative environmental performance level for specific energy consumption 8.2. Emissions to air BAT 28. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions to air, BAT is to use a bag filter. Description See Section 14.2. Table 15 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled dust emissions to air from grain milling The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 9. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR MEAT PROCESSING The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to meat processing. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 9.1. Energy efficiency General techniques to increase energy efficiency are given in Section 1.3 of these BAT conclusions. The indicative environmental performance level is presented in the table below. Table 16 Indicative environmental performance level for specific energy consumption 9.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. The indicative environmental performance level is presented in the table below. Table 17 Indicative environmental performance level for specific waste water discharge 9.3. Emissions to air BAT 29. In order to reduce channelled emissions of organic compounds to air from meat smoking, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 18 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled TVOC emissions to air from a smoke chamber The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 10. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR OILSEED PROCESSING AND VEGETABLE OIL REFINING The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to oilseed processing and vegetable oil refining. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 10.1. Energy efficiency BAT 30. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 6 and to generate an auxiliary vacuum. Description The auxiliary vacuum used for oil drying, oil degassing or minimisation of oil oxidation is generated by pumps, steam injectors, etc. The vacuum reduces the amount of thermal energy needed for these process steps. Table 19 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific energy consumption 10.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. Indicative environmental performance levels are presented in the table below. Table 20 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific waste water discharge 10.3. Emissions to air BAT 31. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions to air, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 21 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled dust emissions to air from handling and preparation of seeds as well as drying and cooling of meal The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 10.4. Hexane losses BAT 32. In order to reduce the hexane losses from oilseed processing and refining, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. Table 22 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for hexane losses from oilseed processing and refining 11. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR SOFT DRINKS AND NECTAR/JUICE MADE FROM PROCESSED FRUIT AND VEGETABLES The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to soft drinks and nectar/juice made from processed fruit and vegetables. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 11.1. Energy efficiency BAT 33. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 6 and of the techniques given below. Table 23 Indicative environmental performance level for specific energy consumption 11.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. The indicative environmental performance level is presented in the table below. Table 24 Indicative environmental performance level for specific waste water discharge 12. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR STARCH PRODUCTION The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to starch production. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 12.1. Energy efficiency General techniques to increase energy efficiency are given in Section 1.3 of these BAT conclusions. Indicative environmental performance levels are presented in the table below. Table 25 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific energy consumption 12.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. Indicative environmental performance levels are presented in the table below. Table 26 Indicative environmental performance levels for specific waste water discharge 12.3. Emissions to air BAT 34. In order to reduce channelled dust emissions to air from starch, protein and fibre drying, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 27 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled dust emissions to air from starch, protein and fibre drying The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 13. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR SUGAR MANUFACTURING The BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to sugar manufacturing. They apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1. 13.1. Energy efficiency BAT 35. In order to increase the energy efficiency, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques specified in BAT 6 and one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 28 Indicative environmental performance level for specific energy consumption 13.2. Water consumption and waste water discharge General techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water discharged are given in Section 1.4 of these BAT conclusions. The indicative environmental performance level is presented in the table below. Table 29 Indicative environmental performance level for specific waste water discharge 13.3. Emissions to air BAT 36. In order to prevent or reduce channelled dust emissions to air from beet pulp drying, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 30 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled dust emissions to air from beet pulp drying in the case of high-temperature drying (above 500 °C) The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. BAT 37. In order to reduce channelled SO X emissions to air from high-temperature beet pulp drying (above 500 °C), BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 31 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled SO X emissions to air from beet pulp drying in the case of high-temperature drying (above 500 °C) when natural gas is not used The associated monitoring is given in BAT 5. 14. DESCRIPTION OF TECHNIQUES 14.1. Emissions to water 14.2. Emissions to air ( 1 ) Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment ( OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 ). ( 2 ) Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from medium combustion plants ( OJ L 313, 28.11.2015, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations, 30-minute sampling/measurement is inappropriate, a more suitable measurement period may be employed. ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) The monitoring only applies when the substance concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water stream based on the inventory mentioned in BAT 2. ( 6 ) The monitoring only applies in the case of a direct discharge to a receiving water body. ( 7 ) TOC monitoring and COD monitoring are alternatives. TOC monitoring is the preferred option because it does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 8 ) If the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable, a lower monitoring frequency can be adopted but in any case at least once every month. ( 9 ) The measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. ( 10 ) If the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable, a lower monitoring frequency can be adopted but in any case at least once every year. ( 11 ) The measurement is carried out during a campaign of two days. ( 12 ) The monitoring only applies when a thermal oxidiser is used. ( 13 ) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L327, 22.12.2000, p. 1). ( 14 ) The descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 14.1. ( 15 ) The BAT-AELs do not apply to emissions from grain milling, green fodder processing, and the production of dry pet food and compound feed. ( 16 ) The BAT-AELs may not apply to the production of citric acid or yeast. ( 17 ) No BAT-AEL applies for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). As an indication, the yearly average BOD 5 level in the effluent from a biological waste water treatment plant will generally be ≤ 20 mg/l. ( 18 ) The BAT-AEL for COD may be replaced by a BAT-AEL for TOC. The correlation between COD and TOC is determined on a case-by-case basis. The BAT-AEL for TOC is the preferred option because TOC monitoring does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 19 ) The upper end of the range is: as daily averages only if the abatement efficiency is ≥ 95 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. ( 20 ) The lower end of the range is typically achieved when using filtration (e.g. sand filtration, microfiltration, membrane bioreactor), while the upper end of the range is typically achieved when using sedimentation only. ( 21 ) The upper end of the range is 30 mg/l as a daily average only if the abatement efficiency is ≥ 80 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. ( 22 ) The BAT-AEL may not apply when the temperature of the waste water is low (e.g. below 12 °C) for prolonged periods. ( 23 ) The upper end of the range is: as daily averages only if the abatement efficiency is ≥ 95 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. ( 24 ) The lower end of the range can be achieved when pelleting is not applied. ( 25 ) The specific energy consumption level may not apply when fish and other aquatic animals are used as raw material. ( 26 ) The upper end of the range is 0,12 MWh/tonne of products for installations located in cold climates and/or when heat treatment is used for Salmonella decontamination. ( 27 ) The specific energy consumption level may not apply when raw materials other than milk are used. ( 28 ) The upper end of the range is 20 mg/Nm 3 for drying of demineralised whey powder, casein and lactose. ( 29 ) The lower end of the range is typically achieved when using thermal oxidation. ( 30 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply when the TVOC emission load is below 500 g/h. ( 31 ) The specific energy consumption level may not apply to the production of potato flakes and powder. ( 32 ) The lower end of the range is typically associated with the production of peeled tomatoes. ( 33 ) The upper end of the range is typically associated with the production of tomato powder or concentrate. ( 34 ) The specific waste water discharge level may not apply to the production of potato flakes and powder. ( 35 ) The specific waste water discharge level may not apply to the production of tomato powder. ( 36 ) The specific energy consumption level does not apply to the production of ready meals and soups. ( 37 ) The upper end of the range may not apply in the case of a high percentage of cooked products. ( 38 ) The specific waste water discharge level does not apply to processes using direct water cooling and to the production of ready meals and soups. ( 39 ) The lower end of the range is typically achieved when using adsorption or thermal oxidation. ( 40 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply when the TVOC emission load is below 500 g/h. ( 41 ) The upper end of the range is 20 mg/Nm 3 for drying and cooling of meal. ( 42 ) The amount of raw materials refers to gross tonnage. ( 43 ) The specific energy consumption level does not apply to the production of polyols. ( 44 ) The amount of raw materials refers to gross tonnage. ( 45 ) The specific waste water discharge level does not apply to the production of polyols. ( 46 ) When a bag filter is not applicable, the upper end of the range is 20 mg/Nm 3 . ( 47 ) The upper end of the range may include the energy consumption of the lime kilns and dryers. ( 48 ) When using exclusively biomass as a fuel, emission levels are expected to be at the lower end of the range.