COUNCIL DECISION (EU) 2020/1829 of 24 November 2020 on the submission, on behalf of the European Union, of proposals to amend Annex IV and certain entries in Annexes II and IX to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal for consideration at the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, and on the position to be adopted on behalf of the European Union at that meeting as regards proposals by other Parties to that Convention to amend Annex IV and certain entries in Annexes II, VIII and IX to that Convention THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1) in conjunction with Article 218(9) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 1. With regard to proposals to amend Annex IV and certain entries in Annexes II and IX to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (the ‘Convention’) as well as proposals to amend Annexes II, VIII and IX to the Convention in respect of waste electrical and electronic equipment at the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, the Union shall pursue the following objectives: 2. In order to pursue the objectives listed in paragraph 1, the Union shall submit for consideration at the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties a proposal to amend Annex IV to the Convention in order to: A detailed proposal to amend Annex IV to the Convention is set out in Part I of the Annex to this Decision. 3. The Union shall submit for consideration at the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties proposals to amend entries on plastic wastes in Annexes II and IX to the Convention. Detailed proposals concerning those amendments are set out in Part II of the Annex to this Decision. 4. The Commission, on behalf of the Union, shall communicate the proposals referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 to the Secretariat of the Convention. 5. The Union shall propose that the Conference of the Parties develop explanations or guidance, not to be included in the Convention itself, providing clarifications and examples with regard to the disposal operations covered by Annex IV to the Convention, or shall support such a proposal from other Parties. Article 2 The position to be adopted on the Union’s behalf at the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties as regards proposals by other Parties to the Convention to amend Annex IV and certain entries in Annexes II, VIII and IX to the Convention shall be that the Union may support amendments proposed by other Parties to the Convention, provided that they contribute to achieving the Union’s objectives as listed in Article 1(1), concerning: Article 3 Refinement of the position referred to in Articles 1 and 2 may be agreed to, in the light of developments at the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, by representatives of the Union, in consultation with the Member States, during on-the-spot coordination meetings, without a further decision of the Council. Article 4 In the event that new entries for non-hazardous waste electrical and electronic equipment in Annex II to the Convention are adopted at the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, the Union shall, to the extent necessary, take the steps required under the OECD Decision, without prejudice to the notification submitted in accordance with Article 11 of the Convention, to ensure that the current controls on shipments of non-hazardous waste electrical and electronic equipment within the Union and the EEA remain unaffected. Article 5 This Decision shall enter into force on the date of its adoption. Done at Brussels, 24 November 2020. For the Council The President M. ROTH ( 1 ) Council Decision 93/98/EEC of 1 February 1993 on the conclusion, on behalf of the Community, of the Convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal (Basel Convention) ( OJ L 39, 16.2.1993, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste ( OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). PART I Proposal on behalf of the European Union for amendments to Annex IV to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (proposal for a new text for Annex IV) ANNEX IV ( 1 ) Disposal operations There are two categories of disposal operations, namely recovery operations and non-recovery operations. Section A encompasses non-recovery operations and section B recovery operations. This Annex also covers in both sections A and B disposal operations that occur prior to submission to any of the operations in the respective section ( 2 ) . This Annex covers all disposal operations, regardless of their legal status and regardless of whether they are considered to be environmentally sound. A. Non-recovery operations A non-recovery operation is an operation which is not a recovery operation even where the operation has as a secondary consequence the reclamation of substances or energy. B. Recovery operations A recovery operation is an operation the principal result of which is waste serving a useful purpose by replacing other materials which would otherwise have been used to fulfil a particular function, or waste being prepared to fulfil that function, in the plant or in the wider economy. PART II Proposals on behalf of the European Union for amendments to Annexes II and IX to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal In two Those changes shall become effective when the amendments to Annex IV to the Convention become effective. ( 1 ) The amendments to this Annex become effective as of [date occurring [three][four] years after adoption by the Conference of the Parties]. ( 2 ) See operations D31 to D36 in section A and operations R26 to R31 in section B.