COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/958 of 31 May 2021 laying down the format for reporting data and information on fishing gear placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected in Member States and the format for the quality check report in accordance with Articles 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(4) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Member States shall report the data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and on waste fishing gear collected referred to in Article 13(1)(d) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 in the format for reporting data laid out in Annex 1 to this Decision. Article 2 Member States shall draw up the quality check report referred to in Article 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 in the format laid out in Annex 2 to this Decision. Article 3 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 31 May 2021. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 155, 12.6.2019, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ANNEX 1 Format for the reporting of data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected, in accordance with Article 13(1)(d) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council A. Format for the reporting of data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market ( 1 ) B. Format for the reporting of data on waste fishing gear collected ( 4 ) ( 1 ) Data is to be reported in weight (tonnes) – the quality check report must specify whether conversion factors have been used (e.g. from volume to mass). ( *1 ) Only the total amounts (in white cell) of fishing gear and its components are mandatory for reporting. Black shaded cells are not relevant. ( 2 ) ‘Twine’ covers all twines, strings, lightweight ropes, etc. whether they consist of one filament (monofilament) or multiple filaments that are twisted or braided together to form a single multi-stranded twine. ( 3 ) This may include metal weights, rubber rollers, escape devices/grids, etc. ( 4 ) Data is to be reported in weight (tonnes) – the quality check report must specify whether conversion factors have been used (e.g. from volume to mass). ( *2 ) Only the total amounts (in white cell) of fishing gear and its components are mandatory for reporting. This includes any fishing gear containing plastics, as well as any separate components, substances or materials that were part of or attached to such fishing gear when it was discarded, including when it was abandoned or lost. Black shaded cells are not relevant. ( 5 ) ‘Twine’ covers all twines, strings, lightweight ropes, etc. whether they consist of one filament (monofilament) or multiple filaments that are twisted or braided together to form a single multi-stranded twine. ( 6 ) This may include metal weights, rubber rollers, escape devices/grids, etc. ANNEX 2 Format for the quality check report accompanying the data referred to in Annex 1, in accordance with Article 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council I. Objective of the report The quality check report aims to gather information on the data compilation methods and the quality of the data submitted. The report is to allow a better understanding of the approaches taken by Member States on data collection as well as to enable data to be compared across Member States. It accompanies Member State reporting on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected. The quality check report is to evaluate the quality of data collection processes, including the scope and validation of administrative data sources and the statistical validity of survey-based approaches. Moreover, the quality check report is to consider reasons for significant changes in reported data and ensure confidence in the accuracy of that data. II. Format for the quality check report: Fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market 1. GENERAL INFORMATION 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE DATA COLLECTION Add rows if needed 3. DESCRIPTION OF METHODS USED 3.1. Specification of methods and sources Indicate the number of the source of reference between brackets in cells answered ‘yes’, e.g. yes (1). Add specific explanations in the table below for cells that were answered ‘yes’, using the reference numbers. Indicate the frequency of data collection (e.g. monthly, quarterly, annually, continuous) if available. Add rows if needed 3.2. Specification of conversion factors If conversion factors ( 1 ) have been used to estimate voluntary data, specify them in the table below. 4. ACCURACY OF THE DATA 4.1. Statistical surveys on the quantity of fishing gear placed on the market Add rows for each survey made. Add specific explanations in the table below by numbering/referencing the above cells. Add rows if needed 4.2. Main accuracy issues Description of main issues affecting the accuracy of data, including errors related to sampling, coverage, measurement, processing and non-response. Description of estimates used. Add rows if needed 4.3. Differences from previous year’s data Significant methodological changes in the calculation method for the current reference year, if any (please include in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break-flag is required for a certain year). Add rows if needed 4.4. Data verification Additional information about the methods, including the combination of methods used. 5. CONFIDENTIALITY 5.1. Specify by numbered item how confidentiality has been ensured (example: measures or procedures preventing unauthorised disclosure of data etc.) Add rows if needed 5.2. Confidentiality issues related to data publication Add rows if needed 6. DISSEMINATION: MAIN NATIONAL WEBSITES AND PUBLICATIONS Topics to be listed below are related to data dissemination. 7. METADATA List of documents related to data collection methodology, data processing and quality control. III. Format for the quality check report: Waste fishing gear collected 1. GENERAL INFORMATION 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE DATA COLLECTION Add rows if needed 3. DESCRIPTION OF METHODS USED 3.1. Specification of methods and sources Indicate the number of the source of reference between brackets in cells answered ‘yes’, e.g. yes (1). Add specific explanations in the table below for cells that were answered ‘yes’, using the reference numbers. Indicate the frequency of data collection (e.g. monthly, quarterly, annually, continuous) if available. Add rows if needed 3.2. Specification of conversion factors If conversion factors ( 2 ) have been used to estimate voluntary data, specify them in the table below. 4. ACCURACY OF THE DATA 4.1. Statistical surveys on the quantity of waste fishing gear collected Add rows for each survey made. Add specific explanations in the table below by numbering/referencing the above cells. Add rows if needed 4.2. Main accuracy issues Description of main issues affecting the accuracy of data, including errors related to sampling, coverage, measurement, processing and non-response. Description of estimates used. Add rows if needed 4.3. Differences from previous year’s data Significant methodological changes in the calculation method for the current reference year, if any (include in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break flag is required for a certain year). Add rows if needed 4.4. Data verification Additional information about the methods, including the combination of methods used. 5. CONFIDENTIALITY 5.1. Specify by numbered item how confidentiality has been ensured (example: measures or procedures preventing unauthorised disclosure of data etc.) Add rows if needed 5.2. Confidentiality issues related to data publication Add rows if needed 6. DISSEMINATION: MAIN NATIONAL WEBSITES AND PUBLICATIONS Topics to be listed below are related to data dissemination. 7. METADATA List of documents related to data collection methodology, data processing and quality control. ( 1 ) A conversion factor is an arithmetical multiplier for converting a quantity expressed in one set of units into an equivalent expressed in another ( *1 ) Black shaded cells are not relevant. ( 2 ) A conversion factor is an arithmetical multiplier for converting a quantity expressed in one set of units into an equivalent expressed in another. ( *2 ) Black shaded cells are not relevant.