Only the original UN/ECE texts have legal effect under international public law. The status and date of entry into force of this Regulation should be checked in the latest version of the UN/ECE status document TRANS/WP.29/343, available at: Regulation No 101 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UN/ECE) — Uniform provisions concerning the approval of passenger cars powered by an internal combustion engine only, or powered by a hybrid electric power train with regard to the measurement of the emission of carbon dioxide and fuel consumption and/or the measurement of electric energy consumption and electric range, and of categories M 1 and N 1 vehicles powered by an electric power train only with regard to the measurement of electric energy consumption and electric range Supplement 7 to the original version of the Regulation — Date of entry into force: 18 June 2007 Amendment to Regulation 101 published in OJ L 158 of 19.6.2007 Paragraph 1. , amend to read (footnote ( 1 ) not amended): ‘1. SCOPE This Regulation applies to vehicles of categories M 1 and N 1 ( 1 ) with regard to: It does not apply to a category N 1 vehicle if both: Insert new paragraphs 2.7. and 2.8. , to read: Paragraphs 2.7. to 2.16. (former) , renumber as paragraphs 2.9. to 2.18. Paragraph 3.3. , amend to read: Paragraph 5.2.1. , amend to read: Paragraphs 7.1. to 7.1.3. , amend to read (inserting a reference to new footnote ( 4 ): ‘7.1. Vehicles powered by an internal combustion engine only, except vehicles equipped with a periodically regenerating emission control system The type approval can be extended to vehicles from the same type or from a different type differing with regard to the following characteristics of Annex 4 if the CO 2 emissions measured by the technical service do not exceed the type approved value by more than 4 per cent for vehicles of category M 1 and 6 per cent for vehicles of category N 1 : Insert new footnote ( 4 ) , to read: Paragraph 7.2. , amend to read: ‘7.2. Vehicles powered by an internal combustion engine only and equipped with a periodically regenerating emission control system The type approval can be extended to vehicles from the same type or from a different type, differing with regard to the characteristics of Annex 4, given in paragraphs 7.1.1. to 7.1.5. above, but not exceeding the family characteristics of Annex 10, if the CO 2 emissions measured by the technical service do not exceed the type approved value by more than 4 per cent for vehicles of category M 1 and 6 per cent for vehicles of category N 1 , and where the same K i factor is applicable. The type approval can be extended also to vehicles from the same type, but with a different K i factor, if the corrected CO 2 value measured by the technical service does not exceed the type approved value by more than 4 per cent for vehicles of category M 1 and 6 per cent for vehicles of category N 1 .’ Paragraphs 7.4. to 7.4.3. , amend to read: ‘7.4. Vehicles powered by a hybrid electric power train The type approval can be extended to vehicles from the same type or from a different type differing with regard to the following characteristics of Annex 4 if the CO 2 emissions and the electric energy consumption measured by the technical service do not exceed the type approved value by more than 4 per cent for vehicles of category M 1 and 6 per cent for vehicles of category N 1 : Insert new paragraphs 7.5. to 7.6.3. , to read: ‘7.5. Extension of approval of vehicles of category N 1 within a family, if powered by an internal combustion engine only or by a hybrid electric power train 7.6. Approval of vehicles of category N 1 within a family, if powered by an internal combustion engine only or by a hybrid electric power train Vehicles of category N 1 can be approved within a family as defined in paragraph 7.6.1. using one of the two alternative methods described in paragraphs 7.6.2. and 7.6.3. 7.6.1. N 1 vehicles may be grouped together into a family for the purposes of this Regulation if the following parameters are identical or within the specified limits: 7.6.2. A vehicle family, as defined in paragraph 7.6.1., can be approved with CO 2 emission and fuel consumption data that are common to all members of the family. The technical service must select for testing the member of the family which the service considers to have the highest CO 2 emission. The measurements are performed as described in paragraph 5. and Annex 6, and the results according to the method described in paragraph 5.5. are used as type-approval values that are common to all members of the family. 7.6.3. Vehicles that are grouped in a family as defined in paragraph 7.6.1. can be approved with individual CO 2 emission and fuel consumption data for each of the family members. The technical service selects for testing the two vehicles, which the service considers to have the highest and the lowest CO 2 emissions respectively. The measurements are performed as described in paragraph 5. and Annex 6. If the manufacturer's data for these two vehicles falls within the tolerance limits described in paragraph 5.5., the CO 2 emissions declared by the manufacturer for all members of the vehicle family can be used as type-approval values. If the manufacturer's data do not fall within the tolerance limits, the results according to the method described in paragraph 5.5. are used as type-approval values and the technical service shall select an appropriate number of other family members for additional tests.’ Annex 4, The TITLE, amend to read (inserting a new reference to footnote ( 6 ): ‘COMMUNICATION ( 6 )’ Insert new footnote ( 6 ) , to read: Item 6.3. , amend to read (inserting a new reference to footnote ( 7 ): 6.3. Type of body: Insert new footnote ( 7 ) , to read: Item 7. , amend to read: 7. Type-approval values.’