COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2021/2053 of 8 November 2021 on the sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 46(1) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, sector environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector is set out in the Annex. Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 25 March 2022. Done at Brussels, 8 November 2021. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Communication from the Commission – Establishment of the working plan setting out an indicative list of sectors for the adoption of sectoral and cross-sectoral reference documents, under Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) ( OJ C 358, 8.12.2011, p. 2 ). ( 3 ) Antonopoulos I., Canfora P., Gaudillat P., Dri M., Eder P., Best Environmental Management Practice in the Fabricated Metal Products manufacturing sector, EUR 30025 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2020, ISBN 978-92-76-14299-7, doi:10.2760/894966, JRC119281; Contents 1. INTRODUCTION This Sectoral Reference Document (SRD) is based on a detailed scientific and policy report ( 1 ) (‘Best Practice Report’) developed by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC). Relevant legal background The Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) was introduced in 1993, for voluntary participation by organisations, by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 ( 2 ) . Subsequently, EMAS has undergone two major revisions: An important new element of the latest revision, which came into force on 11 January 2010, is Article 46 on the development of SRDs. The SRDs have to include best environmental management practices (BEMPs), environmental performance indicators for the specific sectors and, where appropriate, benchmarks of excellence and rating systems identifying performance levels. How to understand and use this document The eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) is a scheme for voluntary participation by organisations committed to continuous environmental improvement. Within this framework, this SRD provides sector-specific guidance to the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector and points out a number of options for improvement as well as best practices. The document was written by the European Commission using input from stakeholders. A Technical Working Group, comprising experts and stakeholders of the sector, led by the JRC, discussed and ultimately agreed on the best environmental management practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence described in this document; these benchmarks in particular were deemed to be representative of the levels of environmental performance that are achieved by the best performing organisations in the sector. The SRD aims to help and support all organisations that intend to improve their environmental performance by providing ideas and inspiration as well as practical and technical guidance. The SRD is primarily addressed to organisations that are already registered with EMAS; secondly to organisations that are considering registering with EMAS in the future; and thirdly to all organisations that wish to learn more about best environmental management practices in order to improve their environmental performance. Consequently, the objective of this document is to support all organisations in the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector to focus on relevant environmental aspects, both direct and indirect, and to find information on best environmental management practices, as well as appropriate sector-specific environmental performance indicators to measure their environmental performance, and benchmarks of excellence. How SRDs should be taken into account by EMAS-registered organisations: Pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009, EMAS-registered organisations are to take SRDs into account at two different levels: Elements of SRDs (indicators, BEMPs or benchmarks of excellence) not considered relevant with regards to the significant environmental aspects identified by the organisation in its environmental review should not be reported or described in the environmental statement. EMAS participation is an ongoing process. Every time an organisation plans to improve its environmental performance (and reviews its environmental performance) it shall consult the SRD on specific topics to find inspiration about which issues to tackle next in a step-wise approach. EMAS environmental verifiers shall check if and how the SRD was taken into account by the organisation when preparing its environmental statement (Article 18(5)(d) of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009). When undertaking an audit, accredited environmental verifiers will need evidence from the organisation of how the relevant elements of the SRD have been selected in light of the environmental review and taken into account. They shall not check compliance with the described benchmarks of excellence, but they shall verify evidence on how the SRD was used as a guide to identify indicators and proper voluntary measures that the organisation can implement to improve its environmental performance. Given the voluntary nature of EMAS and SRD, no disproportionate burdens should be put on the organisations to provide such evidence. In particular, verifiers shall not require an individual justification for each of the best practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence which are mentioned in the SRD and not considered relevant by the organisation in light of its environmental review. Nevertheless, they could suggest relevant additional elements for the organisation to take into account in the future as further evidence of its commitment to continuous performance improvement. Structure of the Sectoral Reference Document This document consists of four chapters. Chapter 1 introduces EMAS’ legal background and describes how to use this document, while Chapter 2 defines the scope of this SRD. Chapter 3 briefly describes the different best environmental management practices (BEMPs) ( 5 ) together with information on their applicability. When specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence could be formulated for a particular BEMP, these are also given. However, defining benchmarks of excellence was not possible for all BEMPs, either because of the limited availability of data or because of the specific conditions of each company and/or plant (type of products manufactured ranging from small prototypes and products with complex geometries, manufactured in small series or large series, to large or small components, diversity of manufacturing processes carried out in each manufacturing facility, etc.) vary to such an extent that a benchmark of excellence would not be meaningful. Even when benchmarks of excellence are given, these are not meant as targets for all companies to reach or metrics to compare the environmental performance across companies of the sector, but rather as a measure of what is possible to help individual companies assess the progress they made and motivate them to improve further. Finally, Chapter 4 presents a comprehensive table with a selection of the most relevant environmental performance indicators, associated explanations and related benchmarks of excellence. 2. SCOPE This reference document addresses the environmental performance of the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector. The target group of this document are companies belonging to the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector, and specifically companies to the following NACE codes (according to the statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community established by Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 ( 6 ) ): This reference document is divided into three main sections (Table 2-1) which cover, from the perspective of the manufacturers, the main environmental aspects of the fabricated metal products manufacturing companies. Table 2-1 Structure of the reference document for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector and main environmental aspects addressed The direct and indirect environmental aspects presented in Table 2-2 and Table 2-3 respectively, were selected as the most commonly relevant in the sector. However, the environmental aspects to be managed by specific companies need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Table 2-2 Most relevant direct environmental aspects and related main environmental pressures addressed in this document Table 2-3 Most relevant indirect environmental aspects and related main environmental pressures addressed in this document The environmental aspects of the NACE codes under the scope of this document that are covered by the Reference Documents on Best Available Techniques (BREFs) ( 7 ) , directly or indirectly linked to the manufacture of fabricated metal products manufacturing as well as by EU legislation, policy instruments and best practice guidance are excluded from the scope of this document. 3. BEST ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, SECTOR ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND BENCHMARKS OF EXCELLENCE FOR THE FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING SECTOR 3.1. BEMPs for cross cutting issues This section is relevant for the fabricated metal products manufacturers. 3.1.1. Applying effective methods for environmental management BEMP is to use effective methods for environmental management, in order to optimise process and product design at the production stage and reduce environmental impacts along the whole value chain. This framework encompasses two levels: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable for all companies, including SMEs. Lack of sufficient in-house technical knowledge and the need for staff training can limit the applicability of this BEMP. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.2. Collaboration and communication along and across the value chain BEMP is to collaborate with other companies within the sector, companies in other sectors and throughout the value chain. This collaboration can be organised as: Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all size of companies in the sector, including SMEs. Lack of sufficient in-house technical knowledge and the need for staff training implies extra costs that may constitute a significant barrier for some companies, especially for SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.3. Energy management Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. The lack of in-house technical knowledge, especially in smaller companies can be a limitation for the applicability of this BEMP. Additionally, improper integration of the elements of the energy management system and weak communication across the organisation can downgrade the performance and effectiveness of the energy management system in place. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.4. Environmentally sound and resource efficient management of chemicals BEMP is to optimise the amounts of chemicals used for manufacturing processes, minimise the chemicals that are disposed of and substitute hazardous chemicals wherever possible with more environmentally friendly alternatives. To achieve these aims, fabricated metal products manufacturers can implement the following measures: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable by all type of companies of the sector, including SMEs. The operation of the described chemical management system requires some technical knowledge, which may be an important barrier, especially for the SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.5. Biodiversity management BEMP is to take into account direct and indirect impacts throughout the value chain and on-site manufacturing processes, by taking the following actions: Applicability 3.1.6. Remanufacturing and high quality refurbishment of high value and/or large series products and components Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. Remanufacturing or refurbishment may increase companies’ operational costs, which are certainly outbalanced for manufacturing of high value products/components/parts and for large volume series. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.7. Link to the Reference Documents on Best Available Techniques relevant for fabricated metal product manufacturing companies It is BEMP for fabricated metal products manufacturing companies to consult the relevant Best Available Techniques ( 10 ) (BAT) described in the relevant Reference Documents on BAT (BREFs) to identify relevant environmental issues to address and, where appropriate, implement the techniques. Applicability Best Available Techniques (BAT) described in the relevant Reference Documents on BAT (BREFs) applies to large companies under the scope of Industrial Emissions Directive (IED) ( 11 ) . This BEMP is very relevant for the SMEs (below the IED threshold). However, the lack of technical knowledge or capacity (of SMEs) may constitute a limiting factor. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2. BEMPs for optimisation of utilities This section deals with practices for the supporting processes and is relevant for the fabricated metal products manufacturers. 3.2.1. Efficient ventilation BEMP is to improve the efficiency of the ventilation system and reduce its energy use by: A similar approach can be also implemented for new installations, whereby the needs are defined on the designed building and processes and there is further opportunity to minimise them by influencing their design. Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. Insufficient in-house technical knowledge can also sometimes constitute a barrier to implement all the elements of this BEMP. The safety of the staff of the manufacturing facility must be set against the energy efficiency of the ventilation system in place. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.2. Optimal lighting In order to achieve optimal lighting in new built and existing manufacturing sites, a lighting study, to define the actual (current and future) light needs and a lighting plan, to define the optimal lighting solution (light systems, fittings, lamps, use of daylight, etc.) need to be carried out. It is BEMP for manufacturers of fabricated metal products to optimise existing and new lighting systems by: Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in the sector, including SMEs. However, it is more suitable for new built manufacturing sites or renovated production lines. The natural lighting is an important element on efficient lighting systems, but its implementation may be limited to all locations due to local natural conditions. Similarly, its applicability may be limited in existing manufacturing sites due to architectural constraints. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.3. Environmental optimisation of cooling systems BEMP is to systemically improve the energy efficiency and overall environmental performance of cooling systems for the machine shops of the manufacturing site by: Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs and it is more suitable for new built or renovated manufacturing sites. However, the implementation of this BEMP may require support from external partners, which may constitute a possible barrier, especially for the SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.4. Rational and efficient use of compressed air BEMP is for fabricated metal product manufacturers to reduce their energy consumption associated with the use of compressed air in the manufacturing processes by the following measures: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is more suitable for new or renovated production lines. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.5. Use of renewable energy BEMP is for fabricated metal product manufacturing companies to use renewable energy for their processes by: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. The own heat generation from renewables and integration in the fabrication processes, highly depends on the technological specificities of the carried out manufacturing processes and the actual demand e.g. high-temperature process. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.6. Rainwater collection BEMP is to reduce freshwater use at manufacturing sites by collecting and using rainwater in the various manufacturing or ancillary processes. Such a system collects rainwater from a catchment area (often the roof of the manufacturing plant or the parking space), has a conveyance system to collect it in a storage tank and a distribution system (pipes and pump) to bring it to the final use points. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is more suitable for new built or retrofitted plants and particularly to those plants where the collected rainwater can be used as process water. In case of retrofitting, the building characteristics may constitute a barrier to the implementation of the BEMP. The geographical location highly influences the relevance of this BEMP (e.g. amount of precipitation, local water scarcity). In certain regions, the BEMP is compulsory by legislation for flood prevention and to reduce the use of ground water. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3. BEMPs for manufacturing processes This section deals with practices for the core manufacturing processes and is relevant for the fabricated metal products manufacturers. 3.3.1. Selection of resource efficient metal working fluids BEMP is to select resource efficient metal working fluids by: BEMP is also to evaluate and control the performance of the selected metal working fluids during or after their application by means of a monitoring system. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. However, the lack of in-house technical knowledge can constitute a barrier, especially in SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.2. Minimisation of lubricoolant consumption in metal processing BEMP is to minimise the use of lubricoolants in metal processing and shaping operations. This can be achieved by applying techniques such as cryogenic cooling or high pressure lubricoolant supply. These techniques result in reduced waste generation, higher overall process efficiencies and consequently lower energy use as well as extended tool service life. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. Due to its energy intensity, it is more suitable for small series or prototypes and for new or renewed installations rather than retrofitting on an ongoing process. However, the energy intensity is a parameter that needs to be carefully examined on a case-by-case basis. This, in combination with the lack of in-house technical knowledge and expertise may constitute a significant barrier for the application of this BEMP. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.3. Incremental sheet metal forming as alternative for mould making For the production of small series, it is BEMP to apply incremental sheet metal forming (ISF) as an alternative for mould making. This allows the manufacturing of complex products with a higher material efficiency. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in the sector, including SMEs. ISF can be used for a wide variety of materials and it is more suitable for complex product geometries and for small series of production and prototypes. However, companies prior to switching to ISF technique, may carry out a life cycle assessment to understand environmental benefits. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.4. Reduction of standby energy use of metal working machines BEMP is to reduce the standby energy use of metal working machines by switching off (and on again) the machines in the most efficient way, either manually or automatically (re-programming the control system) or by purchasing more energy-efficient machines in which a ‘green’ standby mode (with very low energy use) is integrated. This operational way is often based on several subunits that can be switched off individually instead of putting the entire machine simply on standby. An additional approach is reducing the duration of standby phases, especially for machines with high energy use during downtime, through an optimisation of production planning. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable in all types of companies from the sector, including SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.5. Maintaining material value for metal residues BEMP is to maintain material value by post-processing metal scrap (chips and swarf), in particular through two aspects of metal residue processing: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs and more relevant for the production of large series. The volume of material working residues must be significant to ensure economic feasibility. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.6. Multi directional forging When forging complex products with a high variation in cross-section, it is BEMP to apply multi-directional forging. This practice reduces significantly the formation of flash by applying pressure in different directions in the piece under fabrication, resulting in less material needing to be removed by machining afterwards. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is especially suitable for complexly formed components and niche products, and for companies with large production series. Multi-directional forging can be applied to a wide variety of materials (aluminium, copper, magnesium, titanium). However, the applicability of this BEMP may be limited due to the need of purchasing special forging tools and technical knowledge which result in high investment cost. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.7. Hybrid machining as a method to reduce energy use BEMP is for fabricated metal product manufacturers to use hybrid machining if this allows a significant decrease in the total energy needs for machining per single part/product/component by combining two or more different manufacturing processes into a new setup exploiting synergistically the advantages of each individual process. The combination of the various manufacturing processes e.g. milling, drilling can enable more freedom in the design and fabrication of parts, products, components when compared to the use of conventional machining technologies. Applicability Hybrid machining is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is especially suitable for manufacturing sites that have new machines. Hybrid machining is very relevant for the manufacturing of parts/products/components with complex geometries. The combination of relatively high investment costs and lack of in-house specific technical knowledge/capacity required to implement this BEMP may limit its applicability, especially in SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.8. Use of predictive control for paint booth HVAC management BEMP is to minimise the energy use of the HVAC for paint booths by implementing a predictive control system, based on feedback and feedforward control, operating on a window of values. Such system allows keeping constant the speed at which the paint dries without necessarily maintaining constant the temperature and humidity levels in the paint booth, as is the case in conventional control systems. The working principle is keeping constant only the difference between the limit to how much vapour can be absorbed by the air (which varies with temperature) and the amount of water vapour already in the air. Applicability This BEMP is suitable for companies with large series of production, large paint booths and with multiple paint booths. The full and effective implementation of the BEMP requires: The fulfilment of the increased above mentioned requirements in combination with the lack of in-house technical knowledge and high investment costs constitute a barrier to its implementation, especially for SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 4. RECOMMENDED SECTOR-SPECIFIC KEY ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Table 4.1 lists a selection of key environmental performance indicators for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector, together with the related benchmarks and reference to the relevant BEMPs. These are a subset of all the indicators mentioned in Section 3. Table 4.1 Key environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector ( 1 ) The scientific and policy report is publicly available on the JRC website at the following address: The conclusions on best environmental management practices and their applicability as well as the identified specific environmental performance indicators and the benchmarks of excellence contained in this Sectoral Reference Document are based on the findings documented in the scientific and policy report. All the background information and technical details can be found there. ( 2 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 of 29 June 1993 allowing voluntary participation by companies in the industrial sector in a Community eco-management and audit scheme ( OJ L 168, 10.7.1993, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 allowing voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) ( OJ L 114, 24.4.2001, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) According to Annex IV (B.(f)) of the EMAS Regulation, the environmental statement shall contain ‘a summary of the data available on the environmental performance of the organisation with respect to its significant environmental aspects. Reporting shall be on both the core environmental performance indicators and the specific environmental performance indicators as set out in Section C. Where environmental objectives and targets exist, the respective data shall be reported.’ Annex IV – Section C.3. states that ‘each organisation shall also report annually on its performance relating to the significant direct and indirect environmental aspects and impacts that are related to its core business activities, that are measurable and verifiable, and that are not covered already by the core indicators. Where available, the organisation shall take account of sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46 to facilitate the identification of relevant sector specific indicators.’ ( 5 ) A detailed description of each of the best practices, with practical guidance on how to implement them, is available in the ‘Best Practice Report’ published by the JRC and available online at: Organisations are invited to consult it if interested in learning more about some of the best practices described in this SRD. ( 6 ) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical domains ( OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). NB: NACE stands for Nomenclature statistique des Activités économiques dans la Communauté Européenne . ( * ) Only small scale operations (considerably smaller than IED thresholds with substantially different manufacturing processes, e.g. much more manual than automated processes). ( ** ) These activities are considered in scope insofar as the products concerned are composed mainly of metal. ( 7 ) Information on the Reference Documents on Best Available Techniques is available at: ( 8 ) The output (expressed in the indicators as kg finished product or manufactured part) can be expressed in different ways: number of parts, kg of products etc. depending on the type of products and their homogeneity/heterogeneity. Companies can choose suitable metrics to express the output. ( 9 ) Companies that utilise waste materials for energy i.e. heat production by other companies, must have in place appropriate and effective emission treatments systems to avoid air pollution. ( 10 ) The full list of the existing developed BREFs is available here: ( 11 ) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council: ( 12 ) E.g. recovering heating energy for building heating with a heat exchanger. ( 13 ) ( 14 ) EMAS core indicators are listed in Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 (Section C.2). ( 15 ) The numbers refer to the sections in this document.