COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION of 9 December 2013 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for the production of chlor-alkali (notified under document C(2013) 8589) (Text with EEA relevance) (2013/732/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The BAT conclusions for the production of chlor-alkali are set out in the Annex to this Decision. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 9 December 2013. For the Commission Janez POTOČNIK Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 . ( 3 ) BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF CHLOR-ALKALI These BAT conclusions cover certain industrial activities specified in Sections 4.2(a) and 4.2(c) of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU, namely the production of chlor-alkali chemicals (chlorine, hydrogen, potassium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide) by the electrolysis of brine. In particular, these BAT conclusions cover the following processes and activities: These BAT conclusions do not address the following activities or processes: These BAT conclusions do not address the following aspects of chlor-alkali production as they are covered by the BAT reference document on Common Waste Water and Waste Gas Treatment/Management Systems in the Chemical Sector (CWW); Other reference documents which are of relevance for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to: BAT-AELs for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to: DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: BAT CONCLUSIONS 1. Cell technique BAT 1: BAT for the production of chlor-alkali is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The mercury cell technique cannot be considered BAT under any circumstances. The use of asbestos diaphragms is not BAT. 2. Decommissioning or conversion of mercury cell plants BAT 2: In order to reduce emissions of mercury and to reduce the generation of waste contaminated with mercury during the decommissioning or conversion of mercury cell plants, BAT is to elaborate and implement a decommissioning plan that incorporates all of the following features: BAT 3: In order to reduce emissions of mercury to water during the decommissioning or conversion of mercury cell plants, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The BAT-associated environmental performance level ( 1 ) for mercury emissions to water, expressed as Hg, at the outlet of the mercury treatment unit during decommissioning or conversion is 3 – 15 μg/l in 24-hour flow-proportional composite samples taken daily. The associated monitoring is in BAT 7. 3. Generation of waste water BAT 4: In order to reduce the generation of waste water, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given below. 4. Energy efficiency BAT 5: In order to use energy efficiently in the electrolysis process, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 6: In order to use energy efficiently, BAT is to maximise the use of the co-produced hydrogen from the electrolysis as a chemical reagent or fuel. Description Hydrogen can be used in chemical reactions (e.g. production of ammonia, hydrogen peroxide, hydrochloric acid, and methanol; reduction of organic compounds; hydrodesulphurisation of petroleum; hydrogenation of oils and greases; chain termination in polyolefin production) or as a fuel in a combustion process to produce steam and/or electricity or to heat a furnace. The degree to which hydrogen is used depends on a number of factors (e.g. demand for hydrogen as reagent on the site, demand for steam on the site, distance to potential users). 5. Monitoring of emissions BAT 7: BAT is to monitor emissions to air and water by using monitoring techniques in accordance with EN standards with at least the minimum frequency given below. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 6. Emissions to air BAT 8: In order to reduce channelled emissions of chlorine and chlorine dioxide to air from the processing of chlorine, BAT is to design, maintain and operate a chlorine absorption unit that incorporates an appropriate combination of the following features: The BAT-associated emission level for chlorine and chlorine dioxide, measured together and expressed as Cl 2 , is 0,2 – 1,0 mg/m 3 , as an average value of at least three consecutive hourly measurements performed at least once every year at the outlet of the chlorine absorption unit. The associated monitoring is in BAT 7. BAT 9: The use of carbon tetrachloride for the elimination of nitrogen trichloride or the recovery of chlorine from tail gas is not BAT. BAT 10: The use of refrigerants with a high global warming potential, and in any case higher than 150 (e.g. many hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)), in new chlorine liquefaction units cannot be considered BAT. Description Suitable refrigerants include, for example: Applicability The refrigerant selection should take into account operational safety and energy efficiency. 7. Emissions to water BAT 11: In order to reduce emissions of pollutants to water, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. BAT 12: In order to reduce emissions of chloride to water from the chlor-alkali plant, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given in BAT 4. BAT 13: In order to reduce emissions of free chlorine to water from the chlor-alkali plant, BAT is to treat waste water streams containing free chlorine as close as possible to the source, to prevent stripping of chlorine and/or the formation of halogenated organic compounds, by using one or a combination of the techniques given below. The BAT-associated emission level for free chlorine, expressed as Cl 2 , is 0,05 – 0,2 mg/l in spot samples taken at least once every month at the point where the emission leaves the installation. The associated monitoring is in BAT 7. BAT 14: In order to reduce emissions of chlorate to water from the chlor-alkali plant, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 15: In order to reduce emissions of halogenated organic compounds to water from the chlor-alkali plant, BAT is to use a combination of the techniques given below. 8. Generation of waste BAT 16: In order to reduce the quantity of spent sulphuric acid sent for disposal, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The neutralisation of spent sulphuric acid from chlorine drying with virgin reagents is not BAT. The BAT-associated environmental performance level for the quantity of spent sulphuric acid sent for disposal, expressed as H 2 SO 4 (96 wt-%), is ≤ 0,1 kg per tonne of chlorine produced. 9. Site remediation BAT 17: In order to reduce contamination of soil, groundwater and air, as well as to halt pollutant dispersion and transfer to biota from contaminated chlor-alkali sites, BAT is to devise and implement, a site remediation plan that incorporates all of the following features: Description A site remediation plan is often devised and implemented after taking the decision to decommission the plant, although other requirements may dictate a (partial) site remediation plan while the plant is still in operation. Some features of the site remediation plan can overlap, be skipped, or be carried out in another order, depending on other requirements. Applicability The applicability of BAT 17(v). to 17(viii) is subject to the results of the risk assessment mentioned under BAT 17(iv). GLOSSARY ( 1 ) Given that this performance level does not relate to normal operating conditions, it is not an emission level associated with the Best Available Techniques in the sense of Article 3(13) of the Industrial Emissions Directive (2010/75/EU). ( 2 ) Monitoring encompasses both continuous and periodic monitoring as indicated. ( 3 ) Covered by BAT 1, 4, 12, 13, 14 and 15. ( 4 ) Within the scope of the BAT reference document on Common Waste Water and Waste Gas Treatment/Management Systems in the Chemical Sector (CWW BREF).