COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION (EU) 2023/1425 of 27 June 2023 on facilitating finance for the transition to a sustainable economy THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 292 thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS RECOMMENDATION: 1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE 2. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this Recommendation, the following definitions apply: 3. RECOMMENDATION TO UNDERTAKINGS SEEKING TRANSITION FINANCE Sustainable finance tools to determine and articulate transition finance needs 4. USE OF CREDIBLE TRANSITION PATHWAYS TO SET SCIENCE-BASED TARGETS 5. USE OF EU CLIMATE BENCHMARKS 6. USE OF THE EU TAXONOMY 7. USE OF A CREDIBLE TRANSITION PLAN 8. FINANCING INSTRUMENTS TO RAISE TRANSITION FINANCE Green or other sustainability loans Green or other sustainability bonds Equity financing and specialised lending 9. RECOMMENDATION TO FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES AND INVESTORS WILLING TO PROVIDE TRANSITION FINANCE Tools for setting transition finance targets and for identifying projects or undertakings 10. ENGAGEMENT WITH UNDERTAKINGS IN NEED OF TRANSITION FINANCE 11. TRANSITION-SPECIFIC FINANCING SOLUTIONS 12. TRANSITION AND PHYSICAL RISKS 13. RECOMMENDATION RELATED TO SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES Small and medium-sized enterprises seeking transition finance 14. FINANCING SOLUTIONS FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES 15. RECOMMENDATION TO MEMBER STATES Member States are invited to consider the following recommendations to encourage transition financing: 16. RECOMMENDATION TO THE EUROPEAN SUPERVISORY AUTHORITIES AND NATIONAL COMPETENT AUTHORITIES The European supervisory authorities and the national competent authorities are encouraged to: For the Commission Mairead MCGUINNESS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) The Union will need to invest EUR 477 billion more per year in 2021–2030 than it did in 2011–2020 to meet its emissions-reduction targets in the energy and transport sectors. It will need to invest an additional EUR 110 billion per year to achieve its environmental objectives. For details, see the Commission Staff Working Document on ‘Investment needs assessment and funding availabilities to strengthen the EU’s Net-Zero technology manufacturing capacity’ (SWD (2023) 68 final), and the Communication from the Commission on ‘the EU economy after COVID-19: implications for economic governance’, COM (2021) 662 final. ( 2 ) Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on establishing a framework of measures for strengthening Europe’s net-zero technology products’ manufacturing ecosystem (Net-Zero Industry Act), COM (2023) 161 final. ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 ( OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13 ). Hereafter the term ‘Taxonomy’ refers to Regulation (EU) 2020/852 together with Delegated Acts adopted under that Regulation. ( 4 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/2089 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 as regards EU Climate Transition Benchmarks, EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks and sustainability-related disclosures for benchmarks ( OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 17 ). ( 5 ) Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 amending Regulation (EU) No 537/2014, Directive 2004/109/EC, Directive 2006/43/EC and Directive 2013/34/EU, as regards corporate sustainability reporting ( OJ L 322, 16.12.2022, p. 15 ). ( 6 ) Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on European green bonds, COM/2021/391 final. Political agreement reached by co-legislators on 28 February 2023. ( 7 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of Regions on Strategy for Financing the Transition to a Sustainable Economy, COM (2021) 390 final. ( 8 ) OECD (2022), OECD Guidance on Transition Finance: Ensuring Credibility of Corporate Climate Transition Plans, Green Finance and Investment, OECD Publishing, Paris. ( 9 ) G20 (2022), 2022 G20 Sustainable Finance Report. ( 10 ) International Platform on Sustainable Finance (2022), Report on Transition Finance. Available at: ( 11 ) United Nations’ High-Level Expert Group on the Net Zero Emissions Commitments of Non-State Entities (2022), Integrity Matters: Net Zero Commitments by Businesses, Financial Institutions, Cities and Regions. ( 12 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: The European Green Deal, COM (2019) 640 final. ( 13 ) Approved by the Union on 5 October 2016; Council Decision (EU) 2016/1841 of 5 October 2016 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( OJ L 282, 19.10.2016, p. 1 ). ( 14 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178 of 6 July 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council by specifying the content and presentation of information to be disclosed by undertakings subject to Articles 19a or 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU concerning environmentally sustainable economic activities and specifying the methodology to comply with that disclosure obligation ( OJ L 443, 10.12.2021, p. 9 ), Annex I. ( 15 ) Expenditures for activity-based transition plans cannot be considered Taxonomy aligned if they do not fully meet the respective Taxonomy criteria, but they can nevertheless be a meaningful step towards improved levels of sustainability performance and attract transition finance. ( 16 ) As of 17 May 2023, 63 % of the STOXX Europe 600 undertakings have already disclosed their Taxonomy eligibility and alignment for financial year 2022. Source : Bloomberg. ( 17 ) Nearly two in three companies that disclosed Taxonomy-eligible capital expenditure reported a non-zero alignment figure and one in two companies that disclosed eligible revenue reported a non-zero degree of aligned revenue. Source : Bloomberg. ( 18 ) Proposal for a Directive on Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence and amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937, COM (2022) 71. ( 19 ) Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions, amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC ( OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 338 ). ( 20 ) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 ( OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1 ). ( 21 ) Forthcoming advice following up on the Call for advice to the European Banking Authority on green loans and mortgages, available at: ( 22 ) The Platform on Sustainable Finance established by Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852. More information on this Platform is available at: ( 23 ) Communication from the Commission on a ‘Strategy for Financing the Transition to a Sustainable Economy’, COM/2021/390 final. ( 24 ) The distinction and overlaps between transition financing and green financing, as well as how this evolves over time is illustrated in Section 1 of the Annex. ( 25 ) Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises ( OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 1 ) defines microenterprise as an enterprise which employs fewer than 10 persons and the annual turnover and/or annual balance sheet total of which does not exceed EUR 2 million. ( 26 ) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) ( OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1 ). ( 27 ) As defined in Regulation (EU) 2020/852. ( 28 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178 of 6 July 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council by specifying the content and presentation of information to be disclosed by undertakings subject to Articles 19a or 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU concerning environmentally sustainable economic activities, and specifying the methodology to comply with that disclosure obligation ( OJ L 443, 10.12.2021, p. 9 ). ( 29 ) Section 2 of the Annex illustrates how the different characteristics of an undertaking’s transition targets can be reflected in transition financing needs with different time horizons. Figure 2 in the Annex displays various options to articulate transition finance needs. ( 30 ) Section 3 of the Annex gives an overview of tools that might be used to determine transition finance needs and options to raise transition finance. ( 31 ) A possible source for such scenarios might be the scenarios published by the Network for Greening the Financial System. ( 32 ) The European Commission’s qualitative EU Transition Pathways are available at: ( 33 ) Section 4 of the Annex explains in more detail the EU climate benchmark methodologies and how these can be used for articulating transition finance needs. ( 34 ) Such as the Climate Delegated Act and any future delegated acts specifying technical screening criteria. ( 35 ) Section 5 of the Annex further illustrates how the Taxonomy can be used for this purpose. ( 36 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on A new Circular Economy Action Plan: For a cleaner and more competitive Europe. COM/2020/98 final. ( 37 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030: Bringing nature back into our lives. COM/2020/380 final. ( 38 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All EU Action Plan: ‘Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil’. COM/2021/400 final. ( 39 ) Section 6 of the Annex provides examples of the financing instruments described below. ( 40 ) Considering also Section 2 of the Annex. ( 41 ) Section 7 of the Annex provides further suggestions on such tools. ( 42 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on A new Circular Economy Action Plan: For a cleaner and more competitive Europe. COM/2020/98 final. ( 43 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030: Bringing nature back into our lives. COM/2020/380 final. ( 44 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All EU Action Plan: ‘Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil’. COM/2021/400 final. ( 45 ) Under Directive (EU) 2022/2464, reporting for listed SMEs (except micro businesses) will begin in 2027, based on the 2026 financial year. Listed SMEs will be able to report according to separate, proportionate standards developed by the EFRAG. ( 46 ) For instance, companies can support SMEs, whether or not they fall within the scope of mandatory sustainability reporting, to voluntarily use Union sustainable finance tools or other science-based tools to communicate their transition projects, transition targets or transition plans to address transition risks to banks in a transparent and substantive way. Table of contents 1. Relationship between green and transition finance Sustainable finance is about financing both what is already environment-friendly and what is transitioning to such performance levels over time. Figure 1 below shows how transition finance relates to general finance and green finance, and how these different forms of financing might evolve in the short-, medium- and long term. General finance , which does not have any sustainability objectives can be distinguished from green finance and transition finance. Such general finance can currently include both highly impactful and low-impact activities. Over time, as the economy transitions, high-impact activities will have to transition to become low-impact. Transition finance aims to finance that transition. It can include both use-of-proceeds financing and general (corporate) purpose financing. In the short-term transition finance will often not result in improvements that meet green performance targets. In the long-term however transition finance needs to be aligned with climate and environmental objectives of the EU and will therefore be considered either green or low-impact. 2. Considerations on how different types of impacts, risks and opportunities of an undertaking could be reflected in individual transition targets This section relates to points 3 and 4 of the Commission Recommendation. Undertakings can consider their transition finance needs based on their sustainability impacts, risks and opportunities. These can be identified through a materiality assessment following the double materiality approach. As part of this assessment, undertakings could use climate- and environment related scenario analysis to inform the identification and assessment of physical and transition risks and opportunities over the short, medium- and long-term time horizons. Based on the outcome of such a materiality assessment ( 2 ) , undertakings could set transition targets and determine transition finance needs and commitments, where relevant. Figure 2 provides an overview of the tools that can be used for considering how to define transition finance needs in case of material impacts, and how to define finance needs to address low or residual impacts. When planning their transition and defining transition finance needs, undertakings are encouraged to consider setting transition targets based on relevant transition pathways that are compatible with the transition, taking into account the type of impacts and other factors such as severity, scale, scope and irremediability of those impacts. Undertakings can draw on standards and guidance available under Directive (EU) 2022/2464 and its implementation for this purpose (Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive). Undertakings are encouraged to make the following considerations on how different impacts, risks and opportunities could be reflected in transition targets and related transition finance needs. Table 1 General considerations for climate and environmental target setting in case of material impacts Table 2 Considerations for simple improvement targets in case of non-material impacts 3. Overview of sustainable finance tools to articulate and determine transition finance needs Sustainable finance tools, in particular the Taxonomy, or the EU climate benchmarks as well as credible transition plans can be used to support the definition of transition targets and articulate specific transition finance needs at the level of the undertaking and at the level of economic activities. Transition finance can then be raised through green- or sustainability linked bonds, loans, equity financing or specialised lending. Figure 3 below provides an overview of the tools that can be used to articulate and raise transition finance. 4. EU Climate benchmark methodologies This section relates to point 5 of the Commission Recommendation. Where sector-specific science-based pathways or roadmaps do not exist, undertakings could consider the methodologies of the EU climate benchmarks and use those in a way that ensures alignment with the 1,5 °C scenario of the IEA or the IPCC. Where sector-specific science-based scenarios and pathways exist, undertakings could consider whether using those allows them to meet also the minimum standards of EU climate benchmarks. The capital market issuances of undertakings meeting the minimum standards of the climate benchmark methodologies and demonstrating it (for instance through a credible transition plan considering standards and guidance available under Directive (EU) 2022/2464 and its implementation), are more likely to be included in portfolios that follow the EU climate benchmarks. Climate benchmark minimum standards The EU climate benchmarks are based on a set of criteria aiming to ensure a transition path for portfolios that is compatible with the transition to a sustainable economy ( 8 ) . The minimum standards of climate benchmarks’ decarbonisation target and trajectory requires an annual minimum 7 % reduction of GHG intensity or absolute GHG emissions target ( 9 ) . For each year in which the targets are not achieved, missed targets should be compensated for, by upwardly adjusting the targets in the decarbonisation trajectory for the following year. Where possible, consider demonstrating lower average emissions in comparison to peers and avoiding specific exclusion factors listed in Articles 9 to 12 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 of 17 July 2020. Overweighting undertakings that set and publish GHG emission reduction targets The capital market issuances of undertakings can be given a bigger weight in a benchmark that follows the EU climate benchmarks, if the issuing undertaking can demonstrate that it has set and published GHG emission reduction targets, where the following conditions are fulfilled: 5. EU Taxonomy This section relates to point 6 of the Commission Recommendation. 5.1. What the EU Taxonomy can be used for Undertakings can use the Taxonomy as a transition finance tool, for planning the transition of their economic activities and earmarking needed transition investments. As such, it can be used for the classification of sustainable investments, the measurement of current and planned climate or environmental performance, target setting and communication, including articulating Taxonomy-linked targets in transition plans. 5.2. The Taxonomy as a transition tool By defining environmentally sustainable economic activities, not undertakings, the Taxonomy enables undertakings to transition by gradually increasing their share of environmentally sustainable activities. Figure 5 illustrates how an undertaking can gradually transition its activities, here activities performed in factories, and invest into their upgrades to increase the share of green activities in the future. Activity-based transition plans can be the key part of an entity level transition strategy. 5.3. Options for using the Taxonomy to specify transition finance needs Undertakings can use the Taxonomy to define their transition finance needs at activity level. The Taxonomy does not prescribe the timeline by which an undertaking should align its activities with any of its criteria. Instead, it leaves flexibility to market actors to use the timetables of their own science-based transition paths. Undertakings can reference taxonomy criteria in their climate and environmental target setting and where those targets are aligned with the transition and their achievement is credible, they can raise transition finance for their implementation. Figure 6 illustrates how the Taxonomy can be used for this purpose, providing options that can be considered in the given sequence, considering the feasibility of the more ambitious options first. (1) Financing already Taxonomy-aligned economic activities Where an economic activity is already aligned with the Taxonomy, undertakings could consider any current and future financing needs for maintaining Taxonomy alignment also in the future. (2) Investments aligned with the Taxonomy Where an economic activity is eligible but not yet aligned with the Taxonomy, undertakings could consider aligning it with the technical screening criteria of the Taxonomy within 5 (exceptionally 10) years ( 10 ) . Specify the transition investment needed to reach these targets in a CapEx plan. Such capital expenditure is considered Taxonomy aligned investment. (3) Investment aligning with the Taxonomy over longer timeframe Where Taxonomy alignment in 5 (exceptionally 10) years is not feasible, it is possible to consider aligning an asset or economic activity with the associated Taxonomy performance criteria over a longer time horizon that is still compatible with the transition. Transition investments that will only reach Taxonomy-alignment over a longer time frame than the 5 (exceptionally 10) years recognised under Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178, those could be accompanied by an activity-specific transition plan that is compatible with the transition, justifying the longer time-horizon for reaching the targets ( 11 ) and showing how Taxonomy-alignment will be reached in subsequent step. For environmental aspects, the targets could be aligned with international and Union environmental policy objectives and targets, including those related to the sustainable protection and restoration of water and marine resources, circular economy, pollution prevention and control, and the protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems. (4) Investments for transitioning beyond climate mitigation do-no-significant-harm levels in a first step Undertakings with activities currently not meeting the DNSH criteria of the Taxonomy, where investments to reach the substantial contribution criteria in 5 (exceptionally 10) years is not currently feasible, could consider improving the environmental performance of those activities beyond performance levels defined by the ‘do no significant harm’ criteria within a timeframe that is short enough to be compatible with the transition ( 12 ) . . For such transition investments that improve performance beyond do-no-significant-harm criteria of the Taxonomy as a first step in the transition, undertakings could consider accompanying those by an activity-specific transition plan that is compatible with the transition, justifying why this interim step is needed and how Taxonomy-alignment will be reached in subsequent step. The plan could demonstrate (i) how the activity will transition with a meaningful performance improvement to beyond the DNSH criteria level and towards the substantial contribution criteria level; and (ii) how continuous climate or environmental performance improvement will ensure avoiding causing significant harm in the future, as the economy gets closer to climate neutrality, and tolerance levels for harm that is considered significant will also shift over time. (5) Investments specified by other means in activity-based transition plan For highly impactful economic activities not yet covered by Taxonomy Delegated Acts and where there is no low-impact alternative covered by the Taxonomy Regulation, undertakings could consider using other means such as science-based pathways to specify targets and financing needs. (6) Investments for transitioning activities with low environmental impacts For low-impact economic activities, which are therefore not covered by the Taxonomy, undertakings can consider using relevant Taxonomy criteria to address residual impacts e.g. through investments into energy efficiency of buildings, low emission mobility, enabling technologies, etc. 6. Financing instruments to raise transition finance This section relates to point 8 of the Commission Recommendation. Undertakings can consider using one, or a combination of several, transition-related financing instruments to raise transition finance, such as specific loan types or capital market issuances with specific features. Table 3 below provides illustrations for this purpose. Table 3 Examples of loan or capital market financing instruments for raising transition finance 7. Use of European Union sustainable finance tools by financial intermediaries and investors This section relates to point 9 of the Commission Recommendation. Financial intermediaries and investors willing to provide transition finance to support the real-economy’s transition could use sustainable finance tools to set portfolio targets and identify projects or undertaking to finance the transition. Table 4 below provides further illustrations in this regard. Table 4 how to use sustainable finance tools to set portfolio targets and identify projects or undertaking s to finance the transition ( 1 ) Commission Recommendation on facilitating the finance for the transition to a sustainable economy (C(2023) 3844). ( 2 ) A sustainability matter is material from an impact perspective when it pertains to the undertaking’s material actual or potential, positive or negative impacts on people or the environment over the short-, medium- and long-term time horizons. A material sustainability matter from an impact perspective includes impacts caused or contributed to by the undertaking and impacts which are directly linked to the undertaking’s operations, products, and services through its business relationships. A material sustainability could also matter from a financial perspective, for instance if the sustainability risk materialises through stranded assets. ( 3 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on A new Circular Economy Action Plan: For a cleaner and more competitive Europe. COM/2020/98 final. ( 4 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions EU biodiversity strategy for 2030 bringing nature back into our lives. COM/2020/380 final. ( 5 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All EU Action Plan: ‘Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil’. COM/2021/400 final. ( 6 ) The Commission’s EU Transition Pathways are available at: ( 7 ) The undertaking’s dependency on external factors across geographies to achieve its entity level transition plan, e.g. possible future policy, technology readiness, social acceptability, resource availability and physical climate impacts across the sites where it operates. ( 8 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 of 17 July 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards minimum standards for EU Climate Transition Benchmarks and EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks, Articles 6–12. ( 9 ) The minimum requirements are set out in Articles 7 to 9 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 of 17 July 2020. ( 10 ) According to the Taxonomy Disclosures Delegated Act, the period to reach Taxonomy-alignment can exceed five years only where a longer period is objectively justified by specific features of the economic activity and the upgrade concerned, with a maximum of 10 years. ( 11 ) The related capital expenditure is not considered taxonomy aligned, but it can be a meaningful step on the transition path towards higher levels of sustainability performance. ( 12 ) The related capital expenditure is not considered taxonomy aligned, but it can be a meaningful step on the transition path towards higher levels of sustainability performance. ( 13 ) As per Directive (EU) 2022/2464 and its implementation (Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive). ( 14 ) As per Directive (EU) 2022/2464 and its implementation (Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive). ( 15 ) The benchmarks require a baseline decarbonisation requirement of 30 % for the EU Climate Transition Benchmarks and 50 % for the EU Paris-Aligned Benchmarks, 7 % year-on-year decarbonisation requirement, the inclusion of scope 3 emissions, equity allocation constraints to ensure the representation of industries corresponds to that of the parent benchmark (avoid industry bias). ( 16 ) E.g. possible future policy, technology readiness, social acceptability, resource availability and physical climate impacts across the sites where it operates. ( 17 ) The Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulations (EU) 2017/1129, (EU) No 596/2014 and (EU) No 600/2014 to make public capital markets in the Union more attractive for companies and to facilitate access to capital for small and medium-sized enterprises (COM/2022/762 final), contributes to the transparency by requiring the inclusion of sustainability information in prospectuses for issuances with sustainability claims.