COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2019/63 of 19 December 2018 on the sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, sector environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector under Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 46(1) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, sector environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 is set out in the Annex to this Decision. Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 19 May 2019. Done at Brussels, 19 December 2018. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ C 358, 8.12.2011, p. 2 . 1. INTRODUCTION This Sectoral Reference Document (SRD) is based on a detailed scientific and policy report ( 1 ) (‘Best Practice Report’) developed by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC). Relevant legal background The Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) was introduced in 1993, for voluntary participation by organisations, by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 ( 2 ) . Subsequently, EMAS has undergone two major revisions: An important new element of the latest revision, which came into force on 11 January 2010, is Article 46 on the development of SRDs. The SRDs have to include best environmental management practices (BEMPs), environmental performance indicators for the specific sectors and, where appropriate, benchmarks of excellence and rating systems identifying performance levels. How to understand and use this document The eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) is a scheme for voluntary participation by organisations committed to continuous environmental improvement. Within this framework, this SRD provides sector-specific guidance to the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector and points out a number of options for improvement as well as best practices. The document was written by the European Commission using input from stakeholders. A Technical Working Group, comprising experts and stakeholders of the sector, led by the JRC, discussed and ultimately agreed on the best environmental management practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence described in this document; these benchmarks in particular were deemed to be representative of the levels of environmental performance that are achieved by the best performing organisations in the sector. The SRD aims to help and support all organisations that intend to improve their environmental performance by providing ideas and inspiration as well as practical and technical guidance. The SRD is primarily addressed to organisations that are already registered with EMAS; secondly to organisations that are considering registering with EMAS in the future; and thirdly to all organisations that wish to learn more about best environmental management practices in order to improve their environmental performance. Consequently, the objective of this document is to support all organisations in the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector to focus on relevant environmental aspects, both direct and indirect, and to find information on best environmental management practices, as well as appropriate sector-specific environmental performance indicators to measure their environmental performance, and benchmarks of excellence. How SRDs should be taken into account by EMAS-registered organisations Pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009, EMAS-registered organisations are to take SRDs into account at two different levels: They should describe how relevant best environmental management practices and benchmarks of excellence (which provide an indication of the environmental performance level that is achieved by best performers) were used to identify measures and actions, and possibly to set priorities, to (further) improve their environmental performance. However, implementing best environmental management practices or meeting the identified benchmarks of excellence is not mandatory, because the voluntary character of EMAS leaves the assessment of the feasibility of the benchmarks and of the implementation of the best practices, in terms of costs and benefits, to the organisations themselves. Similarly to environmental performance indicators, the relevance and applicability of the best environmental management practices and benchmarks of excellence should be assessed by the organisation according to the significant environmental aspects identified by the organisation in its environmental review, as well as technical and financial aspects. Elements of SRDs (indicators, BEMPs or benchmarks of excellence) not considered relevant with regards to the significant environmental aspects identified by the organisation in its environmental review should not be reported or described in the environmental statement. EMAS participation is an ongoing process. Every time an organisation plans to improve its environmental performance (and reviews its environmental performance) it shall consult the SRD on specific topics to find inspiration about which issues to tackle next in a step-wise approach. EMAS environmental verifiers shall check if and how the SRD was taken into account by the organisation when preparing its environmental statement (Article 18(5)(d) of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009). When undertaking an audit, accredited environmental verifiers will need evidence from the organisation of how the relevant elements of the SRD have been selected in light of the environmental review and taken into account. They shall not check compliance with the described benchmarks of excellence, but they shall verify evidence on how the SRD was used as a guide to identify indicators and proper voluntary measures that the organisation can implement to improve its environmental performance. Given the voluntary nature of EMAS and SRD, no disproportionate burdens should be put on the organisations to provide such evidence. In particular, verifiers shall not require an individual justification for each of the best practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence which are mentioned in the SRD and not considered relevant by the organisation in light of its environmental review. Nevertheless, they could suggest relevant additional elements for the organisation to take into account in the future as further evidence of its commitment to continuous performance improvement. Structure of the Sectoral Reference Document This document consists of four chapters. Chapter 1 introduces EMAS’ legal background and describes how to use this document, while Chapter 2 defines the scope of this SRD. Chapter 3 briefly describes the different best environmental management practices (BEMPs) ( 5 ) together with information on their applicability. When specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence could be formulated for a particular BEMP, these are also given. However, defining benchmarks of excellence was not possible for all BEMPs either because of the limited availability of data or because the specific conditions of each company and/or plant (type of electrical and electronic equipment manufactured ranging from large household appliances to small and microelectronic equipment and including both business-to-business and business-to-consumers, diversity of manufacturing processes carried out in each manufacturing facility, etc.) vary to such an extent that a benchmark of excellence would not be meaningful. Even when benchmarks of excellence are given, these are not meant as targets for all companies to reach or metrics to compare the environmental performance across companies of the sector, but rather as a measure of what is possible to help individual companies assess the progress they made and motivate them to improve further. Finally, Chapter 4 presents a comprehensive table with a selection of the most relevant environmental performance indicators, associated explanations and related benchmarks of excellence. 2. SCOPE This reference document addresses the environmental performance of the Electrical and Electronic Equipment (EEE) manufacturing sector. The target group of this document are companies belonging to the EEE manufacturing sector, i.e. to the following NACE codes (according to the statistical classification of economic activities established by Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 ( 6 ) ): This reference document covers actions that EEE manufacturers can implement to achieve improvements in the environmental performance over the whole EEE value chain, as presented in the figure below. In the figure, the arrows show the key material flows among the different actors in the value chain, while the terms ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ are used to distinguish the activities where a manufacturer has full control (‘direct environmental aspects’) to those resulting from the interaction with third parties but which can be influenced to a reasonable degree by the EEE manufacturer (‘indirect environmental aspects’). Overview of key material flows of the electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) manufacturing value chain This reference document is divided into three main sections (Table 2-1) which cover, from the perspective of the manufacturers, the main environmental aspects along the value chain of the electrical and electronic equipment. Table 2-1 Structure of the reference document for the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector and main environmental aspects addressed The environmental aspects presented in Table 2-2 were selected as the most commonly relevant in the sector. However, the environmental aspects to be managed by specific companies need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Table 2-2 Most relevant environmental aspects and related main environmental pressures addressed in this document 3. BEST ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, SECTOR ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND BENCHMARKS OF EXCELLENCE FOR THE ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING SECTOR 3.1. BEMPs for manufacturing processes This section is relevant for the EEE manufacturers. 3.1.1. Energy-efficient cleanroom technology BEMP is to minimise the energy use of the cleanrooms. This can be achieved by implementing the following measures: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all EEE manufacturers that operate cleanrooms. For newly built cleanroom facilities, the ACR can be lower than the ACR range recommended according to its classification, but efforts are necessary to ensure and adjust the quality requirements of the cleanroom. For existing cleanroom facilities, particle count-based control and continuous monitoring can be applied to reduce ACR values. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.2. Energy-efficient cooling technology BEMP is to reduce the need for cooling and improve the energy efficiency of the cooling systems used in production processes and production halls. This can be achieved by applying the following measures: Applicability Measures to improve the energy efficiency of cooling are broadly applicable to EEE manufacturing companies. To be able to implement free cooling, the temperature level of the return flow of the cooling system must be above the outdoor temperature and enough space must be available in the outdoor area of the production site. Absorption cooling is applicable where a source of waste heat or renewable heat is continuously available at the production site or in its surroundings. The economic feasibility of the proposed measures depends substantially on the existence of a year-round cooling load. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.3. Energy-efficient soldering BEMP is to improve the energy efficiency of reflow soldering operations. For existing soldering equipment, BEMP is to do the following: For new soldering equipment, BEMP is to do the following: For both existing systems and new soldering equipment, BEMP is to: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to EEE manufacturers with reflow soldering operations, and especially relevant for the production of printed circuit boards (PCB). The measures for new soldering equipment are applicable when the decision is taken to install a new reflow soldering line. The return on investment depends considerably on increased yield, performance, and maintenance requirements rather than energy savings. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.4. On-site copper recycling in process chemicals BEMP is to recover copper from the etching process agents used in printed circuit board manufacturing by electrolysis. This allows the recovery of high-quality copper, the reduction of the amount of etching agent used and the reuse of water. Applicability The BEMP is applicable to printed circuit board production facilities. However, the economic feasibility depends greatly on the production levels, and thus on the amount of high-quality copper that can be recovered (e.g. over 60 t of copper per year). A further limitation is the space needed for the on-site recycling system, which ranges between 50 m 2 and 80 m 2 depending on the arrangement of the installation and the volume of the buffer tanks. However, this does not necessarily need to be right next to the etching process. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.5. Cascade rinsing systems BEMP is to minimise water use in EEE printed circuit board (PCB) manufacturing companies by installing multiple cascade rinsing systems with four or more stages. In addition, BEMP is optimising water use, e.g. by setting the water intake in rinsing baths according to process-specific quality requirements and by reuse of rinsing bath water for different process steps. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to printed circuit board manufacturing companies. The optimisation measures and the installation of multiple cascade rinsing systems with at least four stages are applicable both in existing facilities and in new builds. In the case of cascade rinsing systems with four or more stages, the available space may pose some limitations. Five-stage cascade rinsing systems specifically are most applicable for systems with a high machine throughput or highly concentrated electrolytes and the following additional limiting factors need to be considered: Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.6. Minimisation of perfluorocompound emissions BEMP is to minimise the emissions of perfluorocompounds (PFC) in semiconductor fabrication facilities by the following measures: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to semiconductor fabrication facilities using PFC gases. However, the specific measures that can be implemented in a facility need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Process optimisation is broadly applicable and can be an effective measure both in existing facilities and in new-build CVD chambers. It is the only measure which also saves costs, since it can allow lower gas consumption and better throughput. Substitution of PFC gases is often technically unfeasible, especially for plasma etching. Remote plasma cleaning technology using NF 3 is broadly applicable to fabrication facilities. However, its implementation may require replacing processing equipment. It is thus more feasible when a new production facility is being built or obsolete processing equipment needs to be renewed. Concerning point-of-use abatement techniques, burner-scrubber systems are more common than point-of-use plasma abatement. The limitations to the applicability of scrubber systems are space, existing infrastructure and costs. For the plasma abatement devices, one of the main limitations is their low flow treatment capacity. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.7. Rational and efficient use of compressed air BEMP is for electrical and electronic equipment manufacturers to reduce their energy consumption associated with the use of compressed air in the manufacturing processes by the following measures: Applicability The measures described in this BEMP are broadly applicable to all EEE companies that use compressed air. Regarding the heat recovery, a continuous demand for process heat is necessary in order to realise the corresponding energy and cost savings. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.8. Protection and enhancement of biodiversity BEMP is to devise, implement and periodically review an action plan for protecting and enhancing biodiversity at the production facilities and in nearby areas. Examples of actions that can be included in the action plan are: Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all electrical and electronic equipment manufacturers. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.9. Use of renewable energy BEMP is for electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing companies to use renewable energy for their processes thanks to: Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all companies in the sector. Use of renewable electricity (self-generated or purchased) is possible in all cases. Integration of heat from renewable sources in EEE manufacturing processes is, in contrast, more difficult due to their complexity, the need for high temperatures, and, in some cases, incompatibility between the heat demand and the seasonality of the renewable heat offer. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.10. Optimised waste management within manufacturing facilities BEMP is for electrical and electronic equipment manufacturers to develop and implement a waste management strategy that prioritises other treatment options besides disposal for all the waste generated at the manufacturing facilities and follows the waste hierarchy ( 9 ) . This strategy needs to encompass both non-hazardous and hazardous waste fractions, set ambitious targets for improvement and monitor them, and also explore possibilities to implement the approach of industrial symbiosis. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all EEE manufacturing companies. A limiting factor for the effective implementation of industrial symbiosis is the need for communication and coordination among different companies, i.e. lack of knowledge of and insight into other companies’ activities and thus potential exploitation routes for waste and by-products. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2. BEMPs for supply chain management This section is relevant for EEE manufacturers and deals with practices related to their supply chain. 3.2.1. Assessment tools for cost-effective and environmentally sound substitution of hazardous substances BEMP is to use reference tools to identify and assess hazardous substances in purchased materials in order to substitute them. Manufacturers will use input data from suppliers, provided ideally as full material declarations or declarations of conformity, to track substances. The assessment then focusses on three key steps: Applicability This BEMP is, in principle, applicable to all companies of the sector. However, SMEs may lack the leverage to demand full material declarations from many suppliers, in which case they can request supplier declarations of conformity complemented by laboratory testing. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.2. Disclosure and setting of targets for supply chain greenhouse gases emissions BEMP is to assess, according to recognised standards, and regularly disclose all the direct and the most relevant indirect greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (all scope 1 and scope 2 as well as the most relevant scope 3 emissions ( 11 ) ). Based on the assessment, BEMP is to set targets for the reduction of those direct and indirect GHG emissions as well as to demonstrate and regularly publish actual absolute and/or relative GHG emission reductions. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all companies of the sector. However, there are some limitations in the calculation of scope 3 emissions, due to the complexity of the value chains of EEE. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.3. Application of Life Cycle Assessment BEMP is to make use of Life Cycle Assessments (LCA) as a decision support instrument in the context of: strategic planning (macro-level), design and planning of products, facilities, and processes (micro-level) and monitoring the environmental performance of the company (accounting). Conducting LCA on product ranges to support environmental improvements is the most relevant area of application in the industry and allows the setting of LCA-based improvement targets for product ranges. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing companies, especially to large companies. Internal resources and the complexity of LCA are potential limiting factors for the conducting of LCA for small and medium-sized enterprises. However, simplified LCA tools and ready-made databases help mitigate the difficulties. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.2.4. Protection and enhancement of biodiversity along the electrical and electronic equipment supply chain BEMP is to develop and implement a programme for managing the biodiversity impacts related to supply chain products and supply chain activities. Based on a mapping of products and materials provided by the supply chain and of their relevant impacts on biodiversity, procurement guidelines and requirements can be formulated, targeting changes in relation to products and components with a greater potential to impact biodiversity. Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing companies. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3. BEMPs fostering a more circular economy This section is relevant for electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing companies and deals with management and strategic practices that foster a more circular economy. 3.3.1. Strategic guidance on designing products for the circular economy BEMP is to have an approach in place that ensures that the consideration of all the different environmental aspects, and specifically a move towards the circular economy, is systematically integrated into the design process of products. Such an approach is based on: This is implemented by one or both of the following approaches: Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing companies Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.2. Integrated product service offering BEMP is for EEE manufacturers to provide Integrated Product Service Offerings (IPSO) both in business to businesses and business to consumers, shifting from designing and selling physical products to providing a product service system that leads to an improved functional and environmental performance. For instance, IPSO create incentives for manufacturers to ensure their products are durable or offer the opportunity to take back products to redeploy them or refurbish them for further use. Applicability The IPSO model is especially applicable to EEE with a high capital cost and a long useful life. The applicability in the field of electrical household appliances with limited purchasing costs, a low bill of materials or a significant size/weight is limited (e.g. take-back is not feasible if the economical/technical value is too low compared to transportation costs). Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.3. Remanufacturing or high-quality refurbishment of used products BEMP is to prevent waste by remanufacturing or refurbishing used electrical and electronic equipment and bringing them into the market for reuse. The remanufactured or refurbished products achieve at least the same quality levels they had when they were first placed on the market and are sold with the appropriate warranty. Applicability This practice is particularly suitable for mid- or high-capital-intensive equipment. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.3.4. Increase of the content of recycled plastics in electrical and electronic equipment BEMP is to increase the use of recycled plastics for the manufacture of electrical and electronic equipment, where applicable according to the required material properties. This can be achieved by closed-loop recycling of plastic production scrap, closed-loop recycling of post-consumer plastics from own products as well as purchasing recycled plastics made from post-consumer plastic waste (open-loop recycling). Applicability This BEMP is suitable for many polymers that are used in electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing. Recycled plastics can replace virgin plastics in those cases where the required material specifications can be met. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 4. RECOMMENDED SECTOR-SPECIFIC KEY ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS The following table lists a selection of key environmental performance indicators for the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector, together with the related benchmarks and reference to the relevant BEMPs. These are a subset of all the indicators mentioned in Section 3. Key environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the electrical and electronic equipment manufacturing sector ( 1 ) The scientific and policy report is publicly available on the JRC website at the following address: The conclusions on best environmental management practices and their applicability as well as the identified specific environmental performance indicators and the benchmarks of excellence contained in this Sectoral Reference Document are based on the findings documented in the scientific and policy report. All the background information and technical details can be found there. ( 2 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 of 29 June 1993 allowing voluntary participation by companies in the industrial sector in a Community eco-management and audit scheme ( OJ L 168, 10.7.1993, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 allowing voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) ( OJ L 114, 24.4.2001, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) According to Annex IV (B.e.) of the EMAS Regulation, the environmental statement shall contain ‘a summary of the data available on the performance of the organisation against its environmental objectives and targets with respect to its significant environmental impacts. Reporting shall be on the core indicators and on other relevant existing environmental performance indicators as set out in Section C’. Annex IV — Section C states that ‘each organisation shall also report annually on its performance relating to the more specific environmental aspects as identified in its environmental statement and, where available, take account of sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46.’ ( 5 ) A detailed description of each of the best practices, with practical guidance on how to implement them, is available in the ‘Best Practice Report’ published by the JRC and available on-line at: Organisations are invited to consult it if interested in learning more about some of the best practices described in this SRD. ( 6 ) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical domains ( OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Face velocity is the speed at which air passes over the filters or heating/cooling coils in an air handler unit. ( 8 ) The Air Leakage Index is calculated, when all air consumers are switched off, as the sum for each of the compressors of the time it runs multiplied by the capacity of that compressor, divided by the total standby time and the total rated capacity of the compressors in the system ( 9 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ), known as the Waste Framework Directive, introduces an order of preference for action to reduce and manage waste. This is known as the waste hierarchy. It set the highest priority on waste prevention, followed by waste reuse, then recycling and then (energy) recovery of waste fractions that cannot be prevented, reused or recycled. Finally, waste disposal is only to be considered when none of the previous routes are possible. ( 10 ) Some of which can still be used by virtue of RoHS exemptions ( 11 ) According to the GHG Protocol, scope 1 emissions are all the direct GHG emissions of a company, i.e. GHG emissions that are released by owned or controlled facilities or vehicles. Scope 2 emissions are indirect GHG emissions from consumption of purchased electricity, heat, cold or steam, i.e. emissions that were released elsewhere to produce the energy consumed within company boundaries. Scope 3 denotes all other indirect emissions from product (good or service) or material flows entering or leaving the company boundaries. ( 12 ) EMAS core indicators are listed in Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 (Section C.2). ( 13 ) The numbers refer to the sections in this document.