COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION of 5 May 2014 on setting up Euro-Argo Research Infrastructure as a European Research Infrastructure Consortium (Euro-Argo ERIC) (2014/261/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Regulation (EC) No 723/2009 of 25 June 2009 on the Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure Consortium (ERIC) ( 1 ) , and in particular point (a) of Article 6(1) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 1. The Euro-Argo Research Infrastructure as a European Research Infrastructure Consortium (Euro-Argo ERIC) is hereby established. 2. The Statutes of Euro-Argo ERIC are set out in the Annex. The Statutes shall be kept up to date and made publicly available on the website of Euro-Argo ERIC and at its statutory seat. 3. The essential elements of the Statutes for which amendments shall require approval by the Commission in accordance with Article 11(1) of Regulation (EC) No 723/2009 are provided for in Articles 1, 3, 4, 13, 23-31. Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Done at Brussels, 5 May 2014. For the Commission The President José Manuel BARROSO ( 1 ) OJ L 206, 8.8.2009, p. 1 . STATUTES OF Euro-Argo ERIC The Federal Republic of Germany The Hellenic Republic The French Republic The Italian Republic The Kingdom of the Netherlands The Republic of Finland The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Hereinafter referred to individually as ‘Founding Member’ and collectively as ‘Founding Members’ The Kingdom of Norway The Republic of Poland Hereinafter referred to individually as ‘Founding Observer’ and collectively as ‘Founding Observers’ CONSIDERING THAT climate change is one of the most pressing issues of our century, understanding and predicting changes in both the atmosphere and the ocean are needed to guide international actions and to optimise governments' policies on climate change, this understanding requires global data sets of the highest quality; CONSIDERING THAT the required in situ ocean observations, which must be sustained over long time periods, are beyond the reach of single research teams and countries, the International Argo global ocean observing system has been designed to meet that challenge and is the first-ever global, in situ ocean-observing network in the history of oceanography, providing an essential complement to satellite systems; CONSIDERING THAT success in such a major undertaking could be achieved only through a very high degree of international cooperation, Euro-Argo will develop and consolidate the European component of the global network. Specific European interests also require increased sampling in some regional seas. Overall, the Euro-Argo infrastructure should comprise around 800 floats in operation at any given time. The maintenance of such an array requires Europe to deploy about 250 floats per year; CONSIDERING THAT the Euro-Argo research infrastructure will strengthen European excellence and expertise in climate research and will establish a high level of cooperation between European partners in all implementation aspects: operation at sea, array monitoring and evolution, technological and scientific developments, improving data access for research and the GMES/Copernicus Marine Service, coordination of the European contribution to the international management of the Argo Programme; DESIRING THAT the existing cooperative arrangements are transferred into a body with legal personality separate from its Members to enhance cooperation and collaboration, to enable Euro-Argo to enter into contracts on its own behalf including the purchase of floats and other property, goods or services and to complement and strengthen the governance established by the International Argo Programme; REQUESTING the European Commission to establish the infrastructure Euro-Argo as a European Research Infrastructure Consortium (Euro-Argo ERIC), HAVE THEREFORE AGREED ON THE FOLLOWING PROVISIONS: CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS Article 1 Name and seat Article 2 Description of the infrastructure Article 3 Objectives and tasks Article 4 Activities CHAPTER 2 MEMBERS AND OBSERVERS Article 5 Members and Observers Article 6 Members Article 7 Observers Article 8 Admission of a Member Members of Euro-Argo ERIC must be European Union Member States, non-European Union Member States (associated or third countries) or inter-governmental organisations, and at all times there shall be at least one European Union Member State and two other countries that are either Member States or associated countries as Members. Any Member State, associated country or third country or inter-governmental organisation wishing to be admitted as a Member shall adhere to the Statutes by entering into a written adherence agreement. The admission of new Members shall be subject to a decision by the Council. Article 9 Withdrawal of a Member Article 10 Expulsion of a Member CHAPTER 3 RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE MEMBERS Article 11 Voting rights Article 12 Contributions Article 13 Liability of the Members CHAPTER 4 GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT OF Euro-Argo ERIC Article 14 Governance The governance structure of Euro-Argo ERIC shall comprise the following bodies, having the powers as set out in points (a)-(d): Article 15 The Council Article 16 Management Board Article 17 Programme Manager Article 18 Scientific and Technical Advisory Group (STAG) CHAPTER 5 FINANCE Article 19 Resources The resources of Euro-Argo ERIC shall be decided by the Council in accordance with Article 15(2) and may be comprised of: Article 20 Budgetary principles, accounts and audit Article 21 VAT exemption based on Articles 143(1)(g) and 151(1)(b) of Council Directive 2006/112/EC ( 2 ) shall apply to purchases made by Euro-Argo ERIC for its non-economic activities, not for economic activities undertaken. The VAT exemption shall be applied for purchases made for the scientific, technical and administrative operations undertaken by Euro-Argo ERIC in line with its objectives. This shall include expenses for the housing of Euro-Argo ERIC for official use and expenses for conferences, workshops and meetings held by Euro-Argo ERIC and directly linked to its non-economic activities. However travel and accommodation expenses shall not be covered by the VAT exemption, and purchases below EUR 300 will not be considered for VAT exemption. CHAPTER 6 RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION Article 22 Reporting to the Commission Article 23 Amendments of the Statutes CHAPTER 7 POLICIES Article 24 Intellectual Property Rights Article 25 Data and Access Policy for Users Article 26 Scientific Evaluation Policy Article 27 Dissemination Policy Article 28 Employment Policy Employment policy shall be governed by the laws of the State where Euro-Argo ERIC has its Statutory Seat. All employment and recruitment shall be on a strictly non-discriminatory basis. Article 29 Procurement Policy CHAPTER 8 DURATION, WINDING UP, DISPUTES Article 30 Duration Euro-Argo ERIC shall be established for an initial period ending on 31 December 2020 and shall continue to exist after that date subject to decisions of the Council. Article 31 Winding up Article 32 Language Article 33 Applicable Law Euro-Argo ERIC shall be governed in order of precedence: Article 34 Disputes Article 35 Consolidated version of the Statutes The Statutes shall be kept up to date and made publicly available on the website of Euro-Argo ERIC and at its statutory seat. Any amendment to the Statutes shall be clearly indicated with a note specifying whether the amendment concerns an essential or non-essential element of the Statutes in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation (EC) No 723/2009 and the procedure followed for its adoption. Annex — List of Members and Observers Members and their representing entities are the following: Observers and their representing entities are the following: GLOSSARY ( 1 ) OJ L 298, 26.10.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1 .