COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2024/368 of 23 January 2024 laying down rules for the application of Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the procedures and methods for testing and accepting final materials as used in products that come into contact with water intended for human consumption (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2020 on the quality of water intended for human consumption ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 11(2), point (c), thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The procedures and methods for testing and accepting final materials as used in a product as provided for in Article 11(2), point (c), of Directive (EU) 2020/2184 on the quality of water intended for human consumption are set out in the Annexes I to IV. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Decision, the following definitions apply: Article 3 This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 31 December 2026. Done at Brussels, 23 January 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 435, 23.12.2020, p. 1 . ANNEX I FINAL ORGANIC MATERIAL 1. GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTING FINAL ORGANIC MATERIALS AS USED IN A PRODUCT. The procedure for testing and accepting final organic materials as used in a product includes the following steps: 2. IDENTIFICATION OF RELEVANT SUBSTANCES AND RELEVANT OTHER PARAMETERS 2.1. Categorisation of products or components into risk groups and corresponding testing requirements. For each product or component of an assembled product, a product group and a corresponding conversion factor (CF) shall be determined in accordance with Table 5. Based on the determined CF, the product or component is categorised in a risk group (RG) in accordance with Table 1. The categorisation in a RG determines the corresponding testing requirements including the relevant substances and relevant other parameters. The applicable testing procedure of final organic materials results from the use of these materials in products or components of assembled products. Minor components are considered to be components categorised in risk group 3 or 4 (RG3 or RG4) and for which reduced testing requirements, as set out in Table 1, may apply in comparison with the testing requirements for the risk group 1 or 2 (RG1 or RG2). For an assembled product, the components shall be determined. For each component in an assembled product, a product group shall be determined. If an assembled product consists of components made of the same main polymer, then the surface fraction of these components shall be cumulatively added for the determination of the product group in accordance with Table 5. Products or components made of multilayer materials are considered as one final material consisting of several layers. The testing shall be performed on the final materials as used in products in contact with water intended for human consumption. The specification in Table 1 for testing ‘on product or component’ means that the individual product or component of an assembled product shall be used for the performance of the testing. The specification in Table 1 for testing on ‘test piece of the formulation’ means that a representative test piece of the final material as used in a product or component can be considered for the testing. In this case it is not required that the individual product or component is tested. Table 1 Risk-based testing requirements for products or components of assembled products 2.2. Formulation review A formulation review is required in accordance with the requirements in Table 1. 2.2.1 Required information For a formulation review of a final organic material the following information is required: The cut-off value, below which details of the formulation (i.e. the chemical composition of starting substances or impurities) are not required, expressed as mass percentage in the formulation is: In case of multilayer products with a total barrier, only the layers between the barrier and the surface in contact with drinking water shall be considered. The formulation shall be specified for each layer to be considered. 2.2.2 Relevant substances The formulation shall be evaluated and compared with the accepted starting substances of the European positive list of starting substances for organic materials set out in Annex I of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 ( 3 ) . One of the objectives of the evaluation is to define the relevant substances, which shall be analysed in the migration water. The relevant substances are: For multilayer materials, the relevant substances shall be determined for each layer between the total barrier and the drinking water individually. 2.2.3 Acceptance of starting substances Organic materials shall only be made of : The relevant notes of the Annex I to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 establishing the European positive list of starting substances for organic materials shall be considered in the acceptance of starting substances. 2.2.4 Material-specific requirements For polyamide or polyurethane resin coatings, requirements on the release of primary aromatic amines (PAA) apply, as specified in Table 2. Requirements for rubbers are listed in Table 3. Requirements for organic materials other than rubbers made of starting substances bearing N-functionalities, such as aminic, amidic or quaternary, when tested with chlorinated test water are listed in Table 4. Table 2 Requirement for polyamides and polyurethane resin coatings Table 3 Requirements on amines and nitrosamines for rubbers Table 4 Requirements on nitrosamines for final materials other than rubbers made of starting substances bearing N-functionalities when tested with chlorinated test water 3. TESTING REQUIREMENTS 3.1. Migration testing 3.1.1. Standards For testing the release of relevant substances, unexpected substances and TOC, the following standards shall be used to obtain the migration waters: For testing odour and flavour, colour and turbidity, standard EN 1420:2016 shall be used to obtain the migration waters. The mentioned EN standards leave options for testing. The following provisions in sections 3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.1.4 and 3.1.5 substantiate these standards. 3.1.2 Test piece For a product or a component of which the size does not allow the practical application of the testing, a representative test piece for the testing shall be provided. Special attention shall be given to the production of the test piece. 3.1.3. Temperature of testing All products shall be tested at 23 °C ± 2 °C (cold water test condition). Additionally, products that are normally used for warm or hot applications shall be tested at 60 °C ± 2 °C or 85 °C ± 2 °C, respectively. For this purpose, warm water corresponds to normal operating temperatures between 30 °C and 70 °C and hot water corresponds to operating temperatures exceeding 70 °C. Multilayer products shall always be tested at 60 °C ± 2 °C or 85 °C ± 2 °C additionally, even when not used at these temperatures. 3.1.4. Type of test water Cold water test (23 °C ± 2 °C) shall be performed with chlorinated and non-chlorinated test water. In case a warm or a hot water test is required, this test shall only be performed with non-chlorinated test water. 3.1.5. Migration periods For cold water tests the migration samples of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd migration period according to standards shall be analysed. The compliance with the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 3rd migration period (10th day of testing). If the pass/fail criteria set out in sections 4.2 and 4.3 are not met at the 3rd migration period the testing can be extended and the 5th, 7th and 9th period shall be analysed additionally. In this case the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 9th migration period (31st day of testing). For warm or hot water tests the migration samples of the 1st, 6th and 7th migration period shall be analysed. The compliance with the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 7th migration period (10th day). If the pass/ fail criteria set out in sections 4.2 and 4.3 are not met at the 7th migration period the testing can be extended and the 12th, 17th and 22nd period shall be analysed additionally. In this case the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 22nd migration period (31st day). For multilayer products an extended warm or hot water migration test is always required to ensure that substances originating from different layers appear in the migration water. To ensure sufficient substance diffusion and equilibration across layer boundaries, it is required that the multilayer product has undergone a storage period at room temperature for at least 30 days. 3.2. Analysis of migration waters 3.2.1. Relevant Substances The relevant substances defined in section 2.2.2 shall be analysed in the migration waters (see section 3.1.5). The methods for analysis of relevant substances in migration waters shall be validated and documented in accordance with EN ISO/IEC 17025:2017 or other equivalent standards accepted at international level. 3.2.2. Unexpected Substances Unexpected substances are only determined in the migration waters of the cold water test. For the identification and semi-quantitative analysis of unexpected substances a GC-MS screening shall be conducted according to EN 15768:2015. 3.2.3. Relevant other parameters The relevant other parameters shall be analysed in the migration waters according to the following standards: 3.3. Mathematical modelling Where generally recognised diffusion models exist on the basis of experimental data, mathematical modelling for estimation of migration levels may be used as alternative to the migration testing of relevant substances for certain types of final organic materials. If these recognised diffusion models predict that the migration of the substance complies with the maximum tolerable concentration at the tap (MTC tap) , migration testing for these substances is not necessary. For the assessment of some parameters and for modelling, the content of the respective substances in the final material shall be determined. If compliance is not shown by using the models, migration testing shall be performed. The following mathematical modelling approaches may be used: 3.4. Enhancement of Microbial Growth (EMG) testing For the EMG testing, standard EN 16421:2015 – method 1 or 2 shall be used. 3.5. Testing residual content of substances (QM/QMA) For starting substances with a maximum quantity (QM or QMA) restriction set out in the European positive list of starting substances for organic materials of Annex I of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367, its residual content in the product shall be analysed. 4. ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS: PASS/FAIL CRITERIA 4.1. Formulation Starting substances of the formulation listed in the European positive list of starting substances for organic materials set out in Annex I of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. 4.2. Relevant substances, unexpected substances, TOC 4.2.1. Conversion of test results In accordance with the migration standards EN 12873-1:2014 and EN 12873-2:2021, the test results are expressed as migration rates (M) in μg/(dm 2 .d). These results shall be converted to estimate the concentrations at the tap (C tap ), defined as C tap = M * CF, where CF is the corresponding conversion factor in d/dm. The conversion factors for the different product groups are listed in Table 5 to this Annex. Table 5 Product groups and their conversion factor (CF) 4.2.2. Pass/fail criteria for relevant substances The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: The measured substance concentrations in the migration water from the successive migration periods shall be used to assess the trend. However, if C tap in the relevant migration period is below 1/10 of MTC tap , no trend analysis is required. For ions, the MTC tap,organics of Table 1 in Annex V to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 shall apply. 4.2.3. Pass/fail criteria for unexpected substances The following requirement shall apply to the cold water migration test: The MTC tap for the unexpected substances are set out in Table 6. Table 6 MTC tap for unexpected substances ( 13 ) 4.2.4. Pass/fail criteria for TOC The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: The measured TOC in the migration water from the successive migration periods shall be used to assess the trend. However, if the TOC in the relevant migration period is below 0,2 mg/l no trend analysis is required. 4.3. Odour, flavour, colour and turbidity 4.3.1. Pass/fail criteria for TON, TFN The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: 4.3.2. Pass/fail criteria for colour The acceptance criterion for colour is ≤ 5 mg/l Pt/Co. The criterion shall be met for the 3rd migration period for cold water migration testing / 7th migration period for warm/hot water testing (10th day of testing) or, in case of extended testing, for the 9th migration period for cold water migration testing / 22nd migration period for warm/hot water testing (31st day of testing). 4.3.3. Pass/fail criteria for turbidity The acceptance criterion for turbidity is ≤ 0,5 NFU. The criterion shall be met for the 3rd migration period for cold water migration testing / 7th migration period for warm/hot water testing (10th day of testing) or, in case of extended testing, for the 9th migration period for cold water migration testing / 22nd migration period for warm/hot water testing (31st day of testing). 4.4. Enhancement of Microbial Growth (EMG) The pass/fail criteria for the parameter Enhancement of Microbial Growth (EMG) are listed in Table 7. Additionally, the surface of the products or components shall not have any biocidal effects on water intended for human consumption. Therefore, test pieces without surface colonisation (comparison of contact culture/test sample smear with that of the negative control) do not satisfy this requirement. Table 7 Acceptance criteria for EMG 4.5. Pass/fail criteria for residual content of substances (QM and QMA) The maximum quantity (QM and QMA) limits of the European positive list of starting substances for organic materials set out in Annex I of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 shall apply independently of the product group of final organic materials. 4.6. Purity pass/fail criteria for pigments, colorants and fillers Pigments, colorants and fillers shall comply with the purity requirements according to Table 8, if the corresponding substances were not analysed as relevant substances in the migration waters. The extraction with 0,1 N hydrochloric acid shall be performed according to the procedure described in Council of Europe resolution AP(89)1 on the use of colourants in plastic materials coming into contact with food. Table 8 Requirements on purity of pigments, colorants and fillers ( 1 ) Threshold odour number ( 2 ) Threshold flavour number ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 of 23 January 2024 laying down rules for the application of Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing the European positive lists of starting substances, compositions and constituents authorised for use in the manufacture of materials or products that come into contact with water intended for human consumption ( OJ L, 2024/367, 2024.04.23, ELI: ). ( 4 ) Method should be improved to have a Limit f Detection (LOD) of 0,1 μg/l. ( 5 ) Method should be improved to have a Limit Of Detection (LOD) of 0,1 μg/l. ( 6 ) sum of dibutylamine (CAS 111-92-2), diethylamine (CAS 109-89-7), dimethylamine (CAS 124-40-3), dicyclohexylamine (CAS 101-83-7), cyclohexylethylamine (CAS 5459-93-8), diphenylamine (CAS 122-39-4), dibenzylamine (CAS 103-49-1), benzyl-N-methylamine (CAS 103-67-3), benzylidenebenzylamine (CAS,780-25-6) N-methylaniline (CAS 100-61-8), N-ethylaniline (CAS 103-69-5), N-butylaniline (CAS 1126-78-9) ( 7 ) sum of N-Nitroso-di-n-butylamine (CAS 924-16-3), N-Nitroso-diethanolamine (CAS 1116-54-7), N-Nitroso-diethylamine (CAS 55-18-5), N-Nitroso-diisopropylamine (CAS 601-77-4), N-Nitroso-dimethylamine (CAS 62-75-9), N-Nitroso-di-n-propylamine (CAS 621-64-7), N-Nitroso-ethyl phenylamine (CAS 612-64-6), N-Nitroso-methyl ethylamine (CAS 10595-95-6) N-Nitroso-methyl phenylamine (CAS 614-00-6), N-Nitroso-morpholine (CAS 59-89-2), N-Nitroso-piperidine (CAS 100-75-4), N-Nitroso-pyrrolidine (CAS 930-55-2) ( 8 ) sum of N-Nitroso-di-n-butylamine (CAS 924-16-3), N-Nitroso-diethanolamine (CAS 1116-54-7), N-Nitroso-diethylamine (CAS 55-18-5), N-Nitroso-diisopropylamine (CAS 601-77-4), N-Nitroso-dimethylamine (CAS 62-75-9), N-Nitroso-di-n-propylamine (CAS 621-64-7), N-Nitroso-ethyl phenylamine (CAS 612-64-6), N-Nitroso-methyl ethylamine (CAS 10595-95-6) N-Nitroso-methyl phenylamine (CAS 614-00-6), N-Nitroso-morpholine (CAS 59-89-2), N-Nitroso-piperidine (CAS 100-75-4), N-Nitroso-pyrrolidine (CAS 930-55-2) ( 9 ) If from a series of different diameter pipes made from the same pre-product under the same manufacturing process (a so-called product family) the smallest diameter pipe is assessed and approved, then the whole series of different diameter pipes is allowed to be used for all application areas within the product group without further testing. ( 10 ) ≥ 10 % of the assembled product ( 11 ) < 10 % of the assembled product ( 12 ) < 1 % of the assembled product ( 13 ) Based on the response of the closest internal standard. ANNEX II FINAL METALLIC MATERIALS 1. GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTING FINAL METALLIC MATERIALS AS USED IN A PRODUCT. The procedure for testing and accepting final metallic materials as used in a product includes the following steps: 2. IDENTIFICATION OF RELEVANT SUBSTANCES AND RELEVANT OTHER PARAMETERS 2.1. Composition review For the composition review of a metallic product or an assembled product containing metallic components the following information is required: 2.1.2. Accepted compositions The compositions of the final metallic materials and platings shall comply with compositions listed in the European positive list of compositions for metallic materials in Annex II of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 established in accordance with Article 11(2) (b) of the Directive and fulfil the limitations set out in the European positive list in respect of their use for certain product groups and the use of these products. Categorisation of products in product groups for metallic materials is set out in Table 2 of Annex II to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/365 ( 1 ) . Applied organic impregnations and coatings shall comply with the requirements of Annex I. 2.1.3. Relevant substances For plated products, relevant substances shall be identified based on the composition of the plating listed in the European positive list of compositions of metallic compositions in Annex II of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. 3. TESTING REQUIREMENTS 3.1. Composition testing An analysis of the composition of the final metallic materials shall be performed to verify compliance with the compositional requirements of metallic materials included in the European positive list of metallic compositions in Annex II of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. The methods of analysis shall be validated and documented in accordance with EN ISO/IEC 17025:2017 or other equivalent standards accepted at international level. 3.2. Testing of release of relevant substances from plated products Plated products should be tested for the residues on the surface according to indications in the European positive list of metallic compositions in Annex II of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. A suitable test should simulate metallic element release into drinking water at the consumers tap. The methods of analysis shall be validated and documented in accordance with EN ISO/IEC 17025:2017 or other equivalent standards accepted at international level. The testing of the release of organic substances used in the plating process shall be performed in accordance with the requirements set out in Annex I. 4. ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS: PASS/FAIL CRITERIA 4.1. Compliance with the European positive list of metallic compositions The analysed composition of final metallic materials shall comply with the compositional requirements and other limitations specified in the European positive list of metallic compositions in Annex II of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. 4.2. Pass/fail criteria for relevant substances The requirement C tap ≤ MTC tap,metallics shall apply where MTC tap,metallics is listed in the Table 1 of Annex V to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367, where in the calculation of C tap the stagnation time and the sampling volume are taken in due consideration. ( 1 ) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/365 of 23 January 2024 laying down rules for the application of Directive (EU) 2020/2184 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards methodologies for testing and accepting starting substances, compositions and constituents to be included in the European positive lists ( OJ L, 2024/365, 2024.04.23, ELI: ). ANNEX III FINAL CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS 1. GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTING FINAL CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS AS USED IN A PRODUCT. The procedure for testing and accepting final cementitious materials as used in a product includes the following steps: 2. IDENTIFICATION OF RELEVANT SUBSTANCES AND RELEVANT OTHER PARAMETERS 2.1. Categorisation of products into risk groups and corresponding testing requirements The applicable testing procedure of final cementitious materials results from the use of these materials in products. In accordance with Table 5 of Annex I, a product group and a corresponding conversion factor (CF) shall be determined for the product or the component. Based on the determined CF, the product or component is categorised in a risk group (RG). In accordance with Table 1 of this Annex, the categorisation in a RG determines the corresponding testing requirements and relevant other parameters. For an assembled product, the components shall be determined. For each component in an assembled product, a product group shall be determined. If an assembled product consists of components made of the same final materials, then the surface fraction of these components shall be cumulatively added for the determination of the product group in accordance with Table 5 of Annex I. The testing shall be performed on the final materials as used in products in contact with water intended for human consumption. Minor components are considered to be components categorised in risk group 4 (RG4) and for which reduced testing requirements, as set out in Table 1, may apply in comparison with the testing requirements for the risk group 1, 2 or 3 (RG1, RG2, RG3). Table 1 Risk-based testing requirements for products or components of assembled products 2.2. Formulation review A formulation review shall be performed in accordance with the requirements in Table 1. 2.2.1. Required Information The following information in the formulation review is required for each final cementitious material: The cut-off value, below which details of the formulation of the final material are not required, expressed as mass percentage in the formulation is 0,02 % (w/w) related to the cement content for one constituent. The formulation shall be evaluated and compared with the accepted constituents of the European positive list of organic constituents for cementitious materials in Annex III of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 and with the accepted starting substances of the European positive list for organic materials, when relevant in accordance with Table 1 of Annex III to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. The evaluation shall define the relevant substances that shall be analysed in the migration water. 2.2.2. Relevant substances The relevant substances to be analysed in the migration water are: 2.2.3. Accepted constituents Final cementitious materials shall only contain organic cementitious constituents listed in the European positive list of organic constituents for cementitious materials in Annex III of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 and in the European positive list of starting substances for organic materials as further specified in Table 1 of Annex III to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. The use of the following additional constituents is allowed: The relevant notes of Annex III to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 establishing the European Positive List of organic constituents for cementitious materials in Annex III of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 shall be considered in the acceptance of constituents of cementitious materials. 2.2.4. Material-specific requirements If used, pigments and colorants shall comply with purity criteria as defined in Table 8 of Annex I, and not migrate at levels exceeding 0,1 μg/l. 3. TESTING REQUIREMENTS 3.1. Migration testing Testing of organic coatings with inorganic fillers should be performed according to section 3.1 of Annex I. If pH > 9.5 in the final migration water, the test should be considered invalid and the product should be evaluated as a cementitious product and testing will be performed according to section 3.1 of Annex III. 3.1.1. Specifications for testing final cementitious materials for migration of organoleptic parameters (odour, flavour, colour and turbidity), TOC, relevant and unexpected substances For a product or a component of which the size does not allow the practical application of the testing, a representative test piece for the testing shall be provided. Special attention shall be given to the production of the test piece. Test pieces shall be preconditioned by immersion in demineralised water containing anhydrous calcium chloride ((222 ± 2) mg CaCl 2 L -1 ) and sodium hydrogen carbonate ((336 ± 2) NaHCO 3 mg L -1 ) adjusted to a pH of (7.4 ± 0,1) by air or CO 2 bubbling. Test pieces shall be preconditioned at (23 ± 2) °C in three successive periods of (24 ± 1) h followed by one period of (72 ± 1) h and one period of (24 ± 1) h. After each period the water is discarded and the test piece is not rinsed. If the pH of the last preconditioning water exceeds 9,5 then the preconditioning shall be repeated with new test pieces. After the fifth preconditioning the test piece shall immediately be subjected to the migration test. Test pieces shall be immersed in migration test water with a specified temperature and for a specified period of time. Non-chlorinated migration test water shall be natural water without gas or demineralised water containing anhydrous calcium chloride ((222 ± 2) mg CaCl 2 L -1 ), sodium hydrogen carbonate ((482 ± 2) NaHCO 3 mg L -1 ) and sodium silicate ((71 ± 1) Na 2 SiO 3 ·9·H 2 O mg L -1 ). It shall have a pH of (7.4 ± 0,1) by air or CO 2 bubbling, a conductivity of (500 ± 50) μS cm -1 , an alkalinity of (350 ± 50) mg HCO 3 - L -1 , a concentration of calcium of (80 ± 10) mg -1 L and a concentration of silica of (15 ± 5) mg SiO 2 L -1 . Non-chlorinated migration test water shall have no odour (< 2 TON), flavour (< 2 TFN), colour (< 0,1 m -1 ), turbidity (< 0,1 FNU) and TOC (<0,2 mg C L -1 ). Chlorinated migration test water shall consist of non-chlorinated test water containing (1,0 ± 0,2) mg L -1 of free chlorine. Non-chlorinated migration test water shall be demineralised water containing anhydrous calcium chloride ((110 ± 1) mg CaCl 2 L -1 ), sodium hydrogen carbonate ((140 ± 1) NaHCO 3 mg L -1 ) and sodium silicate ((48 ± 1) Na 2 SiO 3 ·9·H 2 O mg L -1 ). It shall have a pH of (7,0 ± 0,1) by air or CO 2 bubbling. Chlorinated migration test water shall consist of non-chlorinated test water containing (1,0 ± 0,2) mg L -1 of free chlorine. All products shall be tested at 23 °C ± 2 °C (cold water test condition). Additionally, products that are normally used for warm or hot applications shall be tested at 60 °C ± 2 °C or 85 °C ± 2 °C, respectively. For this purpose, warm water corresponds to normal operating temperatures between 30 °C and 70 °C and hot water corresponds to operating temperatures exceeding 70 °C. The test piece for cold water application shall be in contact with test water for 72 h ± 1 h. The test piece for elevated temperature applications shall be in contact with water for 24h. The test shall be repeated at least two more times using fresh test water each time. For cold water tests, the migration samples of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd migration period shall be analysed. The compliance with the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 3rd migration period. If the pass/fail criteria (see sections 4.2 and 4.3) are not met at the 3rd migration period the testing can be extended and the 5th, 7th and 9th period shall be analysed additionally. In this case the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 9th migration period. For warm or hot water tests the migration samples of the 1st, 6th and 7th migration period shall be analysed. The compliance with the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 7th migration period. If the pass/fail criteria (see sections 4.2 and 4.3) are not met at the 7th migration period the testing can be extended and 12th, 17th and 22nd period shall be analysed additionally. In this case the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 22nd migration period. The largest S/V representative of the product group shall be selected. For further details on testing organoleptic parameters, TOC, relevant and unexpected substances relevant European standards or, in the absence thereof, an internationally recognised methods shall be used. Cold water test (23 °C ± 2 °C) shall be performed with chlorinated and non-chlorinated test water. In case a warm or a hot water test is required, the test shall only be performed with non-chlorinated test water. 3.2. Analysis of migration waters 3.2.1. Relevant substances The relevant substances defined in section 2.2.2 shall be analysed in the migration waters. The methods for analysis of relevant substances in migration waters shall be validated and documented in accordance with EN ISO/IEC 17025:2017 or other equivalent standards accepted at international level. 3.2.2. Unexpected substances For the identification and semi-quantitative analysis of unexpected substances a GC-MS screening or screening by other analytical techniques can be used. Unexpected substances are only determined in the migration waters of the cold water test. 3.2.3. Relevant other parameters The methods for analysis of relevant other parameters in migration waters shall be validated and documented in accordance with EN ISO/IEC 17025:2017 or other equivalent standards accepted at international level. 3.3. Mathematical modelling Where generally recognised diffusion models exist on the basis of experimental data, mathematical modelling for estimation of migration levels may be used as alternative to the migration testing of relevant substances for certain types of final cementitious materials. If these recognised diffusion models predict that the migration of the substance complies with the maximum tolerable concentration at the tap (MTC tap) , migration testing for these substances is not necessary. For the assessment of some parameters and for modelling, the content of the respective substances in the final material shall be determined. If compliance is not shown by using the models, migration testing shall be performed. Only validated mathematical models applicable to cementitious materials shall be used to determine the concentration of a relevant substance in migration water. 3.4. Enhancement of Microbial Growth (EMG) testing Tests for Enhancement of Microbial Growth shall be performed if organic constituents are used according to the formulation. For the Enhancement of Microbial Growth testing, standard EN 16421:2015 – method 1 or 2 shall be used. 4. ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS: PASS/FAIL CRITERIA 4.1. Formulation Organic cementitious constituents of the formulation listed in the European positive list of organic constituents for cementitious materials in Annex III of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 and in the European positive list of starting substances for organic materials as further specified in Table 1 of Annex III to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 shall be used: 4.2. Relevant substances, unexpected substances 4.2.1. Conversion of migration test results The migration test results are expressed as migration rates (M) in μg/(dm 2 d). These results shall be converted to estimate the concentrations at the tap (C tap ) , defined as C tap = M * CF, where CF is the corresponding conversion factor in d/dm. The conversion factors for the different product groups are listed in Table 5 to Annex I. 4.2.2. Pass/fail criteria for relevant substances The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: The measured substance concentrations in the migration test water from the successive migration periods shall be used to assess the trend. However, if the C tap in the relevant migration period is below 1/10th of the MTC tap , then no trend analysis is required. For metals, MTC tap,cementitious of Table 1 in Annex V to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367 shall apply. 4.2.3. Pass/fail criteria for unexpected substances The following requirement shall apply to the cold water migration test:C tap ≤ MTC tap for the 3rd migration period or, in case extended testing is needed, at the 9th migration period. The MTC tap for the unexpected substances are set out in Table 6 of Annex I. For certain cementitious products the S/V ratio does not allow to meet the limit of MTC tap = 1 μg/L as established for organic materials. In this case MTC tap < Limit of Quantification for the highest S/V ratio shall apply. 4.2.4. Pass/fail criteria for Total Organic Carbon (TOC) The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: The measured TOC in the migration water from the successive migration periods shall be used to assess the trend. However, if the TOC in the relevant migration period is below 0,2 mg/l no trend analysis is required. 4.3. Odour, flavour, colour and turbidity 4.3.1. Pass/fail criteria for TON, TFN The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: 4.3.2. Pass/fail criteria for colour The acceptance criterion for colour is ≤ 5 mg/l Pt/Co The criterion shall be met for the 3rd migration period for cold water migration testing / 7th migration period for warm/hot water testing or in case of extended testing for the 9th migration period for cold water migration testing / 22nd migration period for warm/hot water testing. 4.3.3. Pass/fail criteria for turbidity The acceptance criterion for turbidity is ≤ 0,5 NFU The criterion shall be met for the 3rd migration period for cold water migration testing / 7th migration period for warm/hot water testing or in case of extended testing for the 9th migration period for cold water migration testing / 22nd migration period for warm/hot water testing. 4.4. Enhancement of Microbial Growth (EMG) The pass/fail criteria for Enhancement of Microbial Growth (EMG) for method 1 (EN 16421:2015) is < 1 000 pg ATP/ cm 2 and for method 2 (EN 16421:2015) is ≤ (0,05 ± 0,02) ml/800 cm 2 . Additionally, the surface of the products or components shall not have any biocidal effects on water intended for human consumption. Therefore, test pieces without surface colonisation (comparison of contact culture/test sample smear with that of the negative control) do not satisfy this requirement. ( 1 ) Threshold odour number ( 2 ) Threshold flavour number ANNEX IV FINAL ENAMELS, CERAMIC MATERIALS AND OTHER INORGANIC MATERIALS (INCLUDING GLASS) 1. GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTING The procedure for testing and accepting final enamels, other glass materials, ceramic materials and other inorganic materials as used in a product includes the following steps: 2. IDENTIFICATION OF RELEVANT SUBSTANCES AND RELEVANT OTHER PARAMETERS 2.1. Categorisation of products or components into risk groups and corresponding testing requirements. For each product or component of an assembled product, a product group and a corresponding conversion factor (CF) shall be determined in accordance with Table 5 of Annex I. Based on the determined CF, the product or component is categorised in a risk group (RG) in accordance with Table 1. The categorisation in a RG determines the corresponding testing requirements including the relevant other parameters. The applicable testing procedure of final materials results from the use of these materials in products or components of assembled products. Minor components are considered to be components categorised in risk group 4 (RG4) and for which reduced testing requirements, as set out in Table 1, may apply in comparison with the testing requirements for the risk group 1, 2 or 3 (RG1, RG2, RG3). For an assembled product the components shall be determined. For each component in an assembled product, a product group shall be determined. If an assembled product consists of components made of the same final material, then the wetted surface fraction of these components shall be cumulatively added for the determination of the product group in accordance with Table 5 of Annex I. The testing shall be performed on the final materials as used in products in contact with water intended for human consumption. Table 1 Risk-based testing requirements for products or components of assembled products 2.2. Composition review 2.2.1. Required information For the final materials the complete composition with the range for all constituents exceeding 0,02 % (m/m) is required. The content of lead and cadmium shall be declared. 2.2.2. Accepted compositions The compositions of the final materials shall comply with compositions listed in the European positive lists of compositions of enamels, ceramics and other inorganic materials set out in Table 1 of Annex IV of Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367, and fulfil the limitations set out in this European positive list in respect of their use for certain product groups and the use of these products. The content of lead and cadmium shall be less than 0,02 % (m/m). 2.2.3. Relevant substances The relevant substances to be analysed in migration waters are specified for each composition set out in the Annex IV to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. 3. TESTING REQUIREMENTS 3.1. Testing of the composition An analysis of the composition of the final materials shall be performed to verify compliance with the compositional requirements of compositions of enamels, ceramics or other inorganic materials included in the Annex IV to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. 3.2. Migration testing 3.2.1. Standards For testing the release of relevant substances, the following standard shall be used to obtain the migration waters: EN 12873-1:2014. The following sections 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 substantiate this standard. 3.2.2. Test piece Special attention shall be given to the production of the test piece. The respective component or product is to be used as test piece(s). A specifically produced test piece shall only be used if the product cannot be tested. 3.2.3. Temperature of testing All products shall be tested at 23 °C ± 2 °C (cold water test condition). Additionally, products that are normally used for warm or hot applications shall be tested at 60 °C ± 2 °C or 85 °C ± 2 °C, respectively. For this purpose, warm water corresponds to normal operating temperatures between 30 °C and 70 °C and hot water corresponds to operating temperatures exceeding 70 °C. For materials that can be subjected to high temperature variation (for example, in solar water heaters), the test should be carried out at 85 °C. 3.2.4. Type of test water Cold water test (23 °C ± 2 °C) shall be performed with non-chlorinated test water. In the case PAH analysis is required the test shall be performed with chlorinated test water additionally. In case a warm or a hot water test is required, the test shall only be performed with non-chlorinated test water. 3.2.5. Migration periods For cold water tests the migration samples of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd migration period according to standards shall be analysed. The compliance with the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 3rd migration period (10th day of testing). If the pass/fail criteria (see 4.2 and 4.3) are not met at the 3rd migration period, testing can be extended and the 5th, 7th and 9th period shall be analysed additionally. In this case the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 9th migration period (31st day of testing). For warm or hot water tests the migration samples of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 7th, migration period shall be analysed. The compliance with the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 7th migration period (10th day). If the pass/ fail criteria (see 4.2 and 4.3) are not met at the 7th migration period, testing can be extended and the 12th, 17th and 22nd period shall be analysed additionally. In this case the pass/fail criteria shall be assessed at the 22nd migration period (31st day). 3.3. Analysis of migration waters 3.3.1. Relevant Substances The methods for analysis of relevant substances in migration waters shall be validated and documented in accordance with EN ISO/IEC 17025:2017 or other equivalent standards accepted at international level. 4. ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS: PASS/FAIL CRITERIA 4.1. Composition The analysed composition of the final material shall comply with the compositional requirements and other limitations specified in the respective European positive list of compositions. 4.2. Relevant substances 4.2.1. Conversion of test results In accordance with the standard EN 12873-1:2014, the test results are expressed as migration rates (M) in μg/(dm 2 .d). These results shall be converted to estimate the concentrations at the tap (C tap ), defined as C tap = M * CF, where CF is the corresponding conversion factor in d/dm. The conversion factors for the different product groups are listed in Table 5 of Annex I. 4.2.2. Pass/fail criteria for relevant substances The following requirements shall apply to the cold water migration test: The following requirements shall apply to the warm/hot water migration test: The measured substance concentrations in the migration water from the successive migration periods shall be used to assess the trend. However, if C tap in the relevant migration period is below 1/10 of MTC tap , no trend analysis is required. The MTC tap,inorganic to be applied are defined in the Annex IV and Table 1 of Annex V to Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2024/367. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)