COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/19 of 18 December 2020 laying down a common methodology and a format for reporting on reuse in accordance with Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (notified under document C(2020) 8976) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 9(7) and 37(7) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Common methodology for the measurement of reuse 1. For the purposes of Article 9(4) of Directive 2008/98/EC, Member States shall measure reuse by carrying out a qualitative and a quantitative monitoring of measures on reuse. 2. The qualitative monitoring referred to in paragraph 1 shall include an identification and description of measures on reuse and an assessment of their impacts or expected impacts, on the basis of the available data. The qualitative monitoring shall be carried out each year. 3. The quantitative monitoring referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out by measuring reuse generated by reuse operators or households in accordance with any of the following methods or a combination of those methods or any other method equivalent in terms of relevance, representativeness and reliability: The quantitative monitoring for a given product category shall be carried out at least once every three years. The first monitoring shall cover all product categories and shall be carried out for the first reporting period referred to in the third subparagraph of Article 37(3) of Directive 2008/98/EC. 4. Member States shall take appropriate measures to ensure the reliability and accuracy of the data on reuse. In particular, Member States shall ensure that the measurement of reuse carried out in accordance with the common methodology set out in this Article is based on a representative sample of the population or of reuse operators or households as applicable. Article 2 Reporting on reuse Member States shall report the data and submit the quality check report concerning the implementation of Article 9(4) of Directive 2008/98/EC in the format laid down in the Annex. Article 3 Addressees This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 18 December 2020. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 . Formats for reporting on reuse A. FORMAT FOR THE REPORTING ON THE QUALITATIVE DATA ON REUSE B. FORMAT FOR THE REPORTING ON THE QUANTITATIVE DATA ON REUSE 1. Reuse per product category 2. Reuse operators C. FORMAT FOR THE QUALITY CHECK REPORT 1. Objectives of the report The objectives of the quality check report are the following: 2. General information Member State: Organisation submitting the data and the descriptions referred to in points 3.1, 3.2 and 4.1: Reporting period: Delivery date/version: Link to data publication by the Member State (if any): 3. Information concerning measurement of reuses 3.1. General description of the sources of information and data used for reporting on measures on reuse in accordance with section A and of the sources of data used for reporting on the amount of reused products in accordance with Section B Please indicate the source(s) of information and data. 3.2. Detailed description of the methods used for reporting on measures on reuse in accordance with section A and for reporting on the amount of reused products in accordance with Section B Please describe the methods for measuring reuse. The description shall include the following: 4. Notification of methodological changes and problems 4.1. Description of methodological changes (if applicable) Please describe significant methodological changes in the calculation method for the reporting period in relation to the previous reporting period, if any (please include, in particular, retrospective revisions and their nature). Please describe the changes separately for the reporting in accordance with section A and the reporting in accordance with section B. 4.2. Explanation of tonnage difference (if applicable) Please explain the causes of the tonnage difference (which product categories or estimates have caused the difference, and what the underlying cause is) where the variation is greater than 20 % compared to the data submitted for the previous reporting period. 4.3. Notification of problems (if any) In case you have experienced problems with the collection of the requested data, please provide a description of those problems. 5. Confidentiality Please provide a justification for withholding the publication of specific parts of this report, if necessary. For each case, please indicate the precise location of those parts (the respective cell or cells). 6. Main national websites, reference documents and publications Please provide links to main national websites, reference documents and publications on measures on reuse reported in accordance with Section A. Please provide links to main national websites, reference documents and publications used for the purposes of reporting in accordance with Section B.