COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 101/2012 of 6 February 2012 amending Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 of 9 December 1996 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 19(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 The Annex to Regulation (EC) No 338/97 is replaced by the text set out in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 6 February 2012. For the Commission The President José Manuel BARROSO ( 1 ) OJ L 61, 3.3.1997, p. 1 . ( 2 ) OJ L 24, 27.1.2011, p. 1 . ‘ANNEX Notes on interpretation of Annexes A, B, C and D ( 1 ) OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7 . ( 2 ) OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7 . ( 3 ) Population of Argentina (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas of the populations included in Annex B, in cloth and in derived manufactured products and other handicraft artefacts. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words “VICUÑA-ARGENTINA”. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation “VICUÑA-ARGENTINA-ARTESANÍA”. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 4 ) Population of Bolivia (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas and in cloth and items made thereof, including luxury handicrafts and knitted articles. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words “VICUÑA-BOLIVIA”. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation “VICUÑA-BOLIVIA-ARTESANÍA”. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 5 ) Population of Chile (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas of the populations included in Annex B, and in cloth and items made thereof, including luxury handicrafts and knitted articles. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words “VICUÑA-CHILE”. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation “VICUÑA-CHILE-ARTESANÍA”. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 6 ) Population of Peru (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing international trade in wool sheared from live vicuñas and in the stock extant at the time of the ninth meeting of the Conference of the Parties (November 1994) of 3 249 kg of wool, and in cloth and items made thereof, including luxury handicrafts and knitted articles. The reverse side of the cloth must bear the logotype adopted by the range States of the species, which are signatories to the Convenio para la Conservación y Manejo de la Vicuña, and the selvages the words “VICUÑA-PERU”. Other products must bear a label including the logotype and the designation “VICUÑA-PERU-ARTESANÍA”. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 7 ) All species are listed in Appendix II except Balaena mysticetus, Eubalaena spp., Balaenoptera acutorostrata (except population of West Greenland), Balaenoptera bonaerensis, Balaenoptera borealis, Balaenoptera edeni, Balaenoptera musculus, Balaenoptera omurai, Balaenoptera physalus, Megaptera novaeangliae, Orcaella brevirostris, Orcaella heinsohni, Sotalia spp., Sousa spp., Eschrichtius robustus, Lipotes vexillifer, Caperea marginata, Neophocaena phocaenoides, Phocoena sinus, Physeter macrocephalus, Platanista spp., Berardius spp., Hyperoodon spp., which are listed in Appendix I. Specimens of the species listed in Appendix II to the Convention, including products and derivatives other than meat products for commercial purposes, taken by the people of Greenland under licence granted by the competent authority concerned, shall be treated as belonging to Annex B. A zero annual export quota is established for live specimens from the Black Sea population of Tursiops truncatus removed from the wild and traded for primarily commercial purposes. ( 8 ) Populations of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe (listed in Annex B): For the exclusive purpose of allowing: (a) trade in hunting trophies for non-commercial purposes; (b) trade in live animals to appropriate and acceptable destinations as defined in Resolution Conf. 11.20 for Botswana and Zimbabwe and for in situ conservation programmes for Namibia and South Africa; (c) trade in hides; (d) trade in hair; (e) trade in leather goods for commercial or non-commercial purposes for Botswana, Namibia and South Africa and for non-commercial purposes for Zimbabwe; (f) trade in individually marked and certified Ekipas incorporated in finished jewellery for non-commercial purposes for Namibia and ivory carvings for non-commercial purposes for Zimbabwe; (g) trade in registered raw ivory (for Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe whole tusks and pieces) subject to the following: (i) only registered government-owned stocks, originating in the State (excluding seized ivory and ivory of unknown origin); (ii) only to trading partners that have been verified by the Secretariat, in consultation with the Standing Committee, to have sufficient national legislation and domestic trade controls to ensure that the imported ivory will not be re-exported and will be managed in accordance with all requirements of Resolution Conf. 10.10 (Rev. CoP14) concerning domestic manufacturing and trade; (iii) not before the Secretariat has verified the prospective importing countries and the registered government-owned stocks; (iv) raw ivory pursuant to the conditional sale of registered government-owned ivory stocks agreed at COP12 which are 20 000 kg (Botswana), 10 000 kg (Namibia), 30 000 kg (South Africa); (v) in addition to the quantities agreed at CoP12, government-owned ivory from Botswana, Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa registered by the 31st of January 2007 and verified by the Secretariat may be traded and despatched, with the ivory in (g)(iv) in a single sale per destination under strict supervision of the Secretariat; (vi) the proceeds of the trade are used exclusively for elephant conservation and community conservation and development programmes within or adjacent to the elephant range; and (vii) the additional quantities specified in (g)(v) shall be traded only after the Standing Committee has agreed that the above conditions have been met; (h) no further proposals to allow trade in elephant ivory from populations already on Annex B shall be submitted to the Conference of the Parties for the period from CoP14 and ending nine years from the date of the single sale of ivory that is to take place in accordance with provisions in paragraph (g)(i), (g)(ii), (g)(iii), (g)(vi), and (g)(vii). In addition, such further proposals shall be dealt with in accordance with Decisions 14.77 and 14.78. On a proposal from the Secretariat, the Standing Committee can decide to cause this trade to cease partially or completely in the event of non-compliance by exporting or importing countries, or in the case of proven detrimental impacts of the trade on other elephant populations. All other specimens shall be deemed to be specimens of species included in Annex A and the trade in them shall be regulated accordingly. ( 9 ) The inclusion of Lamna nasus into Annex C applies as soon as the inclusion of this species in Appendix III to the Convention takes effect, i.e. 90 days after the Convention Secretariat communicates to all Parties that the species is included in Appendix III to the Convention. ( 10 ) The following are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation: ( 11 ) Trade of specimens with source code A is allowed only if specimens traded possess cataphylls. ( 12 ) Artificially propagated specimens of the following hybrids and/or cultivars are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation: ( 13 ) Artificially propagated hybrids of Cymbidium, Dendrobium, Phalaenopsis and Vanda are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation, when specimens are readily recognizable as artificially propagated and do not show any signs of having been collected in the wild such as mechanical damage or strong dehydration resulting from collection, irregular growth and heterogeneous size and shape within a taxon and shipment, algae or other epiphyllous organisms adhering to leaves, or damage by insects or other pests; and Plants not clearly qualifying for the exemption must be accompanied by appropriate CITES documents. ( 14 ) Artificially propagated specimens of cultivars of Cyclamen persicum are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation. However, the exemption does not apply to such specimens traded as dormant tubers. ( 15 ) Artificially propagated hybrids and cultivars of Taxus cuspidata , live, in pots or other small containers, each consignment being accompanied by a label or document stating the name of the taxon or taxa and the text “artificially propagated”, are not subject to the provisions of this Regulation.