COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2015/2174 of 24 November 2015 on the indicative compendium of environmental goods and services, the format for data transmission for European environmental economic accounts and modalities, structure and periodicity of the quality reports pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council on European environmental economic accounts (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2011 on European environmental economic accounts ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 3(5), 6(2) and 7(3) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Indicative compendium of environmental goods and services and of economic activities The indicative compendium of environmental goods and services and of economic activities is established as set out in the Annex. Article 2 Technical format for data transmissions Member States shall provide data required by the Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 using SDMX compliant data formats. The Commission (Eurostat) shall make available detailed documentation in relation to these formats. Article 3 Modalities, structure and periodicity of the quality reports 1. Every year Member States shall provide the Commission (Eurostat) with reports on the quality of the data transmitted under Regulation (EU) No 691/2011 with the same transmission deadlines as stipulated in Annexes I to VI, section 4 of that Regulation. 2. The quality reports shall include the following information: Article 4 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 24 November 2015. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 192, 22.7.2011, p. 1 . In order to facilitate a uniform application of Annex V to Regulation (EU) No 691/2011, this Annex establishes an indicative compendium of environmental goods and services and of economic activities. The compendium consists of a list of environmental goods and services and a list of economic activities. The goods, services and economic activities should be nationally relevant. The following aspects may be used to assess national relevance: The indicative compendium is not exhaustive and it does not exclude the existence of other nationally relevant environmental goods, services and economic activities. Environmental goods and services Environmental economic activities