COMMISSION DECISION of 23 June 2014 establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the EU Ecolabel for bed mattresses (notified under document C(2014) 4083) (Text with EEA relevance) (2014/391/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the EU Ecolabel ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 8(2) thereof, After consulting the European Union Eco-labelling Board, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 1. The product group ‘bed mattresses’ shall comprise products consisting of a cloth cover that is filled with materials and that can be placed on an existing supporting bed structure or designed for free standing in order to provide a surface to sleep or rest upon for indoor use. 2. The product group shall not include wooden and upholstered bed bases, inflatable mattresses and water mattresses, as well as mattresses classified under Council Directive 93/42/EEC ( 3 ) . Article 2 For the purpose of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 In order to be awarded the EU Ecolabel under Regulation (EC) No 66/2010, a product shall fall within the product group ‘bed mattresses’ as defined in Article 1 of this Decision and shall comply with the criteria as well as the related assessment and verification requirements set out in the Annex. Article 4 The criteria for the product group ‘bed mattresses’, as well as the related assessment and verification requirements, shall be valid for four years from the date of adoption of this Decision. Article 5 For administrative purposes, the code number assigned to the product group ‘bed mattresses’ shall be ‘014’. Article 6 Decision 2009/598/EC is repealed. Article 7 1. By derogation from Article 6, applications for the EU Ecolabel for products falling within the product group ‘bed mattresses’ submitted before the date of adoption of this Decision shall be evaluated in accordance with the conditions laid down in Decision 2009/598/EC. 2. Applications for the EU Ecolabel for products falling within the product group ‘bed mattresses’ submitted within two months from the date of adoption of this Decision may be based either on the criteria set out in Decision 2009/598/EC or on the criteria set out in this Decision. Those applications shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria on which they are based. 3. EU Ecolabel licenses awarded in accordance with the criteria set out in Decision 2009/598/EC may be used for 12 months from the date of adoption of this Decision. Article 8 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 23 June 2014. For the Commission Janez POTOČNIK Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 27, 30.1.2010, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision 2009/598/EC of 9 July 2009 on establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the Community Ecolabel for bed mattresses ( OJ L 203, 5.8.2009, p. 65 ). ( 3 ) Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical devices ( OJ L 169, 12.7.1993, p. 1 ). FRAMEWORK Assessment and verification requirements The specific assessment and verification requirements are indicated within each criterion. Where the applicant is required to provide declarations, documentation, analyses, test reports, or other evidence to show compliance with the criteria, these may originate from the applicant and/or his supplier(s) and/or their suppliers, etc., as appropriate. Competent bodies shall preferentially recognise tests which are accredited according to ISO 17025 and verifications performed by bodies which are accredited under the EN 45011 standard or an equivalent international standard. Where appropriate, test methods other than those indicated for each criterion may be used if the competent body assessing the application accepts their equivalence. Where appropriate, competent bodies may require supporting documentation and may carry out independent verifications. As pre-requisite, the product must meet all respective legal requirements of the country (countries) in which the product is intended to be placed on the market. The applicant shall declare the product's compliance with this requirement. EU ECOLABEL CRITERIA Criteria for awarding the EU Ecolabel to bed mattresses: The Ecolabel criteria reflect the best environmental performing products on the market of bed mattresses. Whilst the use of chemical products and release of pollutants is part of the production process, the use of hazardous substances are excluded whenever possible or limited to the minimum necessary to provide an adequate function and at the same time strict quality and safety standards to the mattress. For this purpose, derogation conditions for specific substances/groups of substances are granted in exceptional circumstances, in order not to shift the environmental burden to other life cycle phases or impacts and only when there are no viable alternatives existing on the market. Criterion 1. Latex foam Note: The following requirements need to be met only if latex foam contributes to more than 5 % of the total weight of the mattress. 1.1. Restricted substances The concentrations in the latex foam of the substances listed below shall not exceed the following values: Assessment and verification: 1.2. Emission of specified volatile organic compounds (SVOCs, VOCs, VVOCs) The room concentrations of the substances reported below, calculated through the test chamber method, shall not exceed the following values after a period of 24 hours. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a report presenting the results of the following test procedure. A test chamber analysis shall be performed in accordance with the standard ISO 16000-9. The wrapped sample shall be stored at room temperature at least for 24 hours. After this period the sample shall be unwrapped and immediately transferred into the test chamber. The sample shall be placed on a sample holder, which allows air access from all sides. The climatic factors shall be adjusted according to ISO 16000-9. For comparison of test results, the area specific ventilation rate (q = n/l) shall be 1. The ventilation rate shall be between 0,5 and 1. The air sampling shall be done 24 ± 1 h after loading of the chamber during 1 hour on DNPH cartridges for the analysis of formaldehyde and other aldehydes and on Tenax TA for the analysis of other volatile organic compounds. Sampling duration for other compounds may be longer but shall be completed before 30 hours. The analysis of formaldehyde and other aldehydes shall comply with the standard ISO 16000-3. Unless specified differently, the analysis of other volatile organic compounds shall comply with the standard ISO 16000-6. Testing following the standard CEN/TS 16516 shall be considered equivalent to those of the ISO 16000 series of standards. The analysis of nitrosamines shall be done by means of gas chromatography in combination with a thermal energy analysis detector (GC-TEA), in accordance with the BGI 505-23 method (formerly: ZH 1/120.23) or equivalent. 1.3. Dyes Should dyes be used, criterion 5.5 shall be respected. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide either a declaration of non-use of dyes from the manufacturer of the foam or, in case of use, a declaration of compliance with this criterion, together with supporting documentation. Criterion 2. Polyurethane (PUR) foam Note: The following requirements need to be met only if PUR foam contributes to more than 5 % of the total weight of the mattress. 2.1. Restricted substances The concentrations in the PUR foam of the substances listed below shall not exceed the following values: Assessment and verification: 2.2. Emission of specified volatile organic compounds (SVOCs, VOCs, VVOCs) The room concentrations of the substances reported below, calculated through the test chamber method, shall not exceed the following values after a period of 72 hours. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a report presenting the results of the following test procedure. The foam sample is placed on the bottom of an emission test chamber and is conditioned for 3 days at 23 °C and 50 % relative humidity, applying an air exchange rate n of 0,5 per hour and a chamber loading L of 0,4 m 2 /m 3 (= total exposed surface of sample in relation to chamber dimensions without sealing edges and back) in accordance with ISO 16000-9 and ISO 16000-11. Sampling shall be done 72 ± 2 h after loading of the chamber during 1 hour on Tenax TA and DNPH cartridges for respectively VOC and formaldehyde analysis. The emissions of VOC are being trapped on Tenax TA sorbent tubes and subsequently analysed by means of thermo-desorption-GC-MS in accordance to ISO 16000-6. Results are semi-quantitatively expressed as toluene equivalents. All specified individual components are reported from a concentration limit ≥ 1 μg/m 3 . Total VOC value is the sum of all components with a concentration ≥ 1 μg/m 3 and eluting within the retention time window from n-hexane (C6) to n-hexadecane (C16), both included. The sum of all detectable compounds classified as categories C1A or C1B according to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 is the sum of all these substances with a concentration ≥ 1 μg/m 3 . In case the test results exceed the standard limits, substance specific quantification needs to be performed. Formaldehyde can be determined by collection of the sampled air onto DNPH cartridge and subsequent analysis by HPLC/UV in accordance to ISO 16000-3. Testing following the standard CEN/TS 16516 shall be considered equivalent to those of the ISO 16000 series of standards. 2.3. Dyes Should dyes be used, criterion 5.5 shall be respected. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide either a declaration of non-use of dyes from the manufacturer of the foam or, in case of use, a declaration of compliance with this criterion, together with supporting documentation. 2.4. Total chlorine content of isocyanates Should mixed isomers of toluene diisocyanate (TDI) be used in the production of the PUR foam, the total chlorine content of these isocyanates shall not exceed 0,07 % by weight. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide either a declaration of non-use from the manufacturer of the foam or the results of the test methods carried-out in accordance with ASTM D4661-93 or equivalent. 2.5. Blowing agents Halogenated organic compounds shall not be used as blowing agents or as auxiliary blowing agents. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a declaration of non-use from the manufacturer of the foam. Criterion 3. Wire and springs Note: The following requirements need to be met only if wire and springs contribute to more than 5 % of the total weight of the mattress. 3.1. Degreasing If degreasing and/or cleaning of wire and/or springs is carried out with organic solvents, use shall be made of a closed cleaning/degreasing system. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a corresponding declaration from the manufacturer of wire and/or springs. 3.2. Galvanisation The surface of springs shall not be covered with a galvanic metallic layer. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a corresponding declaration from the manufacturer of wire and/or springs. Criterion 4. Coconut fibres Note: The following requirement needs to be met only if coconut fibre contribute to more than 5 % of the total weight of the mattress. Criteria for latex foam shall be considered if coconut fibre material is rubberised using latex. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall either provide a declaration of non-use of rubberised coconut fibres, or the test reports required in criterion 1 for latex foam. Criterion 5. Textiles (fabrics and fibres used as mattress cover and/or filling materials) Notes: 5.1. General requirements on hazardous substances (including flame retardants, biocides and plasticizers) (Applicability: all textiles) All textiles: criteria 7 (flame retardants), 8 (biocides), 9 (plasticizers) and 10 (hazardous substances) shall be respected by all textiles. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance with this criterion, together with the supporting documentation required in the respective criterion (7, 8, 9 and 10). 5.2. Auxiliaries used in preparations and formulations (Applicability: covers made of any fibres and filling materials made of wool) All covers : The following substances shall not be used in any preparations or formulations used for the production of all mattress covers. Limit values for the presence of Alkylophenols and APEOs on the cover shall be respected. Filling materials made of wool : Alkylophenols and APEOs shall not be used in any preparations or formulations used for the production of filling materials made of wool and limit values for their presence in the filling material shall be respected. Assessment and verification: 5.3. Surfactants, fabric softeners and complexing agents in wet processes (Applicability: covers made of any fibres) All surfactants, softeners and complexing agents: At least 95 % by weight of surfactants, softeners and complexing agents shall comply with one of the following conditions: Non-ionic and cationic surfactants : All non-ionic and cationic surfactants shall also be readily biodegradable under anaerobic conditions. The latest revision of the Detergents Ingredients Database should be used as a reference point for biodegradability: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide appropriate documentation through safety data sheets and declarations from suppliers. For all surfactants, softeners and complexing agents, this shall be supported by results of appropriate OECD or ISO tests for: For non-ionic and cationic surfactants, this shall be supported by results of appropriate OECD or ISO tests (ISO 11734, ECETOC No 28 (June 1988), OECD 311). 5.4. Bleaching of pulp, yarns, fabrics and end products (Applicability: covers made of any fibres) Chlorine agents shall not be used for the bleaching of any yarns, fabrics or end-products with the exception of man-made cellulose fibres. Pulp used to manufacture man-made cellulose fibres (e.g. viscose) shall be bleached without the use of elemental chlorine. The resulting total amount of chlorine and organically bound chlorine in the finished fibres (OX) shall not exceed 150 ppm or in the wastewater from pulp manufacturing (AOX) shall not exceed 0,170 kg/ADt pulp. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a declaration of non-use of chlorinated bleaching agents from the supplier. For man-made cellulose fibres, the applicant shall provide a test report showing compliance with either the OX or the AOX requirement, using the appropriate test method: 5.5. Dyes (Applicability: covers made of any fibres) The following restrictions apply to dyes. The use of dyes in textiles shall be also compliant with criterion 10 on hazardous substances and thus the related derogation conditions shall apply. Derogation conditions relate to the handling of dyes in the dye house, the dyeing process and colour removal from wastewater from dye houses. Assessment and verification: 5.6. Extractable metals (Applicability: covers made of any fibres) The following limit values shall apply: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a report presenting the results of the final product testing as verification for the limit values. The tests shall be extraction according to ISO 105-E04 (acid sweat solution) and detection with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) or inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, also referred to as ICP-AES). 5.7. Water, stain and oil repellents (Applicability: covers made of any fibres) Fluorinated water, stain and oil repellent treatment shall not be used. This shall include perfluorinated and polyfluorinated carbon treatments. Non-fluorinated treatments shall be readily biodegradable and non-bioaccumulative in the aquatic environment including aquatic sediment. They shall additionally comply with criterion 10 on hazardous substances. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a declaration of non-use from the supplier supported by safety data sheets and compliance with criterion 10 shall be demonstrated accordingly. 5.8. Wastewater discharges from wet processing (Applicability: covers made of any fibres and filling materials made of wool) Wastewater discharges to the environment shall not exceed 20 g COD/kg textile processing. This requirement shall apply to weaving, dyeing, printing and finishing processes used to manufacture the product(s). The requirement shall be measured downstream of on-site wastewater treatment plant or off-site wastewater treatment plant receiving wastewater from those processing sites. If the effluent is treated on site and discharged directly to surface waters, it shall also meet the following requirements: If colour removal is required by a derogation condition in criterion 10(a) then the following spectral absorption coefficients shall be met: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide detailed documentation and test reports, using ISO 6060 for determination of COD and ISO 7887 for determination of colour, and showing compliance with this criterion on the basis of monthly averages for the six months preceding the application, together with a declaration of compliance. The data shall demonstrate compliance by the production site or, if the effluent is treated off-site, by the wastewater treatment operator. 5.9. Mechanical resistance (Applicability: covers made of any fibre) Mattress cover shall achieve satisfactory mechanical properties, which are defined by the following testing standards: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide reports describing the results of the tests performed according to ISO 13937-2 or ISO 9073-4 for tear strength, ISO 13936-2 (under a load of 60 N) for seam slippage and ISO 13934-1 for tensile strength. 5.10. Durability of flame retardant function (Applicability: covers made of any fibre) Removable and washable covers shall retain their functionality after 50 wash and tumble dry cycles at a minimum of 75 °C. Covers that are not intended to be removed and washed shall retain their functionality after a soak test. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide reports from tests carried out according to the following standards, as appropriate: 5.11. Dimensional change (Applicability: removable covers made of any fibres) For mattress covers that are removable and washable, the dimensional changes after washing and drying at either domestic or industrial washing temperatures and conditions shall not exceed: This criterion does not apply to fabrics that are not promoted as ‘washable’. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide test reports referring to appropriate standards. ISO 6330 in combination with EN 25077 shall be used as test method. Unless the cover states otherwise, the default conditions shall be washing 3A (60 °C), drying C (flat drying) and ironing according to the composition of the fabric. Criterion 6. Glues and adhesives Glues containing organic solvents shall not be used. Glues and adhesives used for assembling the product shall be also compliant with criterion 10 on hazardous substances. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a declaration of non-use or a declaration from suppliers together with supporting documentation and compliance with criterion 10 shall be demonstrated accordingly. Criterion 7. Flame retardants The following flame retardants shall not be added intentionally to the product, any article of it and any homogeneous part of it: The use of any flame retardant shall be compliant with criterion 10 on hazardous substances. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide and shall make suppliers to provide a declaration of non-use confirming that the listed flame retardants have not been included in the product, any article of it and any homogeneous part of it. A list of substances added to enhance the flame retarding properties shall be also provided, including concentrations and related H statements/R phrases, and compliance with criterion 10 shall be demonstrated accordingly. Criterion 8. Biocides 8.1. Production The use of any biocidal active substance in the product shall have to be authorised under Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 3 ) (list available at: and shall be compliant with criterion 10 on hazardous substances. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide either declarations of non-use or evidence that the use of biocides is authorised under Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. A list of biocidal products added to the product shall be also provided, including concentrations and related H statements/R phrases, and compliance with criterion 10 shall be demonstrated accordingly. 8.2. Transportation Chlorophenols (their salts and esters), polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB), organo-tin compounds (including TBT, TPhT, DBT and DOT) and diemthyl fumarate (DMFu) shall not be used during the transportation or storage of the product, any article of it and any homogeneous part of it. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide and shall make suppliers to provide a declaration of non-use, as appropriate, confirming that the listed substances have not been used during the transportation or storage of the product, any article and any homogeneous part of it. A list of biocidal products added to the product shall be also provided, including concentrations and related H statements/R phrases, and compliance with criterion 10 shall be demonstrated accordingly. Criterion 9. Plasticizers The following plasticizers shall not be added intentionally to the product, any article of it and to any homogeneous part of it: The sum of the prohibited plasticizers shall be lower than 0,10 % by weight. The use of any plasticizer shall be compliant with criterion 10 on hazardous substances. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide and shall make suppliers to provide a declaration of non-use confirming that the listed substances have not been used in the product, any article of it and any homogeneous part of it. Safety data sheets for the formulation of polymers may be requested to confirm that the listed substances have not been included in the product. A list of plasticizers added to the product shall be provided, including concentrations and related H statements/R phrases, and compliance with criterion 10 shall be demonstrated accordingly. Additional verification for the total content of phthalates may be required in accordance with ISO 14389 when quality of information is considered insufficient. Criterion 10. Excluded or limited substances and mixtures (a) Hazardous substances and mixtures The EU Ecolabel may not be awarded if the product or any article of it, as defined in Article 3(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 4 ) , or any homogenous part of it contains a substance or mixture meeting the criteria for classification with the hazard statements or risk phrases specified in the table below, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 or Council Directive 67/548/EEC ( 5 ) , or contains a substance or mixture referred to in Article 57 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, unless specific derogation has been granted. The most recent classification rules adopted by the Union shall take precedence over the listed hazard classifications and risk phrases. Applicants shall therefore ensure that any classifications are based on the most recent classification rules. The hazard statements and the risk phrases in the table below generally refer to substances. However, if information on substances cannot be obtained, the classification rules for mixtures apply. The use of substances or mixtures which change their properties upon processing (e.g. become no longer bioavailable or undergo chemical modification) so that the identified hazards no longer apply are exempted from the above requirements. This shall include for instance modified polymers and monomers or additives which become covalently bonded within plastic coatings. In accordance with Article 6(7) of Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 the following substances are specifically derogated from the requirements set out in criterion 10(a) and in accordance with the derogation conditions set out below. For each substance all derogation conditions shall be met for the specified hazard classifications. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide the bill of materials of the product, including a list with all articles and homogeneous part of it. The applicant shall screen the presence of substances and mixtures that may be classified with the hazard statements or risk phrases reported above in the criterion. The applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance with requirement 10(a) for the product, any article of it or any homogenous part of it. Applicants shall select the appropriate forms of verification. The main forms of verification are foreseen as follows: The declaration shall include related documentation, such as declarations of compliance signed by the suppliers, on the non-classification of the substances, mixtures or materials with any of the hazard classes associated to the hazard statements or risk phrases referred in the list above in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008, as far as this can be determined, as a minimum, from the information meeting the requirements listed in Annex VII to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. The information provided shall relate to the forms or physical states of the substances or mixtures as used in the final product. The following technical information shall be provided to support the declaration of classification or non-classification for each substance and mixture: Safety Data Sheets (SDS) shall be completed in accordance with the guidance in Section 10, 11 and 12 of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 (Requirements for the Compilation of Safety Data Sheets). Incomplete SDS shall require supplementing with information from declarations by chemical suppliers. Information on intrinsic properties of substances may be generated by means other than tests, for instance through the use of alternative methods such as in vitro methods, by quantitative structure activity models or by the use of grouping or read-across in accordance with Annex XI to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. The sharing of relevant data across the supply chain is strongly encouraged. Where substances used are derogated, then the declaration shall specifically identify those derogated substances and provide supporting evidence showing how the derogation conditions are met. (b) Substances listed in accordance with Article 59(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 No derogation from the exclusion in Article 6(6) of Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 shall be given concerning substances identified as substances of very high concern and included in the list provided for in Article 59(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, present in mixtures, in an article or in any homogeneous part of the product in concentrations > 0,10 % by weight. Assessment and verification : reference to the latest list of substances of very high concern shall be made on the date of application. The applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance with requirement 10(b), together with related documentation, including declarations of compliance signed by the material suppliers and copies of relevant Safety Data Sheets for substances or mixtures in accordance with Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. Concentration limits shall be specified in the safety data sheets in accordance with Article 31 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 for substances and mixtures. Criterion 11. Emission of specified volatile organic compounds (SVOCs, VOCs, VVOCs) from the mattress The contribution of mattresses to the VOC content of the indoor air shall not exceed the final values reported below, for a period of 7 days or, alternatively, 28 days. Values are calculated with the emission test chamber method and with reference to the European Reference Room, by analogy with the procedure specified in the ‘Health-related Evaluation Procedure for Volatile Organic Compounds Emissions from Building Products’ developed by the AgBB (2012 version available at Assessment and verification : the applicant shall perform a test chamber analysis in accordance with the standard EN ISO 16000-9. The analysis of formaldehyde and other aldehydes shall comply with the standard ISO 16000-3; the analysis of VOCs and SVOCs shall comply with the standard ISO 16000-6. Testing following the standard CEN/TS 16516 shall be considered equivalent to those of the ISO 16000 series of standards. Test results shall be calculated for an area specific ventilation rate ‘q’ = 0,5 m 3 /m 2 h, corresponding to a loading factor ‘L’ of 1 m 2 /m 3 and an air change rate ‘n’ of 0,5 per hour. In all these cases, the total surface of all surfaces (upside, downside and edges) of the mattress determine the area used for calculation of the loading factor. The test shall be performed on an entire mattress. Should this not be possible for any reason, any of the following alternative procedures of testing may be applied: Criterion 12. Technical performance 12.1. Quality The mattress shall be designed in a way that a quality product meeting the needs of the consumer is placed on the market. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a report describing the approach followed and the actions taken in order to ensure the quality of the product, the fulfilment of specific functional characteristics and the respect of thermo-hygrometric wellness requirements. The following aspects should be taken into consideration: research and development, selection of materials, internal testing and verification procedures for demonstrating the fulfilment of functional characteristics and the respect of thermo-hygrometric wellness requirements. 12.2. Durability Mattresses shall present the following functional characteristics: Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a test report describing the results obtained following the test method EN 1957. The losses of height and firmness refer to the difference between the measurements made initially (at 100 cycles) and after the completion (30 000 cycles) of the durability test. 12.3. Warranty A list of recommendations on how to use, maintain and dispose the mattress shall be reported in the warranty documentation. The warranty for the mattress shall be valid for a period of at least 10 years. This prescription shall not be required for cot mattresses. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide documentation attesting the implementation of the warranty scheme. Criterion 13. Design for disassembly and recovery of materials The manufacturer shall demonstrate that the mattress can be dismantled for the following purposes: Assessment and verification : a report shall be submitted with the application detailing the dismantling of the mattress and the possible disposal of each part. For instance, the following actions could facilitate the dismantling of the mattress: preferring sewing to the application of glue; using removable covers; using single and recyclable materials for each homogeneous part. Criterion 14. Information appearing on the EU Ecolabel The EU Ecolabel can be applied both on the packaging and on the product. If the optional label with text box is used, it shall contain the following text: The following text shall moreover appear: ‘For more information on why this product has been awarded the EU Ecolabel, please visit Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance and visual evidence. Criterion 15. Additional information to consumers The applicant shall provide consumers in written or audiovisual form with a list of recommendations on how to use, maintain and dispose the mattress. Assessment and verification : the applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance and visual evidence. ( *1 ) Only for foams composed of natural latex for at least 20 % by weight. ( *2 ) N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), N-nitrosomethylethylamine (NMEA), N-nitrosodi-i-propylamine (NDIPA), N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine (NDPA), N-nitrosodi-n-butylamine (NDBA), N-nitrosopyrrolidinone (NPYR), N-nitrosopiperidine (NPIP), N-nitrosomorpholine (NMOR). ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Commission Decision 2014/350/EU of 5 June 2014 establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the EU Ecolabel for textile products ( OJ L 174, 13.6.2014, p. 45 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 ). ( *3 ) only for cot mattresses. ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Council Directive 67/548/EEC of 27 June 1967 on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ 196, 16.8.1967, p. 1 ). ( 1 ) According to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008. ( 2 ) According to Directive 67/548/EEC and Directives 2006/121/EC and 1999/45/EC. ( 3 ) According to Commission Regulation (EU) No 286/2011 of 10 March 2011 amending, for the purposes of its adaptation to technical and scientific progress, Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures ( OJ L 83, 30.3.2011, p. 1 ).