COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/1752 of 1 October 2021 laying down rules for the application of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the calculation, verification and reporting of data on the separate collection of waste single-use plastic beverage bottles THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 9(3) and 13(4) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Methodology for the calculation and reporting of the amount of separately collected waste single-use bottles 1. The amount of separately collected waste single-use plastic beverage bottles listed in Part F of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/904 (‘waste single-use bottles’) shall be calculated by dividing the weight of the separately collected waste single-use bottles by the weight of such single-use bottles placed on the market (‘single-use bottles placed on the market’). The resulting ratio shall be expressed in percent. 2. Member States shall apply the formulas laid down in Annex I to calculate the amount of separately collected waste single-use bottles. Article 2 Methodology for the determination of the weight of separately collected waste single-use bottles 1. The weight of the waste single-use bottles shall include the weight of their caps and lids. 2. The weight of the waste single-use bottles shall not include the weight of any remaining beverage. 3. The weight of the waste single-use bottles may include the weight of labels and adhesives only if it is included also in the weight of the single-use bottles placed on the market. 4. The waste single-use bottles shall be considered as separately collected where either of the following conditions is fulfilled: 5. The quality assurance systems referred to in paragraph 4, point (b)(iii) shall: 6. The weight of waste single-use bottles collected separately in accordance with paragraph 4, point (a), shall be measured at the point where they are collected or at the output of the sorting operations. The weight of such waste bottles may be calculated by counting the bottles provided that conversion factors are applied that take into account the weight of each bottle size, the polymer type of the bottles and the lids and caps as well as the losses in subsequent sorting operations. 7. The weight of waste single-use bottles collected separately in accordance with paragraph 4, point (b), shall be measured at the output of the sorting operations where they are separated from the other waste with which they were collected. 8. Where waste single-use bottles and other packaging waste of the same polymer are present at the output of a sorting operation, the weight of the waste single-use bottles shall be proportional to the share of waste single-use bottles at the input of a sorting operation. That share shall be determined based on representative sampling and subsequent compositional analysis or by use of electronic registries. Article 3 Methodology for the determination of the weight of single-use bottles placed on the market 1. The weight of single-use bottles placed on the market shall include only the weight of such bottles that were placed on the market after having been filled with beverage. 2. The weight of single-use bottles placed on the market may, where there are significant imports, exports or other movements within the Union of such bottles by operators or by natural persons for their own personal use, be adjusted in order to take account of such movements. 3. In cases where Member States determine the weight of single-use bottles placed on the market on the basis of the weight of the waste generated from such products as referred to in Article 9(1), second subparagraph, of Directive (EU) 2019/904, the weight of that waste shall include the following: The weight of the bottles referred to in the first subparagraph, points (b) and (c), shall be calculated by applying the sampling methodology and the waste composition analysis set out in Article 4. Article 4 Sampling methodology and waste composition analysis to calculate the weight of waste single-use bottles collected as mixed municipal waste or disposed of as litter 1. The data collection for the waste composition analysis shall be based on surveys and a collection of representative samples. This data collection shall take into account: 2. The data collection and analysis referred to in paragraph 1 shall cover the entire territory of a given Member State. Article 5 Collection and reporting of data 1. Collection of data to calculate the weight of waste single-use bottles and single-use bottles placed on the market in accordance with Article 2 and Article 3shall be carried out every year. Member States shall, to the extent possible, use electronic registries to collect and report data. 2. Member States shall report the data referred to in Article 13(1), point (c), of Directive (EU) 2019/904 in the format laid down in Annex II to this Decision and submit the quality check report referred to in Article 13(2) of that Directive as regards those data in the format laid down in Annex III to this Decision. 3. The Commission shall publish the data reported by the Member States unless a Member State provides a justified request in the report referred to in paragraph 2 to withhold the publication of certain data. Article 6 Entry into force This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Done at Brussels, 1 October 2021. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 155, 12.6.2019, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ANNEX I FORMULAS FOR THE CALCULATION OF THE AMOUNT OF SEPARATELY COLLECTED WASTE SINGLE-USE BOTTLES A SCB = (W SCB apart + W SCB blended )/(W BPM + W EWG ) × 100 % Where: W BPM = W BPM gross – W B out + W B in W B out = W B out moved to other MS + W B out exp + W B out moved to other MS by natural persons + W B out by natural persons W B in = W B in from other MS + W B in imported + W B in moved from other MS by natural persons + W B in by natural persons W EWG = TW SCB + W other SCB + W MSW + W litter ANNEX II FORMAT FOR THE REPORTING OF DATA I. Format for reporting of data calculated based on the methodology set out in Article 3 Table 1 Weight of single-use bottles placed on the market calculated in accordance with Article 3 (in tonnes) II. Format for reporting of data calculated based on the methodology set out in Article 2(4) Table 2 Weight of separately collected for recycling waste single-use bottles calculated in accordance with Article 2(4) (in tonnes) ( 1 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(1). (W BPM gross ) ( 2 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B in imported ) ( 3 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B in from other MS ) ( 4 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B out exp ) ( 5 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B out moved to other MS ) ( 6 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B out by natural persons ) ( 7 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B in by natural persons ) ( 8 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B out moved to other MS by natural persons ) ( 9 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W B in moved from other MS by natural persons ) ( 10 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(2). (W BPM ) ( 11 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(3), point (a). (TW SCB ) ( 12 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(3), point (a). (W other SCB ) ( 13 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(3), point (b). (W MSW ) ( 14 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 3(3), point (c). (W litter ) ( 15 ) Calculated in accordance with Article 2(4), point (a). (W SCB apart ) ( 16 ) Collected together with other waste packaging fractions of municipal waste or with other non-hazardous, non-packaging plastic, metal, paper or glass fractions of municipal waste collected separately for recycling and calculated in accordance with Article 2(4), point (b). (W SCB blended ) ANNEX III FORMAT FOR THE QUALITY CHECK REPORT I. General Information II. Description of the institutions involved in the data collection Add rows as appropriate. III. Description of methods used 3.1. Single-use bottles placed on the market (Annex II, Table 1) 3.1.1. Description of the methodology for surveys and composition analysis Where the weight of single-use bottles placed on the market is determined based on the weight of the waste generated from such products, a description of the methodology used for the sampling and the waste composition analysis referred to in Article 4. 3.1.2. Description of any significant inconsistencies between the weight of single-use bottles placed on the market and the weight of packaging waste generated or any other related issues Where appropriate, a description of corrective measures planned or taken. Add rows as appropriate 3.2. Information on separately collected waste single-use bottles (Annex II, Table 2) 3.2.1. Description of the methods and sources for determining the weight of separately collected waste single-use bottles Explain the practices that are taken into account for calculating the share of separately collected waste single-use bottles, and the methods for determining that waste single-use bottles collected together with other waste are of comparable quality to waste single-use bottles collected separately from any other waste. Include the documentation of the quality assurance systems and of the third party verification that are set up by the waste operators to verify that the conditions set out in Article 2(4)(b), points (i) and (ii), are fulfilled. Add rows as appropriate IV. Data verification and control system 4.1 Verification of data on separately collected waste single-use bottles 4.2 Description of main factors affecting the accuracy of the data reported on waste single-use bottles, single-use bottles placed on the market and/or waste single-use bottles separately collected 4.3 Explanation of the scope and validity of surveys to collect data on waste single-use bottles, single-use bottles placed on the market and or waste single-use bottles separately collected Add rows as appropriate 4.4 Differences in the data reported for the previous reference years Significant methodological changes in the calculation method used for the current reference year in relation to the calculation method used for previous reference years, if any (in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break in the series has to be flagged for a certain year). Add rows as appropriate 4.5 Explanation for the difference in tonnage Where the reported data shows a greater than 10 % variation in relation to the data submitted for the previous reference year. Reasons for the difference or the underlying cause for the differences in the weight of waste single-use bottles, single-use bottles placed on the market and/or waste single-use bottles separately collected. Add rows as appropriate V. Confidentiality Justification for the request to withhold the publication of certain data in this report, together with a list of the specific parts requested to be withheld. VI. Main national websites, reference documents and publications Name and url of the main websites, reference documents and publications related to this data collection. Add rows as appropriate ( 1 ) Labels, adhesives, residues of beverages that the bottles contained and any other material that is not part of the single-use bottle or of its caps and lids. ( 2 ) Describe the estimated coefficients of variation and the methodologies applied for variance estimation. ( 3 ) Describe the type and size of coverage errors. ( 4 ) Describe the instruments to reduce potential risks and avoid errors. ( 5 ) Describe the instruments and methodologies applied to secure quality and relevant data collection instruments. ( 6 ) Describe the processing steps between data collection and production of statistics and list any processing errors identified and their extent. ( 7 ) Describe the unit and item non-response rates for the main variables and the imputation methods (if any). ( 8 ) Describe the type and size of model assumption errors.