COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2018/1147 of 10 August 2018 establishing best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for waste treatment, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (notified under document C(2018) 5070) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for waste treatment, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 10 August 2018. For the Commission Karmenu VELLA Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 establishing a forum for the exchange of information pursuant to Article 13 of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions ( OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3 ). BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES (BAT) CONCLUSIONS FOR WASTE These BAT conclusions concern the following activities specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU, namely: Referring to independently operated treatment of waste water not covered by Directive 91/271/EEC above, these BAT conclusions also cover the combined treatment of waste water from different origins if the main pollutant load originates from the activities covered under points 5.1, 5.3 or 5.5 as listed above. These BAT conclusions do not address the following: Other BAT conclusions and reference documents which could be relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions are the following: These BAT conclusions apply without prejudice to the relevant provisions of EU legislation, e.g. the waste hierarchy. DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following acronyms apply: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air Unless stated otherwise, emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of waste gas) under the following standard conditions: dry gas at a temperature of 273,15 K and a pressure of 101,3 kPa, without correction for oxygen content, and expressed in μg/Nm 3 or mg/Nm 3 . For averaging periods of BAT-AELs for emissions to air, the following definitions apply. Where continuous measurement is used, the BAT-AELs may be expressed as daily averages. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water Unless stated otherwise, emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of water), expressed in μg/l or mg/l. Unless stated otherwise, averaging periods associated with the BAT-AELs refer to either of the following two cases: Time-proportional composite samples can be used provided that sufficient flow stability is demonstrated. All BAT-AELs for emissions to water apply at the point where the emission leaves the installation. Abatement efficiency The calculation of the average abatement efficiency referred to in these BAT conclusions (see Table 6.1) does not include, for COD and TOC, initial treatment steps aiming at separating the bulk organic content from the water-based liquid waste, such as evapo-condensation, emulsion breaking or phase separation. 1. GENERAL BAT CONCLUSIONS 1.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to implement and adhere to an environmental management system (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Applicability The scope (e.g. level of detail) and nature of the EMS (e.g. standardised or non-standardised) will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have (determined also by the type and amount of wastes processed). BAT 2. In order to improve the overall environmental performance of the plant, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. BAT 3. In order to facilitate the reduction of emissions to water and air, BAT is to establish and to maintain an inventory of waste water and waste gas streams, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that incorporates all of the following features: Applicability The scope (e.g. level of detail) and nature of the inventory will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have (determined also by the type and amount of wastes processed). BAT 4. In order to reduce the environmental risk associated with the storage of waste, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. BAT 5. In order to reduce the environmental risk associated with the handling and transfer of waste, BAT is to set up and implement handling and transfer procedures. Description Handling and transfer procedures aim to ensure that wastes are safely handled and transferred to the respective storage or treatment. They include the following elements: Handling and transfer procedures are risk-based considering the likelihood of accidents and incidents and their environmental impact. 1.2. Monitoring BAT 6. For relevant emissions to water as identified by the inventory of waste water streams (see BAT 3), BAT is to monitor key process parameters (e.g. waste water flow, pH, temperature, conductivity, BOD) at key locations (e.g. at the inlet and/or outlet of the pretreatment, at the inlet to the final treatment, at the point where the emission leaves the installation). BAT 7. BAT is to monitor emissions to water with at least the frequency given below, and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 8. BAT is to monitor channelled emissions to air with at least the frequency given below, and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 9. BAT is to monitor diffuse emissions of organic compounds to air from the regeneration of spent solvents, the decontamination of equipment containing POPs with solvents, and the physico-chemical treatment of solvents for the recovery of their calorific value, at least once per year using one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 10. BAT is to periodically monitor odour emissions. Description Odour emissions can be monitored using: The monitoring frequency is determined in the odour management plan (see BAT 12). Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where an odour nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. BAT 11. BAT is to monitor the annual consumption of water, energy and raw materials as well as the annual generation of residues and waste water, with a frequency of at least once per year. Description Monitoring includes direct measurements, calculation or recording, e.g. using suitable meters or invoices. The monitoring is broken down at the most appropriate level (e.g. at process or plant/installation level) and considers any significant changes in the plant/installation. 1.3. Emissions to air BAT 12. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce odour emissions, BAT is to set up, implement and regularly review an odour management plan, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following elements: Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where an odour nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. BAT 13. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce odour emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. BAT 14. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce diffuse emissions to air, in particular of dust, organic compounds and odour, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. Depending on the risk posed by the waste in terms of diffuse emissions to air, BAT 14d is especially relevant. BAT 15. BAT is to use flaring only for safety reasons or for non-routine operating conditions (e.g. start-ups, shutdowns) by using both of the techniques given below. BAT 16. In order to reduce emissions to air from flares when flaring is unavoidable, BAT is to use both of the techniques given below. 1.4. Noise and vibrations BAT 17. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce noise and vibration emissions, BAT is to set up, implement and regularly review a noise and vibration management plan, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following elements: Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where a noise or vibration nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. BAT 18. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce noise and vibration emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.5. Emissions to water BAT 19. In order to optimise water consumption, to reduce the volume of waste water generated and to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce emissions to soil and water, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. BAT 20. In order to reduce emissions to water, BAT is to treat waste water using an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. Table 6.1 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for direct discharges to a receiving water body The associated monitoring is given in BAT 7. Table 6.2 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for indirect discharges to a receiving water body The associated monitoring is given in BAT 7. 1.6. Emissions from accidents and incidents BAT 21. In order to prevent or limit the environmental consequences of accidents and incidents, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below, as part of the accident management plan (see BAT 1). 1.7. Material efficiency BAT 22. In order to use materials efficiently, BAT is to substitute materials with waste. Description Waste is used instead of other materials for the treatment of wastes (e.g. waste alkalis or waste acids are used for pH adjustment, fly ashes are used as binders). Applicability Some applicability limitations derive from the risk of contamination posed by the presence of impurities (e.g. heavy metals, POPs, salts, pathogens) in the waste that substitutes other materials. Another limitation is the compatibility of the waste substituting other materials with the waste input (see BAT 2). 1.8. Energy efficiency BAT 23. In order to use energy efficiently, BAT is to use both of the techniques given below. 1.9. Reuse of packaging BAT 24. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal, BAT is to maximise the reuse of packaging, as part of the residues management plan (see BAT 1). Description Packaging (drums, containers, IBCs, pallets, etc.) is reused for containing waste, when it is in good condition and sufficiently clean, depending on a compatibility check between the substances contained (in consecutive uses). If necessary, packaging is sent for appropriate treatment prior to reuse (e.g. reconditioning, cleaning). Applicability Some applicability restrictions derive from the risk of contamination of the waste posed by the reused packaging. 2. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE MECHANICAL TREATMENT OF WASTE Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in Section 2 apply to the mechanical treatment of waste when it is not combined with biological treatment, and in addition to the general BAT conclusions in Section 1. 2.1. General BAT conclusions for the mechanical treatment of waste 2.1.1. Emissions to air BAT 25. In order to reduce emissions to air of dust, and of particulate-bound metals, PCDD/F and dioxin-like PCBs, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 6.3 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled dust emissions to air from the mechanical treatment of waste The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 2.2. BAT conclusions for the mechanical treatment in shredders of metal waste Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the mechanical treatment in shredders of metal waste, in addition to BAT 25. 2.2.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 26. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, and to prevent emissions due to accidents and incidents, BAT is to use BAT 14g and all of the techniques given below: 2.2.2. Deflagrations BAT 27. In order to prevent deflagrations and to reduce emissions when deflagrations occur, BAT is to use technique a. and one or both of the techniques b. and c. given below. 2.2.3. Energy efficiency BAT 28. In order to use energy efficiently, BAT is to keep the shredder feed stable. Description The shredder feed is equalised by avoiding disruption or overload of the waste feed which would lead to unwanted shutdowns and start-ups of the shredder. 2.3. BAT conclusions for the treatment of WEEE containing VFCs and/or VHCs Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the treatment of WEEE containing VFCs and/or VHCs, in addition to BAT 25. 2.3.1. Emissions to air BAT 29. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce emissions of organic compounds to air, BAT is to apply BAT 14d, BAT 14h and to use technique a. and one or both of the techniques b. and c. given below. Table 6.4 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled TVOC and CFC emissions to air from the treatment of WEEE containing VFCs and/or VHCs The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 2.3.2. Explosions BAT 30. In order to prevent emissions due to explosions when treating WEEE containing VFCs and/or VHCs, BAT is to use either of the techniques given below. 2.4. BAT conclusions for the mechanical treatment of waste with calorific value In addition to BAT 25, the BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the mechanical treatment of waste with calorific value covered by points 5.3(a)(iii) and 5.3(b)(ii) of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU. 2.4.1. Emissions to air BAT 31. In order to reduce emissions to air of organic compounds, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 6.5 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled TVOC emissions to air from the mechanical treatment of waste with calorific value The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 2.5. BAT conclusions for the mechanical treatment of WEEE containing mercury Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the mechanical treatment of WEEE containing mercury, in addition to BAT 25. 2.5.1. Emissions to air BAT 32. In order to reduce mercury emissions to air, BAT is to collect mercury emissions at source, to send them to abatement and to carry out adequate monitoring. Description This includes all of the following measures: Table 6.6 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled mercury emissions to air from the mechanical treatment of WEEE containing mercury The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 3. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE BIOLOGICAL TREATMENT OF WASTE Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in Section 3 apply to the biological treatment of waste, and in addition to the general BAT conclusions in Section 1. The BAT conclusions in Section 3 do not apply to the treatment of water-based liquid waste. 3.1. General BAT conclusions for the biological treatment of waste 3.1.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 33. In order to reduce odour emissions and to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to select the waste input. Description The technique consists of carrying out the pre-acceptance, acceptance and sorting of the waste input (see BAT 2) so as to ensure the suitability of the waste input for the waste treatment, e.g. in terms of nutrient balance, moisture or toxic compounds which may reduce the biological activity. 3.1.2. Emissions to air BAT 34. In order to reduce channelled emissions to air of dust, organic compounds and odorous compounds, including H 2 S and NH 3 , BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 6.7 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled NH 3, odour, dust and TVOC emissions to air from the biological treatment of waste The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 3.1.3. Emissions to water and water usage BAT 35. In order to reduce the generation of waste water and to reduce water usage, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. 3.2. BAT conclusions for the aerobic treatment of waste Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the aerobic treatment of waste, and in addition to the general BAT conclusions for the biological treatment of waste in Section 3.1. 3.2.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 36. In order to reduce emissions to air and to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to monitor and/or control the key waste and process parameters. Description Monitoring and/or control of key waste and process parameters, including: Applicability Monitoring of the moisture content in the windrow is not applicable to enclosed processes when health and/or safety issues have been identified. In that case, the moisture content can be monitored before loading the waste into the enclosed composting stage and adjusted when it exits the enclosed composting stage. 3.2.2. Odour and diffuse emissions to air BAT 37. In order to reduce diffuse emissions to air of dust, odour and bioaerosols from open-air treatment steps, BAT is to use one or both of the techniques given below. 3.3. BAT conclusions for the anaerobic treatment of waste Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to the anaerobic treatment of waste, and in addition to the general BAT conclusions for the biological treatment of waste in Section 3.1. 3.3.1. Emissions to air BAT 38. In order to reduce emissions to air and to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to monitor and/or control the key waste and process parameters. Description Implementation of a manual and/or automatic monitoring system to: This includes monitoring and/or control of key waste and process parameters, e.g.: 3.4. BAT conclusions for the mechanical biological treatment (MBT) of waste Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in this section apply to MBT, and in addition to the general BAT conclusions for the biological treatment of waste in Section 3.1. The BAT conclusions for the aerobic treatment (Section 3.2) and anaerobic treatment (Section 3.3) of waste apply, when relevant, to the mechanical biological treatment of waste. 3.4.1. Emissions to air BAT 39. In order to reduce emissions to air, BAT is to use both of the techniques given below. 4. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE PHYSICO-CHEMICAL TREATMENT OF WASTE Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in Section 4 apply to the physico-chemical treatment of waste, and in addition to the general BAT conclusions in Section 1. 4.1. BAT conclusions for the physico-chemical treatment of solid and/or pasty waste 4.1.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 40. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to monitor the waste input as part of the waste pre-acceptance and acceptance procedures (see BAT 2). Description Monitoring the waste input, e.g. in terms of: 4.1.2. Emissions to air BAT 41. In order to reduce emissions of dust, organic compounds and NH 3 to air, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 6.8 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled emissions of dust to air from the physico-chemical treatment of solid and/or pasty waste The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 4.2. BAT conclusions for the re-refining of waste oil 4.2.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 42. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to monitor the waste input as part of the waste pre-acceptance and acceptance procedures (see BAT 2). Description Monitoring of the waste input in terms of content of chlorinated compounds (e.g. chlorinated solvents or PCBs). BAT 43. In order to reduce the quantity of waste sent for disposal, BAT is to use one or both of the techniques given below. 4.2.2. Emissions to air BAT 44. In order to reduce emissions of organic compounds to air, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The BAT-AEL set in Section 4.5 applies. The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 4.3. BAT conclusions for the physico-chemical treatment of waste with calorific value 4.3.1. Emissions to air BAT 45. In order to reduce emissions of organic compounds to air, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The BAT-AEL set in Section 4.5 applies. The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 4.4. BAT conclusions for the regeneration of spent solvents 4.4.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 46. In order to improve the overall environmental performance of the regeneration of spent solvents, BAT is to use one or both of the techniques given below. 4.4.2. Emissions to air BAT 47. In order to reduce emissions of organic compounds to air, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use a combination of the techniques given below. The BAT-AEL set in Section 4.5 applies. The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 4.5. BAT-AEL for emissions of organic compounds to air from the re-refining of waste oil, the physico-chemical treatment of waste with calorific value and the regeneration of spent solvents Table 6.9 BAT-associated emission level (BAT-AEL) for channelled emissions of TVOC to air from the re-refining of waste oil, the physico-chemical treatment of waste with calorific value and the regeneration of spent solvents 4.6. BAT conclusions for the thermal treatment of spent activated carbon, waste catalysts and excavated contaminated soil 4.6.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 48. In order to improve the overall environmental performance of the thermal treatment of spent activated carbon, waste catalysts and excavated contaminated soil, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. 4.6.2. Emissions to air BAT 49. In order to reduce emissions of HCl, HF, dust and organic compounds to air, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 4.7. BAT conclusions for the water washing of excavated contaminated soil 4.7.1. Emissions to air BAT 50. In order to reduce emissions of dust and organic compounds to air from the storage, handling, and washing steps, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 4.8. BAT conclusions for the decontamination of equipment containing PCBs 4.8.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 51. In order to improve the overall environmental performance and to reduce channelled emissions of PCBs and organic compounds to air, BAT is to use all of the techniques given below. The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 5. BAT CONCLUSIONS FOR THE TREATMENT OF WATER-BASED LIQUID WASTE Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions presented in Section 5 apply to the treatment of water-based liquid waste, and in addition to the general BAT conclusions in Section 1. 5.1. Overall environmental performance BAT 52. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to monitor the waste input as part of the waste pre-acceptance and acceptance procedures (see BAT 2). Description Monitoring the waste input, e.g. in terms of: 5.2. Emissions to air BAT 53. In order to reduce emissions of HCl, NH 3 and organic compounds to air, BAT is to apply BAT 14d and to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 6.10 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions of HCl and TVOC to air from the treatment of water-based liquid waste The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 6. DESCRIPTION OF TECHNIQUES 6.1. Channelled emissions to air 6.2. Diffuse emissions of organic compounds to air 6.3. Emissions to water 6.4. Sorting techniques 6.5. Management techniques ( 1 ) Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment ( OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40 ). ( 2 ) Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste ( OJ L 182, 16.7.1999, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from medium combustion plants ( OJ L 313, 28.11.2015, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ( 5 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 199/2006 of 3 February 2006 amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001 setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs as regards dioxins and dioxin-like PCBs ( OJ L 32, 4.2.2006, p. 34 ). ( 6 ) Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 September 2000 on end-of life vehicles ( OJ L 269, 21.10.2000, p. 34 ). ( 7 ) Regulation (EC) No 850/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on persistent organic pollutants and amending Directive 79/117/EEC ( OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 7 ). ( 8 ) Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) ( OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38 ). ( 9 ) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations, a 30-minute measurement is inappropriate, a more suitable measurement period may be employed (e.g. for the odour concentration). For PCDD/F or dioxin-like PCBs, one sampling period of 6 to 8 hours is used. ( 10 ) Sorting techniques are described in Section 6.4 ( 11 ) Monitoring frequencies may be reduced if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 12 ) In the case of batch discharge less frequent than the minimum monitoring frequency, monitoring is carried out once per batch. ( 13 ) The monitoring only applies when the substance concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water inventory mentioned in BAT 3. ( 14 ) In the case of an indirect discharge to a receiving water body, the monitoring frequency may be reduced if the downstream waste water treatment plant abates the pollutants concerned. ( 15 ) Either TOC or COD is monitored. TOC is the preferred option, because its monitoring does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 16 ) The monitoring applies only in the case of a direct discharge to a receiving water body. ( 17 ) Monitoring frequencies may be reduced if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. ( 18 ) The monitoring only applies when the substance concerned is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory mentioned in BAT 3. ( 19 ) Instead of EN 1948-1, sampling may also be carried out according to CEN/TS 1948-5. ( 20 ) The odour concentration may be monitored instead. ( 21 ) The monitoring of NH 3 and H 2 S can be used as an alternative to the monitoring of the odour concentration. ( 22 ) The monitoring only applies when solvent is used for cleaning the contaminated equipment. ( 23 ) The descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 6.3. ( 24 ) The averaging periods are defined in the General considerations. ( 25 ) Either the BAT-AEL for COD or the BAT-AEL for TOC applies. TOC monitoring is the preferred option because it does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. ( 26 ) The upper end of the range may not apply: ( 27 ) The BAT-AEL may not apply to plants treating drilling muds/cuttings. ( 28 ) The BAT-AEL may not apply when the temperature of the waste water is low (e.g. below 12 °C). ( 29 ) The BAT-AEL may not apply in the case of high chloride concentrations (e.g. above 10 g/l in the waste input). ( 30 ) The BAT-AEL only applies when biological treatment of waste water is used. ( 31 ) The BAT-AELs only apply when the substance concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water inventory mentioned in BAT 3. ( 32 ) The upper end of the range is 0,3 mg/l for mechanical treatment in shredders of metal waste. ( 33 ) The upper end of the range is 2 mg/l for mechanical treatment in shredders of metal waste. ( 34 ) The averaging periods are defined in the General considerations. ( 35 ) The BAT-AELs may not apply if the downstream waste water treatment plant abates the pollutants concerned, provided this does not lead to a higher level of pollution in the environment. ( 36 ) The BAT-AELs only apply when the substance concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water inventory mentioned in BAT 3. ( 37 ) The upper end of the range is 0,3 mg/l for mechanical treatment in shredders of metal waste. ( 38 ) The upper end of the range is 2 mg/l for mechanical treatment in shredders of metal waste. ( 39 ) When a fabric filter is not applicable, the upper end of the range is 10 mg/Nm 3 . ( 40 ) The BAT-AEL only applies when organic compounds are identified as relevant in the waste gas stream, based on the inventory mentioned in BAT 3. ( 41 ) Either the BAT-AEL for NH 3 or the BAT-AEL for the odour concentration applies. ( 42 ) This BAT-AEL does not apply to the treatment of waste mainly composed of manure. ( 43 ) The lower end of the range can be achieved by using thermal oxidation. ( 44 ) The BAT-AEL does not apply when the emission load is below 2 kg/h at the emission point provided that no CMR substances are identified as relevant in the waste gas stream, based on the inventory mentioned in BAT 3. ( 45 ) Thermal oxidation is carried out with a minimum temperature of 1 100 °C and a two-second residence time for the regeneration of activated carbon used in industrial applications where refractory halogenated or other thermally resistant substances are likely to be present. In the case of activated carbon used for potable water- and food-grade applications, an afterburner with a minimum heating temperature of 850 °C and a two-second residence time is sufficient (see Section 6.1). ( 46 ) These BAT-AELs only apply when the substance concerned is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream, based on the inventory mentioned in BAT 3. ( 47 ) The upper end of the range is 45 mg/Nm 3 when the emission load is below 0,5 kg/h at the emission point.