COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2025/839 of 5 May 2025 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Oxivir Excel BPF’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0032483-0000 is hereby granted to Diversey Europe Operations B.V. for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘Oxivir Excel BPF’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 26 May 2025 until 30 April 2035. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 5 May 2025. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 , ELI: . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 29 February 2024 on the Union authorisation of ‘Oxivir Excel BPF’ (ECHA/BPC/417/2024), . SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS FOR A BIOCIDAL PRODUCT FAMILY Oxivir Excel BPF Product type(s) PT02: Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals PT04: Food and feed area Authorisation number EU-0032483-0000 R4BP asset number EU-0032483-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL - META SPC(S) 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1.1 – Cleaning and disinfection by mopping for healthcare areas. 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilution: bactericidal, yeasticidal and virucidal 4,5% product. For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product to reach the dilution of 4,5%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Add the concentrated product to the water to avoid splashes of concentrated product. Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Clean and disinfect the floor with the wet mop. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with (semi-)automatic dilution system with 2 settings: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product (4,5%). Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Clean and disinfect the floor with the wet mop. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 1.2– Cleaning and disinfection with a cloth or sponge for healthcare areas. 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilutions: Bactericidal, yeasticidal & virucidal 4,5% For packs with manual dilution system To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of product to reach the dilution of 4,5%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid on the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with (semi-)automatic dilution system Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product (4,5%). Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid on the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 1.3 – Cleaning and disinfection of small objects by soaking or dipping for healthcare areas. 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilutions: bactericidal, yeasticidal & virucidal 4,5% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters with water. Add the correct amount of product to reach the dilution of 4,5%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Add the product to the water to avoid splashes of concentrated product. Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with (semi-)automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product (4,5%). Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. The solutions for soaking or dipping can be used only once. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.4. Use description Table 4. Use # 1.4 – Cleaning and disinfection by foaming for healthcare areas. 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilutions: bactericidal, yeasticidal & virucidal 4,5% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a foaming spray bottle three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of concentrated product. to reach the dilution of 4,5%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Apply the diluted product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surface disinfection. For packs with (semi-)automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a foaming spray bottle with the diluted product. Apply the diluted product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surface disinfection. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.5. Use description Table 5. Use # 1.5 –Cleaning and disinfection using moist wipes (incl. healthcare areas) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions Prepare 1,5 litres dilution by adding 75 ml Oxivir Excel to 1,425 litres water. Apply 1,5 litres diluted product to the Dry Wipes bucket. Distribute the liquid evenly. Close the bucket. Open the lid. Take a single wipe. Close the lid after taking a wipe. Only use wet wipes. Wipe the surface and make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.6. Use description Table 6. Use # 1.6 – Cleaning and disinfection of food contact surfaces using a mop 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilution: bactericidal, yeasticidal & virucidal 3,75% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product to reach the dilution of 3,75%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Add the concentrated product to the water to avoid splashes of the concentrated product. Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Clean and disinfect the floor with the wet mop. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with (semi-) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product (3,75%). Soak the mop in the solution. Distribute the liquid. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.7. Use description Table 7. Use # 1.7 – Cleaning and disinfection of food contact surfaces using a cloth or sponge. 4.7.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilution: bactericidal, yeasticidal & virucidal 3,75% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product to reach the dilution of 3,75%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Add the concentrated product to the water to avoid splashes of concentrated product. Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with (semi-) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product (3,75%). Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.7.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.7.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.7.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.7.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.8. Use description Table 8. Use #1.8 – Cleaning and disinfection of food contact small objects by soaking or dipping. 4.8.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilution: bactericidal, yeasticidal & virucidal 3,75% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product. to reach the dilution of 3,75%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with(semi-) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with diluted product (3,75%). Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. The solutions for soaking or dipping can be used only once. 4.8.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.8.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.8.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.8.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.9. Use description Table 9. Use # 1.9 – Cleaning and disinfection of food contact surfaces by foaming. 4.9.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilution: 3,75% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a foaming spray bottle three quarters withfull of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product. to reach a dilution of 3,75%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Apply the diluted product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surface disinfection. For packs with full (semi-) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a foaming spray bottle with the diluted product (3,75%). Apply the diluted product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surface disinfection. 4.9.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.9.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.9.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.9.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.10. Use description Table 10. Use # 1.10 –Cleaning and disinfection of food contact surfaces with moist wipes 4.10.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilution 5% Prepare 1,5 litres dilution by adding 75 ml of the concentrated product to 1,425 litres of water. To prevent foaming , fill a container three quarters full of water. Apply 1,5 litres of the diluted product to the Dry Wipes bucket. Distribute the liquid evenly. Close the bucket. Open the lid, take a single wipe, close the lid after taking a wipe. Only use wet wipes. Wipe the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.10.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.10.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.10.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.10.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.11. Use description Table 11. Use # 1.11 – Cleaning and disinfection of hard surfaces by mopping in non-health care areas. 4.11.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilutions: Bactericidal – 1,5% product Yeasticidal – 3,75% product Virucidal – 2% product For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product to reach the appropriate dilution of the product. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Add the concentrated product to the water to avoid splashes of the concentrated product. Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Clean and disinfect the floor with the wet mop. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with (semi-) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product. Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Clean and disinfect the floor with the wet mop. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.11.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.11.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.11.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.11.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.12. Use description Table 12. Use # 1.12 – Cleaning and disinfection of hard surfaces with a cloth or sponge in non-health care areas. 4.12.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilutions: bactericidal 1,5%; yeasticidal 3,75%; virucidal 2% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product to reach the appropriate dilution of the product. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with(semi-) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product. Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.12.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.12.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.12.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.12.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.13. Use description Table 13. Use # 1.13 – Cleaning and disinfection of small objects by soaking or dipping in non-health care areas 4.13.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilution: Bactericidal – 1,5% product. Yeasticidal – 3,75% product. Virucidal – 2% product For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product to reach the appropriate dilution of the product. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. For packs with (semi-) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container with the diluted product. Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. The solutions for soaking or dipping can be used only once. 4.13.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.13.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.13.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.13.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.14. Use description Table 14. Use # 1.14 – Cleaning and disinfection of surfaces by foaming in non-health care areas. 4.14.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilutions: bactericidal 1.5%; yeasticidal 3.75%; virucidal 2% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a foaming spray bottle three quarters full of water. Add the correct amount of the concentrated product to reach the appropriate dilution of the product. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. Apply the diluted product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surfaces disinfection. For packs with (semi) automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a foaming spray bottle with the diluted product. Apply the diluted product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surfaces disinfection. 4.14.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.14.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.14.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.14.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.15. Use description Table 15. Use # 1.15 – Disinfection of pre-cleaned hard surfaces. 4.15.1. Use-specific instructions Product dilutions: Bactericidal, yeasticidal & virucidal 2,5% For packs with manual dilution system: To prevent foaming, fill a container three quaters full of water. Add the correct amount of concentrated product to reach the dilution of 2,5%. Carefully fill up with the rest of the water. For packs with (semi-)automatic dilution system: Select the right setting on the dosing equipment. Fill a container eith the diluted product (2,5%). Application using a soaked mop: Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Apply onto floor. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Application using a soaked cloth/sponge: Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid on the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Dipping: Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. The solutions for soaking or dipping can be used only once. Foam spraying: Fill a spray bottle with foam head. Apply the diluted product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Only for small surfaces disinfection. Wipe dry or let air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection 4.15.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.15.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.15.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 4.15.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 1 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use For professional use: Keep away from food, drink and animal feeding stuffs. Wash hands after handling. Keep only in original container. Do not mix with other products. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures The following personal protective equipment (PPE) is stipulated without prejudice to the application by employers of Council Directive 98/24/EC and other Union legislation in the area of health and safety at work. The use of eye protection (consistent with the European Standard EN 166)16 321 or equivalent during handling of the concentrated product is mandatory. Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (classified under the European Standard EN ISO 374) or equivalent during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). Wear chemical-resistant clothing (consistent with the European Standard EN 14605) or equivalent and wear suitable protective footwear (consistent with the European Standards EN 13832) or equivalent when handling concentrated products. See section 6 for the full titles of the EN standards. Keep pets away from treated surfaces until dried. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid: IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. Information to Healthcare personnel/doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid Environmental precautions: Do not allow to enter drainage system, surface or groundwater. Do not allow to enter the ground/soil. Dilute with plenty of water. Inform responsible authorities in case undiluted product reaches drainage system, surface or ground water or the ground/soil. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Dispose of contents/container to a hazardous waste disposal service in accordance with the statutory regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 2 year shelf life. Store in the dark. Do not store at temperatures above 30°C. 6. OTHER INFORMATION The products of this meta-SPC may also be intended for the disinfecting of Medical Device surfaces in medical and clinical areas. In such a case, their placing on the market or putting into service must comply with Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC ( OJ L 117, 05/05/2017, p. 1 ) and they are medical devices classified as class IIa. Those uses are out of the scope of this biocidal registration.product family authorisation and are not covered by it. With respect to the “Category(ies) of users” note: “Professionals (including industrial users) means trained professionals if this is required by national legislation. The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 “Risk mitigation measures” are: EN 13832 - Footwear protecting against chemicals EN ISO 374 - Protective gloves against dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms EN ISO 16321 - Eye and face protection for occupational use EN 14605 - Protective clothing against liquid chemicals - Performance requirements for clothing with liquid-tight (Type 3) or spray-tight (Type 4) connections, including items providing protection to parts of the body only (Types PB [3] and PB [4]). Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) ( OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, p. 11 ). 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 2.1 – Cleaning and disinfection by mopping (incl. healthcare areas). 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Fill a container with the product. Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus of the product. Mop the floor with the wet mop. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 2.2 – Cleaning and disinfection with a cloth or sponge (incl. healthcare areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Soak the cloth or sponge in the product by dipping. Distribute the liquid on the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 2.3 – Cleaning and disinfection of small objects by soaking or dipping (incl. healthcare areas) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. The solutions for soaking or dipping can be used only once. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.4. Use description Table 4. Use # 2.4 – Cleaning and disinfection by foaming (incl. healthcare areas) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions Apply the product on the surface. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surface disinfection. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.5. Use description Table 5. Use # 2.5 – Cleaning and disinfection using moist wipes (incl. healthcare areas). 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions Apply 1,5 litres product to the Dry Wipes bucket. Distribute the liquid evenly. Close the bucket. Open the lid. Take a single wipe. Close the lid after taking a wipe. Only use wet wipes. Wipe the surface and make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.6. Use description Table 6. Use # 2.6 – Cleaning and disinfection by mopping (incl. food contact surfaces) 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions Fill a container with the product. Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Mop the floor with the wet mop. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes and let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.7. Use description Table 7. Use # 2.7 – Cleaning and disinfection with a cloth or sponge (incl. food contact surfaces) 4.7.1. Use-specific instructions Soak the cloth or sponge in the product by dipping. Distribute the liquid on the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.7.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.7.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.7.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.7.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.8. Use description Table 8. Use # 2.8 – Cleaning and disinfection by soaking or dipping of small objects (incl. food contact surfaces) 4.8.1. Use-specific instructions Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. The solutions for soaking or dipping can be used only once. 4.8.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.8.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.8.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.8.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.9. Use description Table 9. Use # 2.9 – Cleaning and disinfection by foaming (incl. food contact surfaces) 4.9.1. Use-specific instructions Apply the product on the surface. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Wipe dry or let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. Only for small surface disinfection. 4.9.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.9.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.9.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.9.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.10. Use description Table 10. Use # 2.10 – Cleaning and disinfection with moist wipes (incl. food contact surfaces) 4.10.1. Use-specific instructions Apply 1,5 litres product to the Dry Wipes bucket. Distribute the liquid evenly. Close the bucket. Open the lid, take a single wipe, close the lid after taking a wipe. Only use wet wipes. Wipe the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.10.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.10.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.10.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.10.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.11. Use description Table 11. Use # 2.11 – Disinfection of pre-cleaned hard surfaces 4.11.1. Use-specific instructions Contact time: 5 minutes Mopping: Dip the mop into the container. Squeeze the surplus solution. Apply onto floor. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for the required contact time. Cloth/sponge application: Soak the cloth or sponge in the solution. Distribute the liquid on the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for the required contact time. Dipping: Cover dipping bath with a lid after placing the objects in the disinfection solution. Ensure that items to be disinfected are fully submerged in the solution for 5 minutes. The solutions for soaking or dipping can be used only once. Foam spraying: Apply the product. Optionally wipe to spread the solution. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for the required contact time. Only for small surfaces disinfection. Wipe dry or let air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.11.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.11.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.11.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 4.11.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 2 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use For professional use: Keep away from food, drink and animal feeding stuffs. Wash hands after handling. Keep only in original container. Do not mix with other products. See use-specific instructions for use. For non-professional use: Comply with the instructions for use. Keep away from food, drink and animal feeding stuffs. Wash hands after handling. Keep only in original container. Do not mix with other products. See use-specific instructions for use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Keep pets away from treated surfaces until dried. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: If symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor.. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Dispose of contents/container to a hazardous waste disposal service in accordance with the statutory regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 2 years shelf life. Store in the dark. Do not store at temperatures above 50°C. Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets. 6. OTHER INFORMATION The products of this meta-SPC may also be intended for the disinfection of medical devices’ surfaces in medical and clinical areas. In such a case, their placing on the market or putting into service must comply with Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC ( OJ L 117, 05/05/2017, p. 1 ) and they are medical devices classified as class IIa. Those uses are out of the scope of this biocidal product family authorisation and are not covered by it. With respect to the “Category(ies) of users” note: “Professionals (including industrial users) means trained professionals if this is required by national legislation. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 3.1 – Cleaning and disinfection using moist wipes on hard surfaces incl. healthcare areas 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions Open the lid. Take a single wipe. Close the lid after taking a wipe. Only use wet wipes. Wipe the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 3.2 – Cleaning and disinfection using moist wipes on hard surfaces incl. food contact surfaces 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions Open the lid. Take a single wipe. Close the lid after taking a wipe. Only use wet wipes. Wipe the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for 5 minutes. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 3.3 – Wipe for disinfecting pre-cleaned hard surfaces 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions Contact time: 5 minutes Open the lid. Take a single wipe. Close the lid after taking a wipe. Only use wet wipes. Wipe the surface. Make sure to wet the surface completely. Allow to act for the required contact time. Let it air dry. No rinsing needed after disinfection. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of Meta-SPC 3 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use For professional use: Keep away from food, drink and animal feeding stuffs. Wash hands after handling. Keep only in original container. Do not mix with other products. See use-specific instructions for use. For non-professional use: Comply with the instructions for use. Wash hands after handling. Keep only in original container. Do not mix with other products. See use-specific instructions for use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Keep pets away from treated surfaces until dried. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: If symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Dispose of contents/container to a hazardous waste disposal service in accordance with the statutory regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 2 years shelf life. Store in the dark. Do not store at temperatures above 50 ° C. Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets. 6. OTHER INFORMATION The products of this meta-SPC may also be intended for the disinfection of medical devices’ surfaces in medical and clinical areas. In such a case, their placing on the market or putting into service must comply with Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC ( OJ L 117, 05/05/2017, p. 1 ) and they are medical devices classified as class IIa. Those uses are out of the scope of this biocidal product family authorisation and are not covered by it. With respect to the “Category(ies) of users” note: “Professionals (including industrial users) means trained professionals if this is required by national legislation. The following types of wipes are included: Wipe with size 15 x 25 cm; weight is 1,52 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 15,2 x 17,7 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 15,2 x 20,3 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 17,7 x 20,3 cm; weight is 1,50 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 19 x 25,4 cm; weight is 1,49 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 20 x 26,7 cm; weight is 1,49 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 20 x 30 cm; weight is 1,50 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 25 x 25 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 25,4 x 25,4 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 3,75 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 250%) Wipe with size 15 x 25 cm; weight is 1,52 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 15,2 x 17,7 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 15,2 x 20,3 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 17,7 x 20,3 cm; weight is 1,50 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 19 x 25,4 cm; weight is 1,49 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 20 x 26,7 cm; weight is 1,49 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 20 x 30 cm; weight is 1,50 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 25 x 25 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) Wipe with size 25,4 x 25,4 cm; weight is 1,51 gr; 6 ml liquid per wipe (wipe liquid load is 400%) 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)