COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2022/162 of 4 February 2022 laying down rules for the application of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the calculation, verification and reporting on the reduction in the consumption of certain single-use plastic products and the measures taken by Member States to achieve such reduction (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 4(2) and Article 13(4), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Methodology for calculating the reduction in the consumption of single-use plastic products 1. Member States shall calculate the reduction in the consumption of single-use plastic products based on either of the following parameters: 2. Member States shall calculate the reduction in the consumption of single-use plastic products placed on the market in a Member State in a calendar year in accordance with the formulas set out in Annex I. 3. Where there are significant exports or imports or other movements within the Union of single-use plastic products before they are made available to the final consumer or user, Member States may adjust the weight or number of single-use plastic products placed on the market, as referred to in paragraph 1, in order to take account of such movements. Article 2 Reporting of data 1. Member States shall report the data on single-use plastic products placed on the market referred to in Article 13(1), point (a), of Directive (EU) 2019/904, as calculated in accordance with Article 1 of this Decision, in the format laid down in Annex II to this Decision. 2. Member States shall report the information on consumption reduction measures referred to in Article 13(1), point (b), of Directive (EU) 2019/904 in the format laid down in Annex III to this Decision. 3. Member States shall submit the quality check report as regards the data and information referred to in this Article in the format laid down in Annex IV. 4. The Commission shall publish the data reported by the Member States unless, as regards information included in the quality check report, the Member State provides a justified request to withhold the publication of certain data. 5. Member States shall, to the extent possible, use electronic registries to collect and report data to the Commission. Article 3 Entry into force This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . Done at Brussels, 4 February 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 155, 12.6.2019, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision 2005/270/EC of 22 March 2005 establishing the formats relating to the database system pursuant to Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on packaging and packaging waste ( OJ L 86, 5.4.2005, p. 6 ), as amended by Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2019/665 of 17 April 2019 ( OJ L 112, 26.4.2019, p. 26 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ANNEX I Formulas for the calculation of the reduction in the consumption of single-use plastic products For single-use plastic cups for beverages, including their covers and lids, referred to in Part A, point (1), of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/904 (‘cups for beverages’): For single-use plastic food containers referred to in Part A, point (2), of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/904 (‘food containers’): where: CfB means cups for beverages; FC means food containers; ConRed means consumption reduction in a Member State per calendar year; PoMCfB means: PoMFC means t2022 means the reference year which is the calendar year 2022 t means the reference year (the year for which the data is collected and reported). ANNEX II Format for reporting of data on single-use plastic products placed on the market ( 1 ) Provision of data is mandatory if a Member State applies the methodology laid down in Article 1(1), point (a), and may be adjusted in accordance with Article 1(3). Provision of data is voluntary if a Member State applies the methodology laid down in Article 1(1), point (b). ( 2 ) Provision of data is mandatory if a Member State applies the methodology laid down in Article 1(1), point (a), and may be adjusted in accordance with Article 1(3). Provision of data is voluntary if a Member State applies the methodology laid down in Article 1(1), point (b). ( 3 ) Provision of data is mandatory if a Member State applies the methodology laid down in Article 1(1), point (b), and may be adjusted in accordance with Article 1(3). Provision of data is voluntary if a Member State applies the methodology laid down in Article 1(1), point (a). ANNEX III Format for reporting information on consumption reduction measures 1. Measures to achieve reduction in the consumption of single-use plastic cups for beverages, including their covers and lids, referred to in Part A, point (1), of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/904 (SUP CfB) Add rows as appropriate. 2. Measures to achieve reduction in the consumption of single-use plastic food containers referred to in Part A, point (2), of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/904 (SUP FC) Add rows as appropriate. ANNEX IV Format for the quality check report 1. General Information 2. Description of the parties involved in the data collection: 3. Description of methods used. a. Data sources for calculating data on single-use plastic cups for beverages, including their covers and lids, referred to in Part A, point (1), of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/904 placed on the market of a Member State b. Data sources for calculating data on single-use plastic food containers referred to in Part A, point (2), of the Annex to Directive (EU) 2019/904 placed on the market of a Member State c. Where data is reported by weight using the methodology referred to in Article 1(1), point (a), please indicate whether an estimate for the weight of plastic contained in single-use plastic products placed on the market of a Member State and for the total weight of such products has been used, where data collection does not cover the whole market. If yes, please indicate the added weight of plastics in % of the total weight reported d. Where data is reported by the number of products using the methodology referred to in Article 1(1), point (b), please indicate whether an estimate of the number of single-use plastic products placed on the market of a Member State has been used, where data collection does not cover the whole market. If yes, please indicate the added number of products in % of the total number reported 4. Data verification and control system a. Verification of data on single-use plastic products placed on the market of a Member State b. Description of main factors affecting the accuracy of the data on single-use plastic products placed on the market of a Member State c. Explanation of the scope and validity of surveys to collect data on single-use plastic products placed on the market of a Member State d. Differences from the data reported for the previous reporting years Significant methodological changes in the calculation method used for the current reference year in relation to the calculation method used for previous reference years, if any (please include in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break-flag is required for a certain year). e. Where the weight of plastic contained in and the total weight of single-use plastic products placed on the market of a Member State or the number of such products placed on the market of a Member State has increased by more than 10 % compared to the previous reporting year, an explanation of the reasons for that differences Add rows as appropriate. 5. Confidentiality Justification to withhold the publication of specific parts of this quality check report in accordance with Article 2(4) and listing of the parts that are requested to be withheld. 6. Main national websites, reference documents and publications Please provide the name and url of the main websites, reference documents and publications related to this data collection. Add rows as appropriate. ( 1 ) A free rider is a producer or distributor that places single-use plastic products on the market but does not fulfil its EPR responsibilities individually or collectively with other producers. ( 2 ) Movements within the Union and imports / exports of products after they have been sold to end-users. ( 3 ) Placing on the market data must include sale through distance communication. ( 4 ) De-minimis rules applied for reporting on single-use plastic products placed on the market. ( 5 ) A free rider is a producer or distributor that places single-use plastic products on the market but does not fulfil its EPR responsibilities individually or collectively with other producers. ( 6 ) Movements within the Union and imports / exports of products after they have been sold to end-users. ( 7 ) Placing on the market data must include sale through distance communication. ( 8 ) De-minimis rules applied for reporting on single-use plastic products placed on the market. ( 9 ) Describe the estimated coefficients of variation and the methodologies applied for variance estimation. ( 10 ) Describe the type and size of coverage errors. ( 11 ) Describe the instruments to reduce potential risks and avoid errors. ( 12 ) Describe the instruments and methodologies applied for securing quality and relevance of data collection instruments. ( 13 ) Describe the processing steps between data collection and production of statistics and list processing errors identified and their extent. ( 14 ) Describe the non-response rates for the main variables and the imputation methods (if any). ( 15 ) Describe the type and size of model assumption errors.