COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2019/1004 of 7 June 2019 laying down rules for the calculation, verification and reporting of data on waste in accordance with Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Commission Implementing Decision C(2012) 2384 (notified under document C(2019) 4114) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 11a(9) and 37(7) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 2 Calculating municipal waste that is prepared for re-use pursuant to Article 11a(1) of Directive 2008/98/EC The amount of municipal waste prepared for reuse shall only include the products or the components of products that, following checking, cleaning or repairing operations, can be re-used without further sorting or pre-processing. The parts of those products or of those components of products that have been removed during repairing operations may be included in the amount of municipal waste prepared for re-use. Article 3 Calculating recycled municipal waste pursuant to Article 11a(1), Article 11a(2) and Article 11a(5) of Directive 2008/98/EC 1. The amount of recycled municipal waste shall be the amount of municipal waste at the calculation point. The amount of municipal waste entering the recycling operation shall include targeted materials. It may include non-targeted materials only to the extent that their presence is permissible for the specific recycling operation. 2. Calculation points applicable to certain waste materials and certain recycling operations are specified in Annex I. 3. Where municipal waste materials cease to be waste at the calculation points specified in Annex I, the amount of those materials shall be included in the amount of recycled municipal waste. 4. Where the measurement point relates to the output of a facility that sends municipal waste for recycling without further preliminary treatment, or to the input to a facility where municipal waste enters the recycling operation without further preliminary treatment, the amount of sorted municipal waste that is rejected by the recycling facility shall not be included in the amount of recycled municipal waste. 5. Where a facility carries out preliminary treatment prior to the calculation point in that facility, the waste removed during the preliminary treatment shall not be included in the amount of recycled municipal waste reported by that facility. 6. Where municipal waste generated by a given Member State has been mixed with other waste or waste from another country before the measurement point or the calculation point, the proportion of municipal waste originating from a given Member State shall be identified using appropriate methods, such as electronic registries and sampling surveys. Where such waste undergoes further preliminary treatment, the amount of non-targeted materials removed by that treatment shall be deducted taking into account the proportion and, where appropriate, the quality of waste materials coming from municipal waste originating from a given Member State. 7. Where municipal waste materials enter recovery operations whereby those materials are used principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy, the output of such operations that is subject to material recovery, such as the mineral fraction of incineration bottom ash or clinker resulting from co-incineration, shall not be included in the amount of municipal waste recycled with the exception of metals separated and recycled after incineration of municipal waste. Metals incorporated in the mineral output of the co-incineration process of municipal waste shall not be reported as recycled. 8. Where municipal waste materials enter recovery operations whereby those materials are not principally used either as fuel or other means to generate energy, or for material recovery, but result in output that includes recycled materials, fuels or backfilling materials in significant proportions, the amount of recycled waste shall be determined by a mass balance approach which results in taking account only of waste materials that are subject to recycling. Article 4 Calculating recycled municipal bio-waste pursuant to Article 11a(4) of Directive 2008/98/EC 1. The amount of recycled municipal bio-waste entering aerobic or anaerobic treatment shall only include materials that actually undergo aerobic or anaerobic treatment and shall exclude all materials, including biodegradable material, which are mechanically removed during or after the recycling operation. 2. As from 1 January 2027, Member States may count municipal bio-waste as recycled only if it is: 3. Member States shall apply the methodology laid down in Annex II to calculate the amount of municipal bio-waste separated and recycled at source. 4. The amount of municipal bio-waste separated and recycled at source determined pursuant to paragraph 3 shall be included both in the amount of municipal waste recycled and in the total amount of municipal waste generated. Article 5 Calculating recycled metals separated after incineration of municipal waste pursuant to Article 11a(6) of Directive 2008/98/EC 1. The amount of recycled metals separated from incineration bottom ash shall only include metals contained in the metal concentrate that is separated from the raw incineration bottom ash originating from municipal waste, and shall not include other materials contained in the metal concentrate. 2. Member States shall apply the methodology laid down in Annex III to calculate the amount of recycled metals separated from incineration bottom ash originating from municipal waste. Article 6 Data collection 1. Member States shall obtain data directly from establishments or undertakings managing waste, as appropriate. 2. Member States shall consider the use of electronic registries to record data on municipal waste. 3. Where data collection is based on surveys, those surveys shall fulfil the following minimum requirements: Article 7 Reporting of data 1. Member States shall report the data and submit the quality check report concerning the implementation of points (a) and (b) of Article 11(2) of Directive 2008/98/EC in the format laid down in Annex IV. As regards the implementation of point (a) of Article 11(2) of Directive 2008/98/EC, Member States which report the data and submit the quality check report in the format laid down in Annex V shall be deemed to comply with the first subparagraph. 2. Member States shall report the data and submit the quality check report concerning the implementation of points (c) to (e) of Article 11(2) and Article 11(3) of Directive 2008/98/EC in the format laid down in Annex V. 3. Member States shall report the data and submit the quality check report on mineral or synthetic lubrication or industrial oils placed on the market and waste oils separately collected and treated in the format laid down in Annex VI. 4. The Commission shall publish the data reported by Member States unless as regards information included in the quality check reports a Member State provides a justified request to withhold the publication of certain data. Article 8 Repeal Implementing Decision C(2012)2384 is repealed. Article 9 Transitional provisions Member States shall submit data to the Commission concerning the implementation of points (a) and (b) of Article 11(2) of Directive 2008/98/EC for reference year 2016 and, where applicable, for reference year 2017 by 30 September 2019. The data for reference year 2018 and, where applicable, for reference year 2019 shall be submitted within 18 months of the end of each reference year respectively. The data referred to in this Article shall be transmitted to the Commission by means of the interchange standard referred to in Article 5(4) of Decision 2011/753/EU. Article 10 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 7 June 2019. For the Commission Karmenu VELLA Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 . ( 2 ) Commission Decision 2011/753/EU of 18 November 2011 establishing rules and calculation methods for verifying compliance with the targets set in Article 11(2) of Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 310, 25.11.2011, p. 11 ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Decision of 18 April 2012 establishing a questionnaire for Member States reports on the implementation of Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on waste (C(2012) 2384 final). ( 4 ) Directive (EU) 2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste ( OJ L 150, 14.6.2018, p. 109 ). ANNEX I CALCULATION POINTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 3(2) ( 1 ) Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38 ). ( 2 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 493/2012 of 11 June 2012 laying down, pursuant to Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, detailed rules regarding the calculation of recycling efficiencies of the recycling processes of waste batteries and accumulators ( OJ L 151, 12.6.2012, p. 9 ). ANNEX II METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATING MUNICIPAL BIO-WASTE SEPARATED AND RECYCLED AT SOURCE REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(3) ANNEX III METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATING RECYCLED METALS SEPARATED AFTER INCINERATION OF MUNICIPAL WASTE REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 5(2) ANNEX IV DATA ON WASTE FROM HOUSEHOLDS AND SIMILAR WASTE FROM OTHER ORIGINS, AND DATA ON CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 7(1) A. FORMAT FOR THE REPORTING OF DATA ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF POINT (A) OF ARTICLE 11(2) OF DIRECTIVE 2008/98/EC CONCERNING PREPARING FOR RE-USE AND RECYCLING OF WASTE FROM HOUSEHOLDS AND OF SIMILAR WASTE FROM OTHER ORIGINS B. FORMAT FOR THE QUALITY CHECK REPORT ACCOMPANYING THE DATA REFERRED TO IN PART A I. Objective of the report The objective of this report is to gather information on the data compilation methods and coverage of the submitted data. The report should allow a better understanding of the approaches taken by Member States as well as the possibilities and limits of data comparability across countries. II. General information 1. Member State: 2. Organisation submitting the data and the description: 3. Contact person/contact details: 4. Reference year: 5. Delivery date/version: III. Information on waste from households and similar waste from other origins 1. How are the generated amounts of waste established for the compliance with the waste target? 2. Has a sorting analysis of waste from households and similar waste from other origins been carried out? Yes/No 3. Where other methods have been used, please describe: 4. How do the amounts of waste reported in part A relate to waste statistics reported on the basis of Regulation (EC) No 2150/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 4 ) ? 5. Please describe the composition and sources of waste from households and similar waste from other origins as appropriate by ticking the relevant cells in the table. 6. For calculation methods 1 and 2: Please provide in rows (a) to (c) below the respective amounts or shares and the waste codes used for calculating waste generation in line with the following rationale: 7. How are the data on preparing for re-use and on recycling compiled? 8. Have there been problems with applying the rules on the calculation of biodegradable waste? Yes/No If yes, please describe the problem(s): 9. Has waste been If the answer to (a) and/or (b) is yes, how have the preparing for re-use and recycling rates for those shipped or exported amounts been derived, monitored and validated? C. FORMAT FOR REPORTING OF DATA ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF POINT (B) OF ARTICLE 11(2) OF DIRECTIVE 2008/98/EC CONCERNING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE D. FORMAT FOR THE QUALITY CHECK REPORT ACCOMPANYING THE DATA REFERRED TO IN PART C I. Objective of the report The objective of this report is to gather information on the data compilation methods and coverage of the submitted data. The report should allow a better understanding of the approaches taken by Member States as well as the possibilities and limits of data comparability across countries. II. General information 1. Member State: 2. Organisation submitting the data and the description: 3. Contact person/contact details: 4. Reference year: 5. Delivery date/version: III. Information on construction and demolition waste 1. How are the amounts of generated construction and demolition waste determined? How do those amounts relate to data reported on the basis of Regulation (EC) No 2150/2002? 2. How are the data on preparing for re-use, recycling, backfilling and other recovery compiled? Please, include description of the application of the definition of backfilling laid down in Article 3(17a) of Directive 2008/98/EC in the context of reporting on construction and demolition waste and description of the different waste treatment operations reported under the category ‘other recovery’ in the table in part C and their share (%). 3. Are the data based on the input to preliminary treatment facilities? Yes/No If yes, please provide information on the efficiency of preliminary treatment: 4. Are the data based on the input to the final recycling process? Yes/No 5. Please describe the data validation process: 6. Has waste been If yes, how have the reuse and recycling rates and the recovery rates for those shipped or exported amounts been derived and monitored/validated? ( 1 ) Calculation method chosen pursuant to Decision 2011/753/EU: the number of the chosen calculation method (1 to 4) as in the second column of Annex I of that Decision shall be inserted here. ( 2 ) Waste from households or waste from households and similar waste from other origins as required by the chosen calculation method. ( 3 ) Prepared for re-use and recycled waste from households or waste from households and similar waste from other origins as required by the chosen calculation method. ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 2150/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2002 on waste statistics ( OJ L 332, 9.12.2002, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) In the list of waste codes established by Commission Decision 2000/532/EC of 3 May 2000 replacing Decision 94/3/EC establishing a list of wastes pursuant to Article 1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on waste and Council Decision 94/904/EC establishing a list of hazardous waste pursuant to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous waste ( OJ L 226, 6.9.2000, p. 3 ). ( 6 ) Calculation method chosen pursuant to Annex II of Decision 2011/753/EU. ( 7 ) This includes material recovery other than preparing for re-use, recycling and backfilling. ( 8 ) This is the sum of the amounts reported under preparing for re-use, recycling, backfilling and other material recovery. ANNEX V DATA ON MUNICIPAL WASTE REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 7(2) A. FORMAT FOR THE REPORTING OF DATA B. FORMAT FOR THE QUALITY CHECK REPORT ACCOMPANYING THE DATA REFERRED TO IN PART A I. Objectives of the report The objectives of the quality check report are as follows: II. General information 1. Member State: 2. Organisation submitting the data and the description: 3. Contact person/contact details: 4. Reference year: 5. Delivery date/version: 6. Link to data publication by the Member State (if any): III. Information on municipal waste 1. Description of the entities involved in the data collection Add rows as appropriate 2. Shall the data on municipal waste reported in part A be used to demonstrate compliance with the target laid down in point (a) of Article 11(2) of Directive 2008/98/EC? Yes/No 3. Description of methods used 3.1. Municipal waste generation 3.1.1. Methods for determining municipal waste generation (mark with a cross or specify in the last column) 3.1.2. Description of the methodology used to operationalise the definition of municipal waste in the national data collection systems, including the methodology used to collect data on the non-household fraction of municipal waste 3.1.3. Statistical codes, use of waste codes and verification of data on municipal waste generation 3.1.4. Methods used to estimate the composition of mixed municipal waste generated per material 3.1.5. Estimated share of waste generated by households in municipal waste (in %) and description how that estimate was calculated 3.1.6. Approaches to exclude waste that is not similar in nature and composition to household waste, in particular as regards: 3.1.7. Explanation of estimates used to cover gaps in data on generated municipal waste as regards the amounts of waste generated by households (for instance, due to incomplete coverage of households by the collection systems) and of similar waste (for instance, due to incomplete coverage of similar waste by data on waste collection) 3.1.8. Differences from data reported in previous years Explanation of any significant methodological changes in the municipal waste data collection approach applied for the current reference year in relation to the approach applied for previous reference years (in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break in the series has to be flagged for a certain year). Explanation detailing the causes of the tonnage difference for any component of municipal waste which shows more than 10 % variation from the data submitted for the previous reference year. Add rows as appropriate 3.2. Municipal waste management 3.2.1. Classification of treatment operations Information on the classification used for treatment operations (if a standard classification is used such as the disposal operation or recovery operation codes established in Annexes I and II of Directive 2008/98/EC, refer to its name or specify and describe all the relevant categories used). 3.2.2. Description of methods for determining the amount of municipal waste treated (mark with a cross) Additional information about the methodology, including the combination of methods used. 3.2.3. Preparing for re-use Description of how the amounts recorded under preparing for reuse have been calculated. 3.2.4. Description of applied measurement points for recycling, for instance at the calculation point, at the output of a sorting operation with subtraction of non-target materials as appropriate, and of end-of-waste criteria, etc., including variation at regional and local level and for household and similar waste where relevant Detailed description of the methodology used to calculate the amount of non-target materials removed between the measurement points and the calculation points, where applicable. 3.2.5. Description of the methodology used to determine per material the amount of recycled materials contained in waste items composed of multiple materials 3.2.6. Use of Average Loss Rates (ALRs) Description of the sorted waste to which ALRs are applied, types of sorting plants to which different ALRs apply, the methodological approach to calculating ALRs at such point(s), including the statistical accuracy of any surveys used, or the nature of any technical specifications. Add rows as appropriate 3.2.7. Attribution of waste to municipal sources and non-municipal sources at the measurement point Description of the methodology used to exclude non-municipal wastes (aggregated data across facilities of a similar type is acceptable). Add rows as appropriate 3.2.8. Attribution of waste to different Member States at the measurement point Description of the methodology used to exclude waste originating from other Member States or third countries (aggregated data across facilities of a similar type is acceptable). Add rows as appropriate 3.2.9. Recycling of municipal bio-waste that is not separately collected or separated and recycled at source (relevant until 2026) Information about measures to ensure that the conditions specified in the first subparagraph of Article 11a(4) of Directive 2008/98/EC regarding the recycling of municipal bio-waste that is not separately collected or separated and recycled at source are met. 3.2.10. Municipal bio-waste separated and recycled at source General description of the methodology applied, including the use of direct and indirect measurement and the application of a simplified methodology to measure municipal bio-waste separated and recycled at source. Description of the methods used to obtain the number of active recycling units or the number of persons involved in recycling of municipal bio-waste separated at source through registries or surveys and to ensure that the number of active recycling units includes only those recycling units that are actively used by waste producers. Description of the methods to establish the amounts of municipal bio-waste separated and recycled at source as required by the formulas in Annex II. Detailed description of surveys, including their periodicity, subsamples, confidence levels and confidence intervals. Description of measures to ensure that the reported amounts of municipal bio-waste that is separated and recycled at source are not overestimated (including the application of a coefficient related to moisture loss). Description of measures to ensure that the treatment of municipal bio-waste that is separated and recycled at source is properly carried out and that the recycled output is used and results in benefits to agriculture or ecological improvement. 3.2.11. Calculation of recycled metals separated after incineration of municipal waste Detailed description of the method to collect data in order to calculate the amount of metals separated from incineration bottom ash. Description of the approach taken to measure the total amount of metal concentrate extracted from the incinerator bottom ash. Description of the method to estimate the average level of metallic content in the total amount of metal concentrate, including the reliability of any surveys undertaken. Description of the method to estimate the proportion of municipal waste entering incineration plants, including the reliability of any surveys undertaken. 3.2.12. Other recovery of waste Description of the different waste treatment operations reported under the category ‘other recovery’ in the table in part A and their share (%). 3.2.13. Information on the relevance of temporary storage of waste to amounts of treated waste in a given year and any estimates of waste recycled in the current reference year following temporary storage in a previous reference year(s), and waste going to temporary storage in the current reference year 3.2.14. Differences from the data reported for the previous reference years Significant methodological changes in the calculation method used for the current reference year in relation to the calculation method used for previous reference years, if any (in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break in the series has to be flagged for a certain year). Explanation detailing the causes of the tonnage difference (which waste streams, sectors or estimates have caused the difference, and what the underlying cause is) for any component of municipal waste recycled which shows greater than a 10 % variation from the data submitted for the previous reference year. Add rows as appropriate 3.2.15. Verification of data on recycling of municipal waste 4. Accuracy of the data 4.1.1. Description of main issues affecting the accuracy of data on the generation and treatment of municipal waste, including errors related to sampling, coverage, measurement, processing and non-response 4.1.2. Explanation of the scope and validity of surveys to collect data on the generation and treatment of municipal waste 4.1.3. Statistical surveys used regarding municipal waste generation and treatment Add rows as appropriate IV. Confidentiality Justification to withhold the publication of specific parts of this quality check report where that is requested. V. Main national websites, reference documents and publications C. FORMAT FOR THE REPORT ON THE MEASURES TAKEN PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 11A(3) AND ARTICLE 11A(8) OF DIRECTIVE 2008/98/EC 1. Detailed description of the system for quality control and traceability of municipal waste referred to in Article 11a(3) and Article 11a(8) of Directive 2008/98/EC 2. Quality control and traceability of municipal waste treated outside the Member State 3. Detailed description of measures to ensure that the exporter can prove that the shipment of waste complies with the requirements of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 8 ) and that the treatment of waste outside the Union took place under conditions that are broadly equivalent to the requirements laid down in relevant Union environmental law. ( 1 ) The amount of generated waste per material may be based on data on separately collected waste and on estimates derived from regularly updated waste composition surveys of municipal waste. Where no such surveys are available, the category of mixed waste may be used. ( 2 ) This includes incineration with energy recovery and the reprocessing of waste to be used as fuels or other means to generate energy. The weight of waste subject to energy recovery per material may be based on estimates derived from regularly updated waste composition surveys of municipal waste. Where no such surveys are available, the category of mixed waste may be used. ( 3 ) This excludes preparing for reuse, recycling and energy recovery, and includes backfilling. ( 4 ) Metals separated after incineration of municipal waste shall be reported separately and shall not be included in the row for metals and in the total amount of waste entering energy recovery operations. ( 5 ) Bio-waste separated and recycled at source shall be reported separately and shall not be included in the row for bio-waste. ( 6 ) This includes large dimension waste items which require specific collection and treatment such as furniture and mattresses. ( 7 ) Waste codes established by Decision 2000/532/EC. ( 8 ) Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste ( OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 ). ANNEX VI DATA ON MINERAL AND SYNTHETIC LUBRICATION AND INDUSTRIAL OILS AND WASTE OILS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 7(3) A. FORMAT FOR THE REPORTING OF DATA Table 1 Reporting on data on the placing on the market of mineral and synthetic lubrication and industrial oils and on the treatment of waste oils Table 2 Reporting on data on the treatment of waste oils Table 3 Reporting on data on the placing on the market of mineral and synthetic lubrication and industrial oils and treatment of waste oils other than those listed in Table 1 Table 4 Reference values for the calculation of generated waste oil B. FORMAT FOR THE QUALITY CHECK REPORT ACCOMPANYING THE DATA REFERRED TO IN PART A I. General information 1. Member State: 2. Organisation submitting the data and the description: 3. Contact person/contact details: 4. Reference year: 5. Delivery date/version: 6. Link to data publication by the Member State (if any): II. Information on oils placed on the market and waste oils 1. Data collection methods (the relevant column should be marked with a cross, the last column should be filled-in) Add rows for the treatment of specific types of waste oil as appropriate 2. Description of the methodology used to determine the amount of waste oil generated 3. Description of the method used to determine the dry oil content of the waste oil (e.g. chemical analysis of the water content, expert knowledge, etc.) 4. Description of the outputs of treated waste oils reported under the category ‘other recycling’ and an indication of their amounts 5. Description of the method used to determine the amount of base oils used as fuel 6. Data on waste oil treatment outside the Member State 7. Detailed description of the specific measures for quality control and traceability of waste oils, in particular, as regards monitoring and validation of data 8. Description of the data sources for treatment of waste oils in another Member State or outside the Union (e.g. Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 or primary data from the treatment operator) and the quality of the data 9. Description of any difficulties in collecting data from treatment operators located in another Member State or outside the Union 10. Description of measures to ensure that the exporter of waste oils outside the Union can prove that the shipment of waste complies with the requirements of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 and that the treatment of waste outside the Union took place in conditions that are broadly equivalent to the requirements of the relevant Union environmental law 11. Accuracy of the data 11.1. Description of main issues affecting the quality and accuracy of data on the generation, collection and treatment of waste oils, including errors related to sampling, coverage, measurement, processing and non-response 11.2. Completeness of the data collection on mineral and synthetic lubrication and industrial oils and waste oils Detailed information on how the sources of data cover all the amounts of mineral and synthetic lubrication and industrial oils placed on the market and waste oils collected and treated, and on any amounts added by using estimates, including how the estimates are determined and what share of the total amount of the respective data set they account for. 11.3. Differences from previous reference year's data Significant methodological changes in the calculation method for the current reference year in relation to the calculation method applied for previous year(s). Explanation detailing the causes of the tonnage difference (which waste oils, sectors or estimates have caused the difference, and what the underlying cause is) for any category of waste oils treated which shows a greater than 10 % variation from the data submitted for the previous reference year. Add rows as appropriate III. Confidentiality Justification to withhold the publication of specific parts of this report where that is requested. IV. Main national websites, reference documents and publications This includes reports addressing aspects of the data quality, coverage or other aspects of enforcement such as reports on best practice on waste oil collection and treatment, and reports on import, export or losses of oil. ( 1 ) Including engine oils and gear oils (automotive, aviation, marine, industrial and other sectors); excluding greases and bilge oils. ( 2 ) Including machine oils, hydraulic oils, oils for turbines, transformer oils, heat transmission oils, compressor oils, base oils; excluding greases and oils used for emulsions. ( 3 ) Including metal working oils; in case national reporting does not distinguish industrial oils used in emulsions or otherwise, aggregated data on industrial oils may be provided and shall be specified in row ‘industrial oils’. ( 4 ) Only waste oils under code 190207* of Decision 2000/532/EC. ( 5 ) Oils placed on the market in a Member State taking into account export losses (e.g. export of passenger cars) and import gains (e.g. imports of passenger cars). ( 6 ) Amount of waste oils taking into account handling losses and losses during use. Amounts of waste oil generated may be calculated based on national statistics or by using the reference values listed in Table 4. ( 7 ) Waste oils separately collected. In case collected waste oils are quantified by volume, the corresponding mass is determined by applying a conversion factor of 0,9 tonnes/m 3 . ( 8 ) Waste oil exported to another country (considering the waste categories set out in Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006). ( 9 ) Waste oil generated in another country and imported from that country (considering the waste categories set out in Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006). ( 11 ) Recycling other than regeneration, e.g. as flux oil. ( 12 ) Including use of recovered oils as fuel, in accordance with the definition of recovery in Article 3(15) of Directive 2008/98/EC. ( 13 ) Disposal operation D10 Incineration on land as laid down in Annex I of Directive 2008/98/EC. ( 14 ) Waste oil excluding water content. The dry oil content is determined by measuring the water content. For waste oils other than emulsions, the dry content may alternatively be determined on the basis of a water content of 8 %. For dry oil in emulsions of industrial oils the dry content may alternatively be determined on the basis of a water content of 90 %. ( 10 ) Amount of regenerated oils. The sum of the entries in Column 2 of table 2 divided by the sum of the entries in column 6 of Table 1 corresponds to the conversion efficiency of oil regeneration. ( 11 ) Base oil group I contains less than 90 % saturates and/or more than 0,03 % sulphur and has a viscosity index greater than or equal to 80 and less than 120. ( 12 ) In case national reporting does not distinguish groups I-IV, aggregated data on regenerated base oils may be provided and shall be specified in row ‘Other’. ( 13 ) Base oil group II contains more than or equal to 90 % saturates and less than or equal to 0,03 % sulphur and has a viscosity index greater than or equal to 80 and less than 120. ( 14 ) Base oil group III contains more than or equal to 90 % saturates and less than or equal to 0,03 % sulphur and has a viscosity index greater than or equal to 120. ( 15 ) Base oil group IV are polyalphaolefins. Base oil not included in groups I-IV shall be specified in row ‘Other’. ( 16 ) Includes recycled products from other recycling of waste oils reported under column 7 of Table 1. ( 17 ) On-site energy recovery means recovery of waste oils through internal energy consumption e.g. in a refinery.