COUNCIL DECISION (EU) 2019/2106 of 21 November 2019 on the position to be taken, on behalf of the European Union, within the Joint Committee established by the Agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation on the linking of their greenhouse gas emissions trading systems, as regards the amendment of Annexes I and II to the Agreement THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 192(1), in conjunction with Article 218(9) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The position to be taken, on behalf of the Union, within the second meeting of the Joint Committee established by the Agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation on the linking of their greenhouse gas emissions trading systems, as regards the amendment of Annexes I and II to the Agreement, shall be to support the adoption, by the Joint Committee, of the amendments to those Annexes set out in the Appendix to the draft Decision of the Joint Committee attached to this Decision. Minor technical changes to those Annexes may be agreed to by the representatives of the Union within the Joint Committee without a further decision of the Council. Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the date of its adoption. This Decision shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Union . Done at Brussels, 21 November 2019. For the Council The President H. KOSONEN ( 1 ) OJ L 322, 7.12.2017, p. 3 . ( 2 ) Council Decision (EU) 2017/2240 of 10 November 2017 on the signing, on behalf of the Union, and provisional application of the Agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation on the linking of their greenhouse gas emissions trading systems ( OJ L 322, 7.12.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Council Decision (EU) 2018/219 of 23 January 2018 on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation on the linking of their greenhouse gas emissions trading systems ( OJ L 43, 16.2.2018, p. 1 ). DECISION No 2/2019 OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED BY THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE EUROPEAN UNION AND THE SWISS CONFEDERATION ON THE LINKING OF THEIR GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS TRADING SYSTEMS amending Annexes I and II to the Agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation on the linking of their greenhouse gas emissions trading systems THE JOINT COMMITTEE, Having regard to the Agreement between the European Union and the Swiss Confederation on the linking of their greenhouse gas emissions trading systems ( 1 ) (hereinafter ‘the Agreement’), and in particular Article 13(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Annexes I and II to the Agreement are replaced by the text appearing in Annexes I and II in the Appendix to this Decision. Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the date of entry into force of the Agreement. Done at …, For the Joint Committee Secretary for the European Union The Chair Secretary for Switzerland ( 1 ) OJ EU L 322, 7.12.2017, p. 3. ( 2 ) Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC (OJ EU L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32). ( 3 ) Directive (EU) 2018/410 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2018 amending Directive 2003/87/EC to enhance cost-effective emission reductions and low-carbon investments, and Decision (EU) 2015/1814 (OJ EU L 76, 19.3.2018, p. 3). APPENDIX ANNEX I ESSENTIAL CRITERIA A. Essential criteria for stationary installations This section shall be reviewed in accordance with Article 13(7) of this Agreement with a view to maintaining the current compatibility of the EU ETS and the ETS of Switzerland for the trading period 2021-2030, as proposed by the Swiss government. The Joint Committee shall ensure that the revision of this section, as a minimum, preserves the integrity of the respective domestic emission reduction commitments of the parties and the integrity and orderly functioning of their carbon markets. Carbon leakage and distortion of competition between linked systems shall be avoided. B. Essential criteria for aviation C. Essential Criteria for Registries The ETS of each Party shall include a registry and a transaction log, which shall meet the following essential criteria in relation to security mechanisms and procedures and in relation to the opening and management of accounts: Essential Criteria in relation to Security Mechanisms and Procedures The registries and the transaction logs shall protect the confidentiality, the integrity, the availability and the authenticity of the data stored in the system. To this end, the following security mechanisms shall be implemented by the Parties: Essential Criteria in relation to the Opening and Management of Accounts D. Essential Criteria for Auctioning Platforms and Auction Activities Entities conducting auctions of allowances in the ETS of the Parties shall meet the following essential criteria and shall conduct the auctions accordingly: Switzerland shall endeavour to make use of a private entity for the auctioning of its allowances, in accordance with public procurement rules. Until such an entity is contracted, and provided that the number of allowances to be auctioned in a year is below a fixed threshold, Switzerland may continue to use the current arrangements for auctioning, namely the auctions operated by the FOEN, under the following conditions: The essential criterion 3 shall apply, together with the following provision: admission to bid in auctions of Swiss allowances under the arrangements for auctioning which were in place at the time this Agreement was signed, shall be guaranteed for all entities in the EEA which are admitted to bid in auctions in the Union. Switzerland may mandate entities conducting the auction which are located in the EEA. ANNEX II LINKING TECHNICAL STANDARDS To operationalise the link between the EU ETS and the ETS of Switzerland, a provisional solution shall be in place by May 2020 or as soon as possible thereafter. Parties shall cooperate to replace the provisional solution with a permanent registry link as soon as possible. The Linking Technical Standards (LTS) shall specify: The LTS shall specify that the administrators are to take all reasonable steps to ensure that the SSTL, the EUTL and the link are operational 24 hours a day and 7 days a week, and that any interruptions to the operation of the SSTL, the EUTL and the link are to be kept to the minimum. The LTS shall specify that the communications between the SSTL and the EUTL consist of secure exchanges of webservices messages based on the following technologies ( 1 ) : The LTS shall set out additional security requirements for the Swiss registry, the SSTL, the Union registry and the EUTL and shall be documented in a ‘security management plan’. In particular, the LTS shall specify that: The security testing procedure set out in the LTS shall be completed before the communication link between the SSTL and the EUTL is established, and whenever a new version or release of the SSTL or the EUTL is required. The LTS shall provide two testing environments in addition to the production environment: a developer testing environment and an acceptance environment. The Parties shall provide evidence through the Swiss registry administrator and the Union central administrator that an independent security assessment of their systems has been performed in the previous 12 months in accordance with the security requirements set out in the LTS. Security testing and in particular penetration testing shall be performed on all new major releases of the software in accordance with the security requirements set out in the LTS. The penetration testing shall not be performed by the software developer or by a subcontractor of the software developer. ( 1 ) Those technologies are currently used for establishing a connection between the Union Registry and the International Transaction Log as well as between the Swiss Registry and the International Transaction Log.’