COUNCIL DECISION of 24 June 2010 on the conclusion of the Statute of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) by the European Union (2010/385/EU) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 194(2) and Article 218(6)(a) thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, Having regard to the consent of the European Parliament, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 1. The Declaration of competences is hereby adopted on behalf of the Union and the text thereof is annexed to this Decision. 2. The Statute of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Statute’), is hereby approved on behalf of the Union and the text thereof is attached to this Decision. Article 2 1. The President of the Council is hereby authorised to designate the person(s) empowered to deposit the instrument of ratification, on behalf of the Union, with the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany as depositary of the Statute in accordance with Article XIX and Article XX.A of the Statute in order to express the consent of the Union to be bound. 2. The President of the Council is hereby authorised to designate the person(s) empowered to deposit, on behalf of the Union, the Declaration of competences contained in the Annex, in accordance with Article VI.C of the Statute. Article 3 The Union shall pay an annual contribution to the International Renewable Energy Agency. Article 4 This Decision shall enter into force on the day of its adoption. Done at Luxembourg, 24 June 2010. For the Council The President J. BLANCO LÓPEZ ( 1 ) The Declaration of the Conference regarding authentic versions of the Statute forms an integral part of the Statute. Declaration of competences Article VI.C. of the Statute provides that the instrument of ratification of accession of a regional intergovernmental economic integration organisation shall contain a declaration of the extent of its competence with respect to the matters governed by the Statute. While recognising the European Union’s status as a member, as a general rule, the Member States of the European Union have competence for agenda items dealing with organisational matters (e.g. legal or budgetary issues) and procedural issues (e.g. election of chairpersons, adoption of the agenda, adoption of reports). The list of Union acts below illustrates the extent to which the Union has exercised its internal competence in this field in accordance with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The extent of Union competence ensuing from these acts must be assessed by reference to the precise provisions of each measure, and in particular the extent to which these provisions establish common rules, and, for the purpose of determining the existence of exclusive Union competence, the extent to which these common rules are affected or altered in scope by the provisions of the IRENA statute or an act adopted in implementation thereof. The exercise of competences which Member States of the European Union have transferred to the Union pursuant to the Treaties is, by its nature, liable to continuous change. The Union therefore reserves the right to adjust this Declaration. Statute of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) The PARTIES to this Statute, DESIRING to promote the widespread and increased adoption and use of renewable energy with a view to sustainable development, INSPIRED by their firm belief in the vast opportunities offered by renewable energy for addressing and gradually alleviating problems of energy security and volatile energy prices, CONVINCED of the major role that renewable energy can play in reducing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere, thereby contributing to the stabilisation of the climate system, and allowing for a sustainable, secure and gentle transit to a low carbon economy, DESIRING to foster the positive impact that renewable energy technologies can have on stimulating sustainable economic growth and creating employment, MOTIVATED by the huge potential of renewable energy in providing decentralised access to energy, particularly in developing countries, and access to energy for isolated and remote regions and islands, CONCERNED about the serious negative implications that the use of fossil fuels and the inefficient use of traditional biomass can have on health, CONVINCED that renewable energy, combined with enhanced energy efficiency, can increasingly cover the anticipated steep increase in global energy needs in the coming decades, AFFIRMING their desire to establish an international organisation for renewable energy, that facilitates the cooperation between its Members, while also establishing a close collaboration with existing organisations that promote the use of renewable energy, HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: Article I Establishment of the Agency Article II Objectives The Agency shall promote the widespread and increased adoption and the sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, taking into account: Article III Definition In this Statute the term ‘renewable energy’ means all forms of energy produced from renewable sources in a sustainable manner, which include, inter alia: Article IV Activities Article V Work programme and projects Article VI Membership Article VII Observers Article VIII Organs Article IX The Assembly Article X The Council Article XI The Secretariat Article XII The budget Article XIII Legal personality, privileges and immunities Article XIV Relations with other organisations Subject to the approval of the Assembly the Council shall be authorised to conclude agreements on behalf of the Agency establishing appropriate relations with the United Nations and any other organisations whose work is related to that of the Agency. The provisions of this Statute shall not affect the rights and obligations of any Member deriving from any existing international treaty. Article XV Amendments and withdrawal, review Article XVI Settlement of disputes Article XVII Temporary suspension of rights Article XVIII Seat of the Agency The seat of the Agency shall be determined by the Assembly at its first session. Article XIX Signature, ratification, entry into force and accession Article XX Depositary, registration, authentic text IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised, have signed this Statute. Done at Bonn, this 26 January 2009, in a single original, in the English language.