COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2024/2175 of 3 September 2024 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Contec Calcium Hypochlorite Product Family’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0032017-0000 is hereby granted to Contec Europe for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘Contec Calcium Hypochlorite Product Family’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 24 September 2024 until 31 August 2034. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 3 September 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 , ELI: . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 22 November 2023 on the Union authorisation of ‘Contec Calcium Hypochlorite Product Family’ (ECHA/BPC/403/2023) ( ). SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS FOR A BIOCIDAL PRODUCT FAMILY Contec Calcium Hypochlorite Product Family Product type 2 – Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0032017-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0032017-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL – META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 – Use 1.1 Hard surface disinfection in cleanrooms by trigger spray and wipe (PT 2) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Before applying the ready-to-use product physically remove contaminants from the surface using a cleanroom wipe. Apply the product by spraying onto a cleanroom wipe and then wipe the surface. Ensure that the entire surface is visibly wet and uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. Leave for the required contact time of 1 minute for bacteria, bacterial spores and viruses and then wipe to dry the surface. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 4.2. Use description Table 2 Use # 2 – Use 1.2 Hard surface disinfection in cleanrooms by wiping or mopping (PT 2) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Before applying the ready-to-use product physically remove contaminants from the surface using a cleanroom wipe. Apply the product by pouring the product into a container and using a cleanroom wipe to apply to the surface. Ensure that the entire surface is visibly wet and uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. Leave for the required contact time of 1 minute for bacteria, bacterial spores and viruses and then wipe to dry the surface. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use See ‘Use-specific instructions for use’ sections for each meta SPC. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Engineering measures: Ensure there is sufficient ventilation of the area. All meta SPCs: Trigger spraying: only apply in rooms with a minimum ventilation rate of 20 air changes per hour (ACH). Only for disinfection of small size surfaces. All meta SPCs: Wiping and mopping: only apply in rooms with a minimum ventilation rate of 40 ACH. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: If symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Emergency measures to protect the environment Do not discharge into drains or rivers. Contain the spillage using bunding. Absorb into dry earth or sand. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer. Avoid release to an individual wastewater treatment plant. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in a cool, well-ventilated area. Keep container tightly closed. Keep away from direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Store at temperatures not exceeding 20 °C. Shelf-life: 12 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 3 Use # 1 – Use 2.1 Hard surface disinfection in cleanrooms by trigger spray and wipe (PT 2) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Before applying the ready-to-use product physically remove contaminants from the surface using a cleanroom wipe. Apply the product by spraying onto a cleanroom wipe and then wipe the surface. Ensure that the entire surface is visibly wet and uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. Leave for the required contact time of 5 minutes for bacteria and yeast and then wipe to dry the surface. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 4.2. Use description Table 4 Use # 2 – Use 2.2 Hard surface disinfection in cleanrooms by wiping or mopping (PT 2) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Before applying the ready-to-use product physically remove contaminants from the surface using a cleanroom wipe. Apply the product by pouring the product into a container and using a cleanroom wipe to apply to the surface. Ensure that the entire surface is visibly wet and uniform distribution of the biocidal product should be ensured. Leave for the required contact time of 5 minutes for bacteria and yeast and then wipe to dry the surface. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use See ‘Use-specific instructions for use’ sections for each meta SPC. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Engineering measures: Ensure there is sufficient ventilation of the area. All meta SPCs: Trigger spraying: only apply in rooms with a minimum ventilation rate of 20 ACH. Only for disinfection of small size surfaces. All meta SPCs: Wiping and mopping: only apply in rooms with a minimum ventilation rate of 40 ACH. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: If symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Emergency measures to protect the environment Do not discharge into drains or rivers. Contain the spillage using bunding. Absorb into dry earth or sand. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in a cool, well-ventilated area. Keep container tightly closed. Keep away from direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Store at temperatures not exceeding 20 °C. Shelf-life: 12 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 5 Use # 1 – Use 3.1 Hard surface disinfection in veterinary laboratories by trigger spray and wipe (PT 2) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Disinfection of hard non-porous surfaces or equipment in veterinary laboratories: Apply the product by spraying the product onto the surface and distribute the product with a wipe. Ensure that the entire surface is visibly wet and that the biocidal product is uniformly distributed. Leave for the required contact time of 30 minutes for bacteria, yeast and viruses and then wipe to dry the surface. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 4.2. Use description Table 6 Use # 2 – Use 3.2 Hard surface disinfection in veterinary laboratories by pouring and subsequent wiping or mopping (PT 2) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Disinfection of hard non-porous surfaces or equipment in veterinary laboratories: Apply the product by pouring the product onto the surface and distribute the product with a suitable wipe or mop. Ensure that the entire surface is visibly wet and that the biocidal product is uniformly distributed. Leave for the required contact time of 30 minutes for bacteria, yeast and viruses and then wipe to dry the surface. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use See ‘Use-specific instructions for use’ sections for each meta SPC. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Engineering measures: Ensure there is sufficient ventilation of the area. All meta SPCs: Trigger spraying: only apply in rooms with a minimum ventilation rate of 20 ACH. Only for disinfection of small size surfaces. All meta SPCs: Wiping and mopping: only apply in rooms with a minimum ventilation rate of 40 ACH. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid instructions IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: If symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Emergency measures to protect the environment Do not discharge into drains or rivers. Contain the spillage using bunding. Absorb into dry earth or sand. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to municipal sewer. Avoid release to an individual wastewater treatment plant. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in a cool, well-ventilated area. Keep container tightly closed. Keep away from direct sunlight. Protect from frost. Store at temperatures not exceeding 20 °C. Shelf-life: 12 months 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)