COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2019/1794 of 22 October 2019 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Boumatic Iodine product family’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular the first subparagraph of Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0020541-0000 is granted to Boumatic Gascoigne Melotte for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘Boumatic Iodine product family’, in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 18 November 2019 until 31 October 2029. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 22 October 2019. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/2100 of 4 September 2017 setting out scientific criteria for the determination of endocrine-disrupting properties pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and Council ( OJ L 301, 17.11.2017, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) ECHA opinion of 27 February 2019 on the Union authorisation of ‘Boumatic Iodine product family’ (ECHA/BPC/220/2019). Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Boumatic Iodine product family Product type 3 — Veterinary hygiene (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0020541-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0020541-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL — META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1. Use # 1 – Manual dip treatment, pre- or post-milking teat disinfectants 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by dipping before or after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum 10 ml per dip treatment. Fill the dipping cup with indicated quantity of undiluted product straight from the original packaging. During every treatment, sufficient volume of treatment product needs to be present in the dipping cup. To reduce dermal exposure, the use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder in the product information) and eye protection. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.2. Use description Table 2. Use # 2 – Manual spraying treatment pre- or post-milking teat disinfectants 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by spraying before or after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat at the maximum 15 ml per spray treatment. Fill the spray flask with the indicated quantity of undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder in the product information), protective clothing, chemical resistant boots, and eye protection. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.3. Use description Table 3. Use # 3 – Automated dip treatment, pre- or post-milking teat disinfectants 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by dipping before or after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum 10 ml per dip treatment. Use the undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.4. Use description Table 4. Use # 4 – Automated spraying treatment, pre- or post-milking teat disinfectants 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by spraying before or after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum of 15 ml per spray treatment. Use the undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 1 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. For pre-milking treatment: treat the entire teat with the product, let act 60 seconds and wipe teats dry using single-use towels to avoid any contamination of milk. For post-milking treatment: The teats should be treated as soon as possible after milking in such a way that the teats are fully covered. Let the teats air dry. The cows should be kept in a standing position until the product is fully dried (at least 5 minutes). 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered either for pre- or post-milking disinfection. Keep out of reach of children. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid: general information: immediately remove any clothing soiled by the product After inhalation: Supply fresh air; consult doctor in case of complaints. After skin contact: Wash skin thoroughly. Generally the product does not irritate the skin. After eye contact: Rinse opened eye for several minutes under running water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. After swallowing: Rinse out mouth and then drink water. If you feel unwell, get medical advice/attention. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Do not allow product to enter sewers surface or ground water. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Protect from frost. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct sunlight and out of reach children. Shelf life: 2 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 5. Use # 1 – Manual dip treatment, post milking teat disinfectants 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by dipping after milking. Fill the dipping cup with the indicated quantity of undiluted product straight from the original packaging. During every treatment, sufficient volume of treatment product needs to be present in the dipping cup. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear eye protection. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.2. Use description Table 6. Use # 2 – Manual spraying treatment, post milking teat disinfectants 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by spraying after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum 15 ml per spray treatment. Fill the spray flask with the indicated quantity of undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information) and eye protection. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.3. Use description Table 7. Use # 3 – Automated dip treatment, post-milking teat disinfectants 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by dipping after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum 10 ml per dip treatment. Use the undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, the use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.4. Use description Table 8. Use # 4 – Automated spraying treatment, post-milking teat disinfectants 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by spraying, after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum of 15 ml per spray treatment Use the undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 2 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. For post-milking treatment: The teats should be treated as soon as possible after milking in such a way that the teats are fully covered. Let the teats air dry. The cows should be kept in a standing position until the product is fully dried (at least 5 minutes). 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre- milking disinfection. Keep out of reach of children. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid: general information: immediately remove any clothing soiled by the product After inhalation: Supply fresh air; consult doctor in case of complaints. After skin contact: Wash skin thoroughly. Generally the product does not irritate the skin. After eye contact: Rinse opened eye for several minutes under running water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. After swallowing: Rinse out mouth and then drink water. If you feel unwell, get medical advice/attention. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Do not allow product to enter sewers surface or ground water. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Protect from frost. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct sunlight and out of reach of children. Shelf life: 1 year 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 9. Use # 1 – Manual dip treatment, post milking teat disinfectants 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by dipping after milking. Fill the dipping cup with the indicated quantity of undiluted product straight from the original packaging. During every treatment, sufficient volume of treatment product needs to be present in the dipping cup To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder in the product information) and eye protection. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.2. Use description Table 10. Use # 2 – Manual spraying treatment, post milking teat disinfectants 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by spraying after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum 15 ml per spray treatment Fill the spray flask with the indicated quantity of undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Wear protective chemical resistant gloves (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder in the product information), protective clothing, chemical resistant boots, and eye protection. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.3. Use description Table 11. Use # 3 – Automated dip treatment, post-milking teat disinfectants 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Productfor disinfection of cow teat by dipping after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum 10 ml per dip treatment. Use the undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.4. Use description Table 12. Use # 4 – Automated spraying treatment, post-milking teat disinfectants 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Product for disinfection of cow teat by spraying after milking. Apply an amount of product that is sufficient to cover the entire teat, at the maximum of 15 ml per spray treatment. Use the undiluted product straight from the original packaging. To reduce dermal exposure, use of a dosing pump for filling the product into the application equipment is recommended. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use of the meta SPC 3 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use The products must be brought to temperatures above 20 °C before use. For post-milking treatment: The teats should be treated as soon as possible after milking in such a way that the teats are fully covered. Let the teats air dry. The cows should be kept in a standing position until the product is fully dried (at least 5 minutes). 5.2. Risk mitigation measures In case a combination of pre- and post-milking disinfection is necessary, using another product not containing iodine has to be considered for pre- milking disinfection. Keep out of reach of children. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid: general information: immediately remove any clothing soiled by the product After inhalation: Supply fresh air; consult doctor in case of complaints. After skin contact: Wash skin thoroughly. Generally the product does not irritate the skin. After eye contact: Rinse opened eye for several minutes under running water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing. After swallowing: Rinse out mouth and then drink water. If you feel unwell, get medical advice/attention. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. Do not allow product to enter sewers surface or ground water. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging At the end of the treatment, dispose unused product and the packaging in accordance with local requirements. Used product can be flushed to the municipal sewer or disposed to the manure deposit depending on local requirements. Avoid release to an individual waste water treatment plant. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Protect from frost. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct sunlight and out of reach of children. Shelf life: 2 years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3.