COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/2649 of 28 November 2023 granting a Union authorisation for the single biocidal product ‘Hokoex’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0027471-0000 is granted to Hokochemie GmbH for the making available on the market and use of the single biocidal product ‘Hokoex’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 19 December 2023 to 30 November 2033. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 28 November 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 14 October 2021 on the Union authorisation of the biocidal product ‘Hokoex’ (ECHA/BPC/297/2021), Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product Hokoex Product type 18 – Insecticides, acaricides and products to control other arthropods (Pest control) Authorisation number: EU-0027471-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0027471-0000 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Trade name(s) of the product 1.2. Authorisation holder 1.3. Manufacturer(s) of the product 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the product 2.2. Type of formulation SG – Water soluble granule 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 – Control of nuisance and biting flies in professional livestock in professional farming – professional users 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Spray application only by low pressure downwards spraying using a knapsack sprayer. Wear sturdy footwear/boots during the application of the product. The product may be applied by spraying, pouring or dry scattering. Only one of those specific application methods with its maximum number of biocidal product applications is allowed within one year. Cattle in feedlots or rearing pens (dairy cows, beef cattle, veal calves): Apply in a 50 cm band along the walls, under and next to machinery installations. The first application is best carried out 1-3 days after dung removal, once dung starts to accumulate again. Spraying or pouring: Dry scattering: Cattle on mesh floor (dairy cows, beef cattle, veal calves) : Apply in a 50 cm band along the walls, under and next to machinery installations. When treating liquid manure, the granules can be dispersed directly. The first application is best carried out 1-3 days after dung removal, once dung starts to accumulate again. In cow sheds with slatted floor apply uniformly to the entire surface. Spraying or pouring: Dry scattering: Pigs (sows in individual pens, sows in groups and fattening pigs): Apply in a 50 cm band along the walls, under and next to machinery installations. Spraying or pouring: Maximum 2 applications per year. Dry scattering: Maximum 1 application per year. Poultry (Chicken and broilers – battery cages and free range): Broilers in free range with litter or grating floor, parent broilers in free range or rearing with grating floor (indoor rearing), laying hens in enriched battery cages or in free range with litter floor: Apply to the entire surface. Commence treatment approximately 1 week after removal of excrements but before a depth of 10 cm has accumulated. Laying hens in free range with grating floor: Apply to the area under nesting places and feed troughs. Application only by spraying or pouring: Maximum 1 application per year. Poultry (Turkeys, ducks, and geese): Apply to the entire surface. Commence treatment approximately 1 week after removal of excrements but before a depth of 10 cm has accumulated. Spraying, pouring or dry scattering: Maximum 5 applications per year. Rabbits: Treat entire surface of pits under cages about 3 days after arrival of the animals. Spraying, pouring or dry scattering: Maximum 5 applications per year. Horses : Apply in a 50 cm band along the walls, under and next to machinery installations by dry scattering, pouring or spraying. First application is best carried out 1-3 days after dung removal, once dung starts to accumulate again. For best results use on non-compacted bedding areas. Spraying or pouring: Maximum 4 applications per year. Dry scattering: Maximum 2 applications per year. Goat and sheep sheds: Treat the entire litter surface, respectively the entire floor surface in case of slatted floors. Spraying or pouring: Maximum 5 applications per year. Dry scattering: Maximum 4 applications per year. Minks: Treat area directly under cages where excrements will drop during the rearing cycle. Maximum 1 treatment per year. After use, the application equipment is emptied of any residual product and rinsed with water. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Use # 2 – Control of nuisance and biting flies in animal husbandry – non professional users 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Wear sturdy footwear/boots during the application of the product. Prepare the spray solution by adding the appropriate volume of the biocidal product to the required volume of clean water and agitate. The appropriate volume of the biocidal product is measured using the dosing device provided in the packaging in accordance with the table for application rate(s) and frequency. For spraying: Only apply this product with a handheld manually operated low pressure (3 bar or below) device preferably in combination with a spraying shield. For scattering: Only apply this product using the device provided in the product pack. The product may be applied by spraying or dry scattering. Only one of these specific application methods with its maximum number of biocidal product applications is allowed within one year. Horses : Apply in a 50 cm band along the walls. First application is best carried out 1-3 days after dung removal, once dung starts to accumulate again. For best results use on non-compacted bedding areas. Spraying: Maximum 4 applications per year Dry scattering: Maximum 2 applications per year Goat and sheep sheds: Treat the entire litter surface, respectively the entire floor surface in case of slatted floors. Spraying: Maximum 5 applications per year. Dry scattering: Maximum 4 applications per year. Rabbits: Treat area directly under cages where excrements will drop during the rearing cycle. First treatment about 3 days after arrival of the animals. Spraying or dry scattering: Maximum 5 applications per year. Ferrets: Treat the litter box under cages or the litter area. Spraying or dry scattering: Maximum 1 application per year. Do not spread granules onto dry manure or manure with dried surface, apply by spraying. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 3 Use # 3 – Control of nuisance fly larvae in waste management facilities – professional users 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Spray application only by low pressure downwards spraying using a knapsack sprayer. MBT sites: Spray onto top layer in reception pits that are located indoors. Only treat waste that is stored in contained storage places, such as storage pits or containers. Waste storage places must not be wet cleaned. Only apply the product on waste that will be incinerated. Composting sites: Apply by spraying to the lower third of the height of the compost heaps. After use, the application equipment is emptied of any residual product and rinsed with water. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) 5.1. Instructions for use The general resistance management measures need to be followed: 5.2. Risk mitigation measures See use -pecific risk mitigation measures. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment First aid measures Antidote: No specific antidote is known. Treat symptomatically. IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: If symptoms occur rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. Measures to protect the environment Brush up any spillage of granules and transfer into a sealable container. Either use up granules in compliance with directions for use in case they are not contaminated by any liquid or dispose in accordance with the instructions for safe disposal. Absorb spills of liquid by any absorbent and dispose off in accordance with national regulations. Do not discharge any washing water from treatment equipment to drains. Do not discharge the biocidal product or the diluted solution of the biocidal product into the sewage system or into the environment. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Dispose the product, its residues and packaging according to national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Store in places prevented from the access of children, pets and livestock animals. Do not store near food, drink and animal feedingstuff. Store in the original and closed container in a dry place, at a maximum of 35 °C, protected from direct sunlight and from humidity. Shelf-life: 5 years 6. OTHER INFORMATION Additional label element: The biocidal product contains amorphous silicon dioxide (nano). ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)