COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2023/2776 of 12 October 2023 amending Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the rules for monitoring greenhouse gas emissions and other relevant information from maritime transport (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on the monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas emissions from maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 5(2) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Regulation (EU) 2015/757 is amended as follows: Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 1 January 2024. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 12 October 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 55 . ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2023/957 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 amending Regulation (EU) 2015/757 in order to provide for the inclusion of maritime transport activities in the EU Emissions Trading System and for the monitoring, reporting and verification of emissions of additional greenhouse gases and emissions from additional ship types ( OJ L 130, 16.5.2023, p. 105 ). ( 3 ) Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC ( OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 ). ANNEX I ‘ANNEX I METHODS FOR MONITORING GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS A. CALCULATION OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS (ARTICLE 9) 1. Formulae for the calculation of greenhouse gas emissions For the purposes of calculating greenhouse gas emissions, companies shall apply the following formula: Companies shall calculate CO 2 emissions by adding the CO 2 emissions of all fuels i used, applying the following formula: Companies shall calculate CH 4 emissions by adding the CH 4 emissions resulting from the combustion of all fuels i used together with the emissions caused by CH 4 slippage, applying the following formula: Companies shall calculate N 2 O emissions by adding the N 2 O emissions of all fuels i used, applying the following formula: Fuel consumption shall be calculated separately for emissions from voyages between ports under a Member State’s jurisdiction, from voyages which departed from ports under a Member State’s jurisdiction, from voyages to ports under a Member State’s jurisdiction, and for emissions within ports under the jurisdiction of a Member State. Fuel consumption within ports under the jurisdiction of a Member State at berth shall be calculated separately. 2. Default emission factors In the following table: The default values, as contained in the table below, for emission factors for fuels and emission sources used on board the ship shall be applied for the purpose of this Regulation. Where a cell indicates either TBM or N/A, the highest default value of the fuel class in the same column shall be used. Where, for a particular fuel class, all cells in the same column indicate either TBM or N/A, default value of the least favourable fossil fuel type shall be used. This rule does not apply to column 6 where TBM or N/A refers to non available values for the emissions source. In the case of no default value for Cj, a certified value in accordance with Article 10(6) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council* shall be used. Companies may diverge from the default values for the emission factors listed in the table below, following, as applicable, the application of the conditions and restrictions provided in Article 10(5) and (6) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. For non-fossil fuels not listed in the table below, the company shall determine the emission factors in accordance with Articles 32 to 35 of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066**. Where there is fuel blending, each fuel shall be considered separately. Column 1 identifies the class of the fuels. Column 2 identifies the name of the relevant types of fuel for each class. Column 3 contains the emission factor EF for carbon dioxide in gCO 2 /gfuel. Column 4 contains the emission factor EF for methane in gCH 4 /gfuel. Column 5 contains the emission factor EF for nitrous oxide in gN 2 O/gfuel. Column 6 identifies the part of fuel lost as fugitive and slipped emissions (C j ) measured as % of mass of fuel used by the specific emission source. For fuels such as LNG for which fugitive and slipped emissions exist, the amount of fugitive and slipped emissions as presented in the table is expressed in % of the mass of fuel used. The values of C j in the table are calculated at 50 % of the full engine load. B. METHODS FOR DETERMINING GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS The company shall indicate in the monitoring plan which monitoring method is to be used to determine the greenhouse gas emissions for each ship under its responsibility and ensure that once a method has been chosen, it is consistently applied. The following methods A, B, C and D, based on the calculation approach or the measurement approach, can be used. Under the calculation approach (methods A, B and C), emissions shall be calculated using the formulae set out in Part A. For that purpose, the actual fuel consumption for each voyage shall be determined using any of methods A, B or C described hereinafter and used for the purpose of the calculation. Sources of uncertainty and associated levels of uncertainty shall be considered when selecting any of the methods A, B or C. The company shall regularly perform suitable control activities, including cross-checks between the bunkering quantity as provided by the Bunker Delivery Note (BDN) and the bunkering quantity indicated by on-board measurement, and take corrective action if notable deviations are observed. Under the measurement approach (method D), direct greenhouse gas emissions measurements are used. Any combination of methods A, B, C and D, once assessed by the verifier, may be used if it enhances the overall accuracy of the measurement. 1. Method A: BDN and periodic stocktakes of fuel tanks This method is based on the quantity and type of fuel as indicated on the BDN combined with periodic stocktakes of fuel tanks based on tank readings. The fuel at the beginning of the period, plus deliveries, minus fuel available at the end of the period and de-bunkered fuel between the beginning of the period and the end of the period together constitute the fuel consumed over the period. The period means the time between two port calls or time within a port. For the fuel used during a period, the fuel type and the sulphur content need to be specified. This method shall not be used when BDN are not available on board ships, especially when cargo is used as a fuel, for example, liquefied natural gas (LNG) boil-off. Under existing MARPOL Annex VI regulations, the BDN is mandatory, is to be retained on board for 3 years after the delivery of the bunker fuel and is to be readily available. The periodic stocktake of fuel tanks on board is based on fuel tank readings. It uses tank tables relevant to each fuel tank to determine the volume at the time of the fuel tank reading. The uncertainty associated with the BDN shall be specified in the monitoring plan. Fuel tank readings shall be carried out by appropriate methods such as automated systems, soundings and dip tapes. The method for tank sounding and uncertainty associated shall be specified in the monitoring plan. Where the amount of fuel uplift or the amount of fuel remaining in the tanks is determined in units of volume, expressed in cubic meters, the company shall convert that amount from volume to mass by using actual density values. The company shall determine the actual density by using one of the following: The actual density shall be expressed in kg/cubic meter and determined for the applicable temperature for a specific measurement. In cases for which actual density values are not available, a standard density factor for the relevant fuel type shall be applied once assessed by the verifier. 2. Method B: Bunker fuel tank monitoring on board This method is based on fuel tank readings for all fuel tanks on board. The tank readings shall occur daily when the ship is at sea and each time the ship is bunkering or de-bunkering. The cumulative variations of the fuel tank level between two readings constitute the fuel consumed over the period. The period means the time between two port calls or time within a port. For the fuel used during a period, the fuel type and the sulphur content need to be specified. Fuel tank readings shall be carried out by appropriate methods such as automated systems, soundings and dip tapes. The method for tank sounding and uncertainty associated shall be specified in the monitoring plan. Where the amount of fuel uplift or the amount of fuel remaining in the tanks is determined in units of volume, expressed in cubic meters, the company shall convert that amount from volume to mass by using actual density values. The company shall determine the actual density by using one of the following: The actual density shall be expressed in kg/cubic meter and determined for the applicable temperature for a specific measurement. In cases for which actual density values are not available, a standard density factor for the relevant fuel type shall be applied once assessed by the verifier. 3. Method C: Flow meters for applicable combustion processes This method is based on measured fuel flows on board. The data from all flow meters linked to relevant greenhouse gas emission sources shall be combined to determine all fuel consumption for a specific period. The period means the time between two port calls or time within a port. For the fuel used during a period, the fuel type and the sulphur content need to be monitored. The calibration methods applied and the uncertainty associated with flow meters used shall be specified in the monitoring plan. Where the amount of fuel consumed is determined in units of volume, expressed in cubic meters, the company shall convert that amount from volume to mass by using actual density values. The company shall determine the actual density by using one of the following: The actual density shall be expressed in kg/cubic meter and determined for the applicable temperature for a specific measurement. In cases for which actual density values are not available, a standard density factor for the relevant fuel type shall be applied once assessed by the verifier. 4. Method D: Direct greenhouse gas emissions measurement The direct greenhouse gas emissions measurements may be used for voyages and for greenhouse gas emissions occurring within ports located in a Member State’s jurisdiction. For ships for which CO 2 reporting is based on this method applied to all emissions sources on board the ship, the fuel consumption shall be calculated using the measured CO 2 emissions and the applicable emission factors of the relevant fuels and emission sources. This method is based on the determination of greenhouse gas emissions flows in exhaust gas stacks (funnels) by multiplying the greenhouse gas concentrations of the exhaust gas with the exhaust gas flow. The application of this method to determine emissions of a greenhouse gas shall not prevent companies from applying any other of the methods described under this Part to any other greenhouse gas. The calibration methods applied and the uncertainty associated with the devices used shall be specified in the monitoring plan. C. DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL 1. Control system 2. Data gaps ( 1 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1044 of 8 May 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to values for global warming potentials and the inventory guidelines and with regard to the Union inventory system and repealing Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 666/2014 ( OJ L 230, 17.7.2020, p. 1 ). ANNEX II Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2015/757 is amended as follows: ( *1 ) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82 ).’ ’ ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)