Only the original UN/ECE texts have legal effect under international public law. The status and date of entry into force of this Regulation should be checked in the latest version of the UN/ECE status document TRANS/WP.29/343, available at: Regulation No 92 of the Economic Commission for Europe of the United Nations (UNECE) — Uniform provisions concerning the approval of non-original replacement exhaust silencing systems (NORESS) for vehicles of categories L 1 , L 2 , L 3 , L 4 and L 5 with regard to sound emission [2018/1707] Incorporating all valid text up to: Supplement 2 to the 01 series of amendments – Date of entry into force: 10 October 2017 CONTENTS REGULATION Annexes 1. SCOPE This Regulation applies to non-original replacement exhaust silencing systems for vehicles of categories L 1 , L 2, L 3, L 4 and L 5 ( 1 ) . 2. DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this Regulation 3. APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 3.1. The application for approval of a NORESS or components thereof shall be submitted by its manufacturer or by his duly accredited representative. 3.2. It shall be accompanied by the under mentioned documents in triplicate and the following particulars: 3.3. At the request of the Technical Service conducting the tests for approval, the manufacturer of the NORESS shall submit: 4. MARKINGS 4.1. Each component of the NORESS, excluding pipes and fitting accessories, shall bear: 4.2. These markings shall be clearly legible and indelible and also visible in the position at which the NORESS is fitted. 4.3. The NORESS shall be labelled by its manufacturer; indicating the type(s) of vehicle(s) for which it has been granted the approval. 4.4. A component may carry several approval numbers if it has been approved as a component of several replacement exhaust systems. 4.5. The replacement exhaust system shall be supplied in a packaging or carry a label both providing the following particulars: 4.6. The manufacturer shall provide: 4.7. The approval mark. 5. APPROVAL 5.1. If the NORESS or component thereof submitted for approval under this Regulation meets the requirements of paragraph 6 below, approval for that type shall be granted. 5.2. An approval number shall be assigned to each NORESS type approved. Its first two digits (at present 01 corresponding to the 01 series of amendments to the Regulation) shall indicate the series of amendments incorporating the most recent major technical amendments made to the Regulation at the time of issue of the approval. The same Contracting Party may not assign the same number to another type of NORESS or component designed for, the same type(s) of vehicle. 5.3. Notice of approval or extension or refusal of approval of a NORESS or component thereof under this Regulation shall be communicated to the Parties to the Agreement which apply this Regulation, by means of a form conforming to the model in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 5.4. There shall be affixed to every NORESS and component thereof conforming to a type approved under this Regulation an international approval mark consisting of: 5.5. The approval mark shall be easily legible when the NORESS is fitted to the vehicle, and shall be indelible. 5.6. A component may be marked with more than one approval number if it has been approved as a part of more than one NORESS; in this case the circle need not to be repeated. Annex 2 to this Regulation gives an example of the approval mark. 6. SPECIFICATIONS 6.1. General specifications The silencer shall be designed, constructed and capable of being mounted so that: 6.2. Specifications regarding sound levels The acoustic efficiency of the NORESS or components thereof shall be verified by means of the methods described in Regulation Nos 9, 41 or 63. In particular, for the application of this paragraph reference shall be made to the series of amendments to Regulation No 92 which was in force at the time of type approval of the new vehicle. When the NORESS or its components is fitted to the vehicle described in paragraph 3.3(c), the sound level values obtained using the two methods (stationary and vehicle in motion) shall satisfy the following condition: They shall not exceed the values measured in conformity with the requirements of paragraph 3.3(c), for the same vehicle when fitted with the original silencing system during the test with the vehicle in motion and the stationary test. 6.3. Additional requirements 6.3.1. Tampering protection provisions The NORESS or its components shall be constructed in a way that does not permit removal of baffles, exit-cones and other parts whose primary function is as part of the silencing/expansion chambers. Where incorporation of such a part is unavoidable, its method of attachment shall be such that removal is not facilitated (e.g. with conventional threaded fixings) and shall also be attached such that removal causes permanent/irrecoverable damage to the assembly. 6.3.2. Multi-mode NORESS NORESS with multiple, manually or electronically adjustable, rider selectable operating modes shall meet all requirements in all operating modes. The reported sound levels shall be those resulting from the mode with the highest sound levels. 6.3.3. Prohibition of defeat devices The NORESS manufacturer shall not intentionally alter, adjust or introduce any device or procedure solely for the purpose of fulfilling the sound emission requirements of this Regulation, which will not be operational during typical on-road operation. 6.3.4. Additional sound emission provisions (ASEP) The requirements of paragraph 6.3 of the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41 shall also be fulfilled for the NORESS, if it is designed to be used on vehicles that are type approved according to the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41 and are subject to the requirements of paragraph 6.3 of the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41. If tests are to be performed, the vehicle as described in paragraph 3.3(c) shall be used. The Type Approval Authority may require any relevant test to verify the compliance of the NORESS to these requirements. The manufacturer shall provide a statement in conformity with annex 4 of this Regulation, that the NORESS or components to be approved comply with the additional sound emission provision requirements of paragraph 6.3 of the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41. 6.4. Measurement of vehicle performance 6.4.1. The NORESS or its components shall be such as to ensure that the vehicle's performance is comparable with that achieved with the original exhaust silencing system or components thereof. 6.4.2. The NORESS or, at the manufacturer's choice, the components thereof shall be compared with an original silencing system or components, also in new condition, successively fitted to the vehicle referred to in paragraph 3.3(c). 6.4.3. The verification shall be carried out by measuring the output curve in accordance with paragraph 6.4.4.1 or 6.4.4.2. The maximum power and the engine speed at maximum power measured with the NORESS shall not exceed the net power and the engine speed measured under the conditions set out below with the original equipment exhaust system by more than ± 5 per cent. 6.4.4. Test method 6.4.4.1. Engine test method The measurements shall be carried out on the engine of the vehicle referred to in paragraph 3.3(c), the engine being mounted on a dynamometer. 6.4.4.2. Vehicle test method The measurements shall be carried out on the vehicle referred to in paragraph 3.3(c). The values obtained with the original silencing system shall be compared with those obtained with the NORESS. The test shall be conducted on a roller dynamometer. 6.5. Additional provisions regarding the NORESS or its components filled with fibrous materials The use of fibrous absorbent material shall be permitted in the construction of the NORESS only if the requirements in Annex 3 are met. 6.6. Evaluation of the emission of pollutants of vehicles equipped with replacement silencer system The vehicle referred to in paragraph 3.3(c) with the non-original replacement exhaust silencing system (NORESS) of the type for which approval is requested, shall fulfil the pollution requirements according to the type approval of the vehicle. The evidence shall be documented in the test report. 7. MODIFICATION AND EXTENSION OF THE APPROVAL OF NORESS AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 7.1. Every modification of the type of NORESS or its components shall be notified to the Type Approval Authority which approved the type of NORESS. The said Authority may then either: 7.2. The manufacturer of the NORESS or component thereof or his duly accredited representative may ask the Type Approval Authority which has granted the approval of the NORESS for one or several types of vehicle for an extension of the approval to other types of vehicle. The procedure shall be as described in paragraph 3 above. 7.3. Confirmation or refusal of approval, specifying the modifications, shall be communicated in accordance with the procedure specified in paragraph 5.3 above to the Contracting Parties to the Agreement applying this Regulation. 7.4. The competent authority issuing the extension of approval shall assign a series number to each communication form drawn up for such an extension. 8. CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION The conformity of production procedures shall comply with those set out in the Agreement, Appendix 2 (E/ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505/Rev.2), with the following requirements: 9. PENALTIES FOR NON-CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 9.1. The approval granted in respect of a type of NORESS or its components under this Regulation may be withdrawn if the requirements laid down in paragraph 8 above are not complied with, or if the NORESS or its components fail to pass the tests provided for in paragraph 8(b) above. 9.2. If a Contracting Party to the Agreement applying this Regulation withdraws an approval it has previously granted, it shall forthwith so notify the other Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a communication form conforming to the model contained in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 10. PRODUCTION DEFINITIVELY DISCONTINUED If the holder of the approval completely ceases to manufacture a type of replacement silencing system or components thereof in accordance with this Regulation, he shall so inform the authority which granted the approval which shall in turn inform thereof the other Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement applying this Regulation, by means of a copy of the communication form conforming to the model contained in Annex 1 to this Regulation. 11. NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF TECHNICAL SERVICES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING APPROVAL TESTS, AND OF TYPE APPROVAL AUTHORITIES The Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement which apply this Regulation shall communicate to the United Nations Secretariat the names and addresses of the Technical Services responsible for conducting approval tests and of the Type Approval Authorities which grant approval and to which forms certifying approval or extension or refusal or withdrawal of approval, or production definitively discontinued issued in other countries, are to be sent. ( 1 ) As defined in the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3.), document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev.4, para. 2 - www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29wgs/wp29gen/wp29resolutions.html ( 2 ) Those components are, in particular, the exhaust manifold, the silencer proper, the expansion chamber and the resonator ( 3 ) If the rated maximum net power is reached at several engine speeds, the rated engine speed is used in this Regulation as the highest engine speed at which the rated maximum net power is reached. ( 4 ) The distinguishing numbers of the Contracting Parties to the 1958 Agreement are reproduced in Annex 3 to the Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles (R.E.3), document ECE/TRANS/WP.29/78/Rev. 4 - www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29wgs/wp29gen/wp29resolutions.html ANNEX 1 PART A FOR NORESS FOR VEHICLE TYPES APPROVED ACCORDING TO THE 04 SERIES OF AMENDMENTS TO REGULATION No 41 Communication (Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm) issued by: Name of administration Concerning (2): Approval granted Approval extended Approval refused Approval withdrawn Production definitively discontinued of a vehicle type with regard to a type of NORESS or component there of pursuant to Regulation No 92. Approval No Extension No 1. Trade name or mark of the vehicle: 2. Vehicle type: 3. Manufacturer’s name and address: 4. If applicable, name and address of manufacturer’s representative: 5. Engine 5.1. Manufacturer: 5.2. Type: 5.3. Model: 5.4. Rated maximum net power: kW at min– 1 5.5. Kind of engine (e.g. positive-ignition, compression ignition, etc.) (3): 5.6. Cycles: two-stroke/four-stroke (2) 5.7. Cylinder capacity: cm3 6. Transmission 6.1. Type of transmission: non-automatic gearbox/automatic gearbox: 6.2. Number of gears: 7. Equipment 7.1. Exhaust silencer 7.1.1. Manufacturer or authorized representative (if any): 7.1.2. Model: 7.1.3. Type: in accordance with drawing No 7.2. Intake silencer 7.2.1. Manufacturer or authorized representative (if any): 7.2.2. Model: 7.2.3. Type: in accordance with drawing No 8. Gears used for test of the vehicle in motion: 9. Final drive ratio(s): 10. ECE type approval number of tyre(s): If not available, the following information shall be provided: 10.1. Tyre manufacturer: 10.2. Commercial description(s) of the type of tyre (by axle), (e.g. trade name, speed index, load index): 10.3. Tyre size (by axle): 10.4. Other type approval number (if available): 11. Masses 11.1. Maximum permissible gross weight: kg 11.2. Test mass: kg 11.3. Power to mass ratio index (PMR): 12. Vehicle length: m 12.1. Reference length lref: m 13. Vehicle speeds of measurements in gear (i) 13.1. Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (i): km/h 13.2. Pre-acceleration length for gear (i): m 13.3. Vehicle speed vPP′ (average of 3 runs) for gear (i): km/h 13.4. Vehicle speed vBB′ (average of 3 runs) for gear (i): km/h 14. Vehicle speeds of measurements in gear (i+1) (if applicable) 14.1. Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (i+1): km/h 14.2. Pre-acceleration length for gear (i+1): m 14.3. Vehicle speed vPP′ (average of 3 runs) for gear (i+1): km/h 14.4. Vehicle speed vBB′ (average of 3 runs) for gear (i+1): km/h 15. Accelerations are calculated between lines AA′ and BB′/PP′ and BB′ 15.1. Description of functionality of devices used to stabilize the acceleration (if applicable): 16. Sound levels of moving vehicle 16.1. Wide-open-throttle test result Lwot: db(A) 16.2. Constant speed test results Lcrs: db(A) 16.3. Partial power factor kp: db(A) 16.4. Final test result Lurban: db(A) 17. Sound level of stationary vehicle 17.1. Position and orientation of microphone (according to Appendix 2 of Annex 3 of 04 series of Regulation No 41): 17.2. Test result for stationary test: db(A) at min– 1 18. Additional sound emission provisions: See manufacturer’s statement of compliance (attached) 19. In-use compliance reference data 19.1. Gear (i) or, for vehicles tested with non-locked gear ratios, the position of the gear selector chosen for the test: 19.2. Pre-acceleration length lPA: m 19.3. Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (i): km/h 19.4. Sound pressure level Lwot(i): dB(A) 20. Date of submission of vehicle for approval: 21. Technical Service performing the approval tests: 22. Date of report issued by that Service: 23. Number of report issued by that Service: 24. Approval granted/extended/refused/withdrawn (2): 25. Position of approval mark on the vehicle: 26. Place: 27. Date: 28. Signature: 29. The following documents, bearing the approval number shown above, are annexed to this communication: (a) Drawings, diagrams and plans of the engine and of the exhaust or silencing system; (b) Photographs of the engine and of the exhaust or silencing system; (c) List of duly identified components constituting the exhaust or silencing system. (1) Distinguishing number of the country which has granted/extended/refused/withdrawn an approval (see approval provisions in the Regulation). (2) Delete what does not apply. (3) If a non-conventional engine is used, this should be stated. PART B FOR NORESS FOR VEHICLE TYPES APPROVED ACCORDING TO REGULATION No 9 OR REGULATION No 63 Communication (Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm) issued by: Name of administration Concerning (2): Approval granted Approval extended Approval refused Approval withdrawn Production definitively discontinued of a vehicle type with regard to a type of NORESS or component there of pursuant to Regulation No 92. Approval No Extension No 1. Trade name or mark of the vehicle: 2. Vehicle type: 3. Manufacturer’s name and address: 4. If applicable, name and address of manufacturer’s representative: 5. Engine 5.1. Manufacturer: 5.2. Type: 5.3. Model: 5.4. Rated maximum net power: kW at min– 1 5.5. Kind of engine (e.g. positive-ignition, compression ignition, etc.) (3): 5.6. Cycles: two-stroke/four-stroke (2) 5.7. Cylinder capacity: cm3 6. Transmission 6.1. Type of transmission: non-automatic gearbox/automatic gearbox: 6.2. Number of gears: 7. Equipment 7.1. Exhaust silencer 7.1.1. Manufacturer or authorized representative (if any): 7.1.2. Model: 7.1.3. Type: in accordance with drawing No 7.2. Intake silencer 7.2.1. Manufacturer or authorized representative (if any): 7.2.2. Model: 7.2.3. Type: in accordance with drawing No 8. Gears used for test of the vehicle in motion: 9. Final drive ratio(s): 10. ECE type approval number of tyre(s): If not available, the following information shall be provided: 10.1. Tyre manufacturer: 10.2. Commercial description(s) of the type of tyre (by axle), (e.g. trade name, speed index, load index): 10.3. Tyre size (by axle): 10.4. Other type approval number (if available): 11. Masses 11.1. Maximum permissible gross weight: kg 11.2. Test mass: kg 11.3. Power to mass ratio index (PMR): 12. Vehicle length: m 13. Sound level of the vehicle in motion dB(A) 13.1. Gear (i) for the test of the vehicle in motion 13.2. Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (i): km/h 14. Sound level of the stationary vehicle dB(A) 14.1. at engine speed min– 1 14.2. Position and orientation of microphone: 15. In-use compliance reference data 15.1. Gear (i) or, for vehicles tested with non-locked gear ratios, the position of the gear selector chosen for the test: 15.2. Vehicle speed at the beginning of the period of acceleration (average of 3 runs) for gear (i): km/h 15.3. Sound pressure level L(i): dB(A) 16. Date of submission of vehicle for approval: 17. Technical Service performing the approval tests: 18. Date of report issued by that Service: 19. Number of report issued by that Service: 20. Approval granted/extended/refused/withdrawn (2): 21. Position of approval mark on the vehicle: 22. Place: 23. Date: 24. Signature: 25. The following documents, bearing the approval number shown above, are annexed to this communication: (a) Drawings, diagrams and plans of the engine and of the exhaust or silencing system; (b) Photographs of the engine and of the exhaust or silencing system; (c) List of components, duly identified constituting the exhaust or silencing system. (1) Distinguishing number of the country which has granted/extended/refused/withdrawn an approval (see approval provisions in the Regulation). (2) Delete what does not apply. (3) If a non-conventional engine is used, this should be stated. ANNEX 2 EXAMPLE OF THE APPROVAL MARKS (See paragraph 5.4 of this Regulation) The above approval mark affixed to a component of silencing systems shows that the replacement silencing system type concerned has been approved in the Netherlands (E 4) pursuant to Regulation No 92 under approval No 012439. The first two digits of the approval number 01 indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of this current Regulation No 92 whilst the approval number 00 indicate that the approval was granted in accordance with the requirements of Regulation No 92 in its original form. ANNEX 3 REQUIREMENTS FOR FIBROUS ABSORBENT MATERIALS USED IN NORESS (See paragraph 6.5 of this Regulation) ANNEX 4 STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE ADDITIONAL SOUND EMISSION PROVISIONS (Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm)) This statement is required for non-original replacement exhaust silencing systems specified for the use on L3 category vehicles that are type approved pursuant to the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41 and are subject to the requirements of paragraph 6.3 of the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41. (Name of manufacturer) attests that the non-original replacement exhaust silencing systems of this type (type with regard to its sound emission pursuant to the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41) comply with the requirements of paragraph 6.3 of the 04 series of amendments to Regulation No 41. (Name of manufacturer) makes this statement in good faith, after having performed an appropriate evaluation of the sound emission performance of the non-original replacement exhaust silencing system in accordance with the requirements of Regulation No 92. Name of authorized representative: Signature of authorized representative: