COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2020/580 of 27 April 2020 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘SOPURCLEAN’ (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular the first subparagraph of Article 44(5) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0021157-0000 is granted to SOPURA N.V. for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘SOPURCLEAN’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 18 May 2020 until 30 April 2030. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 27 April 2020. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 26 June 2019 on the Union authorisation of ‘SOPURCLEAN’ (ECHA/BPC/227/2019), Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family SOPURCLEAN Product type 4 – Food and feed area (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0021157-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0021157-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL – META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 – Cleaning in place (CIP) with circulation 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use In case of re-use of the disinfectant solution for CIP procedures, the active substance concentration must be measured and restored to its intended level before re-use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures During the mixing, loading and application phases: 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Use # 2 – Dipping/soaking 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use The dipping solution must be replaced by a fresh solution when it becomes visually polluted, and in all cases daily. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures During the post application phase: Rinse the equipment with drinking water. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use For an effect on bacteria and on yeasts Not mandatory (even if a pre-rinsing is always recommended and usually performed by the users). For disinfection procedures in slaughterhouses, cleaning with a cold alkaline solution) is mandatory before disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Use in well-ventilated places. During the mixing, loading and application phases: wear a protective coverall. Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). Use eye protection during handling of the product. Wear face protection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Particulars of likely direct or indirect adverse effects: First aid instructions: Advice for medical and healthcare personnel: Emergency measures to protect the environment: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Keep only in the original packaging tightly closed in a cool and well-ventilated place Keep the product away from direct sunlight, source of heat and ignition. The product must be stored at temperatures below +30 °C. Do not discharge unused product on the ground, into water courses, into pipes (e.g. sink, toilets) nor down the drains. Dispose of unused product, its packaging and all other waste, in accordance with local regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Storage conditions: Packaging material: Use approved materials suitable for corrosive liquids. Shelf-life: 12 months in the original packaging. 6. OTHER INFORMATION Any product in meta SPC1 shall contain sufficient amounts of acids to yield a pH ≤ 2 at the dilution of 1,5 %. 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.5. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 3 Use # 1 – Cleaning in place (CIP) with circulation 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use In case of re-use of the disinfectant solution for CIP procedures, the active substance concentration must be measured and restored to its intended level before re-use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures During the mixing, loading and application phases: 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 4 Use # 2 – Spraying 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Fully automated process where workers are not present during spraying. Workers only re-enter in the work area when spraying solution has been drained. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.3. Use description Table 5 Use # 3 – Manual disinfection 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general directions for use. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 4.4. Use description Table 6 Use # 4 – Dipping/soaking 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use The dipping solution must be replaced by a fresh solution when it becomes visually polluted, and in all cases daily. 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general directions for use. 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use For an effect on bacteria and on yeasts For disinfection procedures in slaughterhouses, cleaning with a cold alkaline solutionis mandatory before disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures During the mixing and loading and application phases: wear a protective coverall. Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). Use of eye protection during handling of the product. Wear face protection. Use in well ventilated places. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Particulars of likely direct or indirect adverse effects: First aid instructions: Advice for medical and healthcare personnel: Emergency measures to protect the environment: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Keep only in the original packaging tightly closed in a cool and well-ventilated place Keep the product away from direct sunlight, source of heat and ignition. The product must be stored at temperatures below +30 °C. Do not discharge unused product on the ground, into water courses, into pipes (e.g. sink, toilets) nor down the drains Dispose of unused product, its packaging and all other waste, in accordance with local regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Storage conditions: Packaging material: Use approved materials suitable for corrosive liquids. Shelf-life: 12 months in the original packaging. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 7 Use # 1 – Cleaning in place (CIP) with circulation 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use In case of re-use of the disinfectant solution for CIP procedures, the active substance concentration must be measured and restored to its intended level before re-use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures During the mixing, loading and application phases: During the mixing and loading phases: 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use For an effect on bacteria and on yeasts Not mandatory (even if a pre-rinsing is always recommended and usually performed by the users). For disinfection procedures in slaughterhouses, cleaning with a cold alkaline solution is mandatory before disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Use in well-ventilated places. During the mixing, loading and application phases: Wear a protective coverall. Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). Use of eye protection during handling of the product. Wear face protection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Particulars of likely direct or indirect adverse effects: First aid instructions: Advice for medical and healthcare personnel: Emergency measures to protect the environment: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Keep only in the original packaging tightly closed in a cool and well-ventilated place Keep the product away from direct sunlight, source of heat and ignition. The product must be stored at temperatures below +30 °C. Do not discharge unused product on the ground, into water courses, into pipes (sink, toilets…) nor down the drains Dispose of unused product, its packaging and all other waste, in accordance with local regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Storage conditions: Packaging material: Use approved materials suitable for corrosive liquids. Shelf-life: 12 months in the original packaging. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 4 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4 4.1. Use description Table 8 Use # 1 – Cleaning in place (CIP) with circulation 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use In case of re-use of the disinfectant solution for CIP procedures, the active substance concentration must be measured and restored to its intended level before re-use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures During the mixing, loading and application phase: 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general directions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general directions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general directions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 4 ) OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use For an effect on bacteria and on yeasts Not mandatory (even if a pre-rinsing is always recommended and usually performed by the users). For disinfection procedures in slaughterhouses, cleaning with a cold alkaline solution is mandatory before disinfection. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Use in well-ventilated places. During the mixing, loading and application phases: Wear a protective coverall. Wear protective chemical resistant gloves during product handling phase (glove material to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). Use eye protection during handling of the product. Wear face protection. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Particulars of likely direct or indirect adverse effects: First aid instructions: Advice for medical and healthcare personnel: Emergency measures to protect the environment: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging Keep only in the original packaging tightly closed in a cool and well-ventilated place Keep the product away from direct sunlight, source of heat and ignition. The product must be stored at temperatures below +30 °C. Do not discharge unused product on the ground, into water courses, into pipes (e.g. sink, toilets) nor down the drains Dispose of unused product, its packaging and all other waste, in accordance with local regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Storage conditions: Packaging material: Use approved materials suitable for corrosive liquids. Shelf-life: 12 months in the original packaging. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( *1 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( *2 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( *3 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( *4 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( *5 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( *6 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( *7 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3. ( *8 ) Depending on biocidal product specific weight. ( 4 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 4.