COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2019/2193 of 17 December 2019 laying down rules for the calculation, verification and reporting of data and establishing data formats for the purposes of Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) (notified under document C(2019) 8995) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( 1 ) , and in particular Articles 11(3) and 16(9) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Rules for the calculation of the minimum recovery targets referred to in Article 11(1) of Directive 2012/19/EU 1. The weight of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) reported as prepared for re-use shall be the weight of whole appliances, which have become waste, and of components of WEEE that, following checking, cleaning or repairing operations, can be re-used without any further sorting or pre-processing. Where components are prepared for reuse, only the weight of the component itself shall be reported as prepared for re-use. Where whole appliances are prepared for reuse, and only components representing in total less than 15 % of the entire weight of the appliance are replaced by new components during the preparation for re-use process, the entire weight of the appliance shall be reported as prepared for re-use. Appliances and components that are separated at WEEE treatment facilities and are to be re-used without any further sorting or pre-processing shall also be reported as prepared for re-use. 2. The weight of WEEE entering a recycling facility shall be the weight of materials originating from WEEE that, after proper treatment in accordance with Article 8(2) of Directive 2012/19/EU, enter the recycling operation whereby waste materials are reprocessed into products, materials or substances that are not waste. Preliminary activities including sorting, dismantling, shredding or other preliminary treatment to remove waste materials that are not destined for subsequent reprocessing shall not be considered recycling. The points where certain waste materials originating from WEEE are considered to enter the recycling operation are specified in Annex I. Where waste materials cease to be waste as a result of preliminary treatment at the points specified in Annex I, the amount of those materials shall be included in the amount of WEEE reported as recycled. Where a recycling facility carries out preliminary treatment, the weight of the materials removed during preliminary treatment that are not recycled shall not be included in the quantity of WEEE reported as recycled or recovered by that facility and shall not count towards the achievement of the recycling and recovery targets. 3. The weight of WEEE reported as recovered shall include preparing for re-use, recycling and other recovery, including energy recovery. 4. The weight of WEEE reported as treated in a given Member State shall not include the weight of WEEE sorted and stored in that Member State prior to its export to another Member State or outside the Union for treatment. 5. The weight of WEEE reported by a Member State as treated in another Member State or as treated outside the Union shall include respectively the quantities of WEEE that are whole appliances, which have become waste, and are sent to another Member State or outside the Union in order to be de-polluted, dismantled, shredded, recycled or recovered. This weight shall not include the quantities of exports of materials derived from the treatment of WEEE taking place in the reporting Member State. 6. Where WEEE is sent for treatment in another Member State or exported for treatment in a third country in accordance with Article 10 of Directive 2012/19/EU, only the Member State that has collected and sent or exported that WEEE for treatment may count it towards the minimum recovery targets referred to in Article 11(1) of Directive 2012/19/EU. 7. Member States may use substantiated estimates as referred to in Article 16(4) of Directive 2012/19/EU to calculate the average percentage of recycled and recovered materials originating from WEEE and of components of WEEE. Article 2 Format for reporting of data referred to in Article 16(6) of Directive 2012/19/EU and quality check report 1. Member States shall report the quantities of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) placed on their markets, of WEEE collected through all routes, the collection rate achieved and, where applicable, the quantity of WEEE generated, using the format set out in Table 1 of Annex II. That data shall be reported per category of EEE set out in Annex III to Directive 2012/19/EU. For category 4 ‘large equipment’, data shall be reported under two sub-categories, namely ‘4a: Large equipment excluding photovoltaic panels’ and ‘4b: Photovoltaic panels’. 2. Member States shall report the quantities of WEEE prepared for re-use, recycled and recovered, the combined rate achieved for preparing for re-use and recycling, the recovery rate achieved and the quantities of WEEE treated in the Member State and, where relevant, treated in another Member State or outside the Union using the format set out in Table 2 of Annex II. That data shall be reported per category of EEE set out in Annex III to Directive 2012/19/EU. For category 4 ‘large equipment’, data shall be reported under two sub-categories, namely ‘4a: Large equipment excluding photovoltaic panels’ and ‘4b: Photovoltaic panels’. 3. Member States shall report the data referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 in electronic form, by means of an interchange standard set up by the Commission. 4. Member States shall report the data on the weight of EEE placed on the market as calculated in accordance with Article 3 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/699. 5. Member States shall report the data on the weight of WEEE generated as calculated in accordance with to Article 4 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/699. 6. Member States shall report the collection rate attained in a reporting year calculated on the basis of the average weight of EEE placed on their markets in the three preceding years. Where a Member State calculates the collection rate on the basis of the quantity of WEEE generated in its territory, it shall report data on the weight of WEEE generated and data on the WEEE collection rate based on WEEE generated. Where a Member State calculates the collection rate on the basis of the average weight of EEE placed on the market in the three preceding years, it may report, on a voluntary basis, data on the weight of WEEE generated and data on the WEEE collection rate based on WEEE generated. 7. Member States shall submit a quality check report using the format set out in Annex III to this Decision. Where Member States use substantiated estimates to report data on the quantities and categories of WEEE collected through all routes, on WEEE treated within the Member State, or on the average percentage of recycled and recovered materials originating from WEEE and of components of WEEE, the methodology used for those estimates shall be described in the quality check report. Article 3 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 17 December 2019. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38 . ( 2 ) Directive (EU) 2018/849 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directives 2000/53/EC on end-of-life vehicles, 2006/66/EC on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators, and 2012/19/EU on waste electrical and electronic equipment ( OJ L 150, 14.6.2018, p. 93 ). ( 3 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/699 of 18 April 2017 establishing a common methodology for the calculation of the weight of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) placed on the market of each Member State and a common methodology for the calculation of the quantity of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) generated by weight in each Member State ( OJ L 103, 19.4.2017, p. 17 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ANNEX I POINTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 1(2) WHERE WASTE MATERIALS ORIGINATING FROM WEEE ENTER THE RECYCLING OPERATION ANNEX II FORMAT FOR REPORTING DATA FOR THE PURPOSES OF DIRECTIVE 2012/19/EU ON WEEE Table 1 Electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) placed on the market, waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) generated and collected and WEEE collection rate Table 2 Preparing for re-use, recycling and recovery of WEEE, treatment of WEEE in each Member State and WEEE exported and preparing for re-use, recycling and recovery rates ( 1 ) For the purposes of reporting, category 4 of large equipment shall be divided into sub-category ‘4a: Large equipment excluding photovoltaic panels’ and sub-category ‘4b: Photovoltaic panels’. Member States shall report data under the sub-categories 4a and 4b and keep the aggregate line for category 4 empty. If a Member State is not able to distinguish data under sub-categories 4a and 4b, it shall complete the cells in the different columns in aggregate line for category 4 only. ( 2 ) For the purposes of reporting, category 4 of large equipment shall be divided into sub-category ‘4a: Large equipment excluding photovoltaic panels’ and sub-category ‘4b: Photovoltaic panels’. Member States shall report data under the sub-categories 4a and 4b and keep the aggregate line for category 4 empty. If a Member State is not able to distinguish data under sub-categories 4a and 4b, it shall complete the cells in the different columns in aggregate line for category 4 only. ANNEX III FORMAT FOR THE QUALITY CHECK REPORT ACCOMPANYING THE DATA REFERRED TO IN ANNEX II PART 1 GENERAL INFORMATION Member State Organisation submitting the data and the quality check report Contact person/contact details Reference year Delivery date/version of the quality check report Claim for confidentiality PART 2 SOURCE OF DATA, PROCESS FOR VALIDATION OF DATA AND COVERAGE A. Methodologies applied and sources of data A.1: Methodology for the calculation of the quantity of EEE placed on the market A.2: Methodology for the calculation of the WEEE collection rate Please indicate the methodology applied for the calculation of the WEEE collection rate. If the methodology applied is based on the average weight of EEE placed on the market in the three preceding years, please provide data on the quantity of EEE placed on the market in the three years preceding the reference year: A.3: Source of data Please describe the source of data for the different items listed below (e.g. census/national statistics/reporting obligations for business or certified business units/agencies/associations/surveys of waste composition/specific impact assessments that national law may have, and relevant regulations). (a) EEE placed on the market (Table 1: column 1) (b) WEEE generated (Table 1: column 2) (c) WEEE collected (Table 1: columns 3, 4, 5 and 6) (d) Preparing for re-use, recycling and recovery of WEEE (Table 2: columns 1, 2 and 5) (e) WEEE Treated (Table 2: columns 7, 8 and 9) B. Quality of data sources/Process for validation of data B.1: Quality of data sources B.2: Quality of estimations on EEE placed on the market under different categories B.3: Monitoring of the achievement of the targets B.4: Data alignment and consistency B.5: Process for validation of data C. Completeness/Coverage D. Other D.1: Missing data D.2: Plausibility check Please indicate whether any of the following situations has occurred: E. Differences from data reported in previous years F. Main national websites, reference documents and publications