COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 814/2013 of 2 August 2013 implementing Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ecodesign requirements for water heaters and hot water storage tanks (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products ( 1 ) and in particular Article 15(1) thereof, After consulting the Ecodesign Consultation Forum, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation establishes ecodesign requirements for the placing on the market and/or putting into service of water heaters with a rated heat output ≤ 400 kW and hot water storage tanks with a storage volume ≤ 2 000 litres, including those integrated in packages of water heater and solar device as defined in Article 2 of Delegated Regulation (EU) No 812/2013. 2. This Regulation shall not apply to: Article 2 Definitions In addition to the definitions set out in Article 2 of Directive 2009/125/EC, the following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Regulation: For the purposes of Annexes II to VI, additional definitions are set out in Annex I. Article 3 Ecodesign requirements and timetable 1. The ecodesign requirements for water heaters and hot water storage tanks are set out in Annex II. 2. Each ecodesign requirement shall apply in accordance with the following timetable: 3. Compliance with ecodesign requirements shall be measured and calculated in accordance with the requirements set out in Annexes III and IV. Article 4 Conformity assessment 1. The conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 8(2) of Directive 2009/125/EC shall be the internal design control set out in Annex IV to that Directive or the management system set out in Annex V to that Directive. 2. For the purposes of conformity assessment, the technical documentation shall contain the product information set out in point 1.6 of Annex II to this Regulation. Article 5 Verification procedure for market surveillance purposes When performing the market surveillance checks referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive 2009/125/EC to ensure compliance with the requirements set out in Annex II to this Regulation, the Member States’ authorities shall apply the verification procedure set out in Annex V to this Regulation. Article 6 Indicative benchmarks The indicative benchmarks for best-performing water heaters and hot water storage tanks available on the market at the time of entry into force of this Regulation are set out in Annex VI. Article 7 Review 1. The Commission shall review this Regulation in the light of technological progress with water heaters and hot water storage tanks and present the result of that review to the Ecodesign Consultation Forum no later than five years from the date of entry into force of this Regulation. In particular, the review shall include an assessment of the following aspects: 2. The Commission shall also review this Regulation in the light of technological progress with water heaters and present the result of that review to the Ecodesign Consultation Forum no later than three years from the date of entry into force of this Regulation. The review shall only include an assessment of the appropriateness of setting separate ecodesign requirements for different types of water heaters. Article 8 Transitional provisions 1. Until 26 September 2015 Member States may allow the placing on the market and/or putting into service of water heaters which are in conformity with the national provisions in force when this Regulation is adopted regarding water heating energy efficiency and sound power level. 2. Until 26 September 2018 Member States may allow the placing on the market and/or putting into service of water heaters which are in conformity with the national provisions in force when this Regulation is adopted regarding emissions of nitrogen oxides. 3. Until 26 September 2017 Member States may allow the placing on the market and/or putting into service of hot water storage tanks, which are in conformity with the national provisions in force upon adoption of this Regulation regarding standing losses. Article 9 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 2 August 2013. For the Commission The President José Manuel BARROSO ( 1 ) OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10 . ( 2 ) OJ L 330, 16.12.2009, p. 10 . ( 3 ) See page 83 of this Official Journal. ( 4 ) OJ L 316, 14.11.2012, p. 12 . ( 5 ) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 . ( 6 ) See page 136 of this Official Journal. ( 7 ) OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p. 1 . ANNEX I Definitions applicable for Annexes II to VI For the purposes of Annexes II to VI the following definitions shall apply: ANNEX II Ecodesign requirements 1. ECODESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER HEATERS 1.1. Requirements for water heating energy efficiency 1.2. Requirements for storage volume of storage water heaters with declared load profiles 3XS, XXS, XS and S From 26 September 2015: 1.3. Requirements for mixed water at 40 °C of storage water heaters with declared load profiles M, L, XL, XXL, 3XL and 4XL From 26 September 2015 the amount of mixed water at 40 °C shall not fall below the following values: 1.4. Requirements for sound power level From 26 September 2015 the sound power level of heat pump water heaters shall not exceed the following values: 1.5. Requirements for emissions of nitrogen oxides 1.6. Requirements for product information related to water heaters From 26 September 2015 the instruction manuals for installers and end-users, free access websites of manufacturers, their authorised representatives and importers and technical documentation for the purposes of conformity assessment pursuant to Article 4 shall contain the following elements: 2. ECODESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR HOT WATER STORAGE TANKS 2.1. Requirement for standing loss From 26 September 2017 the standing loss S of hot water storage tanks with storage volume V , expressed in litres, shall not exceed the following limit: 2.2. Requirements for product information related to hot water storage tanks From 26 September 2015 the instruction manuals for installers and end-users, the free access websites of manufacturers, their authorised representatives and importers and technical documentation for the purposes of conformity assessment pursuant to Article 4 shall contain the following elements: ANNEX III Measurements 1. For the purposes of compliance and verification of compliance with the requirements of this Regulation, measurements shall be made using harmonised standards the reference numbers of which have been published for this purpose in the Official Journal of the European Union , or using other reliable, accurate and reproducible methods that take into account the generally recognised state-of-the-art methods. They shall meet the conditions and technical parameters set out in points 2 to 7. 2. GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR TESTING WATER HEATERS 3. CONDITIONS FOR TESTING THE SMART CONTROL COMPLIANCE ( SMART ) OF WATER HEATERS Where the manufacturer deems it appropriate to declare the value of smart as being ‘1’, measurements of the weekly electricity and/or fuel consumption with or without smart controls shall be carried out using a two-week measurement cycle as follows: 4. CONDITIONS FOR TESTING SOLAR WATER HEATERS The solar collector, solar hot water storage tank, pump in the collector loop (if applicable) and heat generator shall be tested separately. Where the solar collector and solar hot water storage tank cannot be tested separately, they shall be tested in combination. The heat generator shall be tested under the conditions set out in point 2 of this Annex. The results shall be used for the calculations set out in point 3(b) of Annex IV under the conditions set out in Tables 2 and 3. For the purpose of establishing Q tota the efficiency of the heat generator using the Joule effect in electric resistance heating elements is assumed to be 100/ CC . 5. CONDITIONS FOR TESTING HEAT PUMP WATER HEATERS Table 2 Average daytime temperature [°C] Table 3 Average global solar irradiance [W/m 2 ] Table 4 Standard rating conditions for heat pump water heaters, temperatures in dry bulb air temperature (wet bulb air temperature indicated in brackets) Table 5 Maximum ventilation exhaust air available [m 3 /h], at a temperature of 20 °C and with humidity of 5,5 g/m 3 6. TECHNICAL PARAMETERS OF WATER HEATERS The following parameters shall be established for water heaters: in addition, for water heaters using fossil and/or biomass fuels: in addition, for water heaters for which the value of smart is declared as being ‘1’: in addition, for storage water heaters with declared load profiles 3XS, XXS and XS: in addition, for storage water heaters with declared load profiles M, L, XL, XXL, 3XL and 4XL: in addition, for solar water heaters: in addition, for heat pump water heaters: 7. TECHNICAL PARAMETERS OF HOT WATER STORAGE TANKS The following parameters shall be established for hot water storage tanks: ANNEX IV Calculations 1. For the purposes of compliance and verification of compliance with the requirements of this Regulation, calculations shall be made using harmonised standards the reference numbers of which have been published for this purpose in the Official Journal of the European Union , or using other appropriate calculation methods that take into account the generally recognised state-of-the-art methods. They shall meet the technical parameters and calculations set out in points 2 to 5. Technical parameters used for the calculations shall be measured in accordance with Annex III. 2. TECHNICAL PARAMETERS OF WATER HEATERS The following parameters shall be calculated for water heaters under average climate conditions: 3. CALCULATION OF THE WATER HEATING ENERGY EFFICIENCY η wh 4. DETERMINATION OF THE SMART CONTROL FACTOR SCF AND OF SMART CONTROL COMPLIANCE smart 5. DETERMINATION OF THE AMBIENT CORRECTION TERM Q cor The ambient correction term is calculated as follows: Where: the k-values are given in Table 6 for each load profile. Table 6 k-values ANNEX V Verification procedure for market surveillance purposes For the purposes of checking conformity with the requirements laid down in Annex II, Member State authorities shall test a single water heater or hot water storage tank. The values declared by the manufacturer shall meet the requirements set out in Annex II. If the measured parameters do not meet the values declared by the manufacturer, in accordance with Article 4(2), within the ranges set out in Table 7, the measurement shall be carried out on three additional water heaters or hot water storage tanks. The arithmetic mean of the measured values of these three water heaters or hot water storage tanks shall meet the requirements laid down in Annex II within the ranges set out in Table 7. Otherwise, the model and all other equivalent water heater models or hot water storage tanks models shall be considered not to comply. The Member States authorities shall provide the test results and other relevant information to the authorities of the other Member States and to the Commission within one month of the decision being taken on the non-compliance of the model. Member State authorities shall use the procedures set out in Annexes III and IV. Table 7 Verification tolerances ( *1 ) ‘Rated value’ means the value declared by the manufacturer. ANNEX VI Indicative benchmarks referred to in Article 6 At the time of entry into force of this Regulation, the best available technology on the market for water heaters and hot water storage tanks in terms of water heating energy efficiency, sound power level, standing loss and emissions of nitrogen oxides was identified as follows: The benchmarks specified in points 1, 2 and 4 do not necessarily imply that a combination of these values is achievable for a single water heater.