COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/1758 of 11 September 2023 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 44(5), first subparagraph, thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 A Union authorisation with authorisation number EU-0028967-0000 is hereby granted to Salveco SAS for the making available on the market and use of the biocidal product family ‘SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS’ in accordance with the summary of the biocidal product characteristics set out in the Annex. The Union authorisation is valid from 2 October 2023 to 30 September 2033. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 September 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) ECHA opinion of 15 June 2022 on the Union authorisation of ‘SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS’ (ECHA/BPC/346/2022), SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS FOR A BIOCIDAL PRODUCT FAMILY SALVECO SALVESAFE PRODUCTS Product type 2 - Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Product type 3 - Veterinary hygiene (Disinfectants) Product type 4 - Food and feed area (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0028967-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0028967-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL - META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional, medical and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 2 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and food industry areas 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use. 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use. 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use. 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water for each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures For professional use only: For non-professional use only: 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 "Risk mitigation measures" are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 3 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional, medical and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 4 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and food industry areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water on the label of each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures For professional use only: For non-professional use only: 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 "Risk mitigation measures" are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.5. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.6. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.7. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.8. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.9. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.10. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.11. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.12. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 5 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in institutional, and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 6 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water on the label of each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 "Risk mitigation measures" are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 4 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4 4.1. Use description Table 7 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 8 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 4 ) OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use The authorisation holder shall indicate on the label the relevant volume of product to be diluted in water on the label of each specific product. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 "Risk mitigation measures" are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 5 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 5 4.1. Use description Table 9 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in institutional, medical, and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 10 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in institutional and industrial (food industry) areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.3. Use description Table 11 Use # 3 – Disinfectants used to disinfect the materials and surfaces associated with the housing of animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in veterinary area) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 5 ) OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 "Risk mitigation measures" are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 6 1. META SPC 6 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 6 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 6 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 6 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 6 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 6 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 6 4.1. Use description Table 12 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in medical area) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 6 ) OF THE META SPC 6 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 "Risk mitigation measures" are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 6 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 7 1. META SPC 7 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 7 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 7 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 7 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 7 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 7 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 7 4.1. Use description Table 13 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Apply the product by fully wetting all surface for 5 minutes (apply approx. 18 sprays/m 2 or 20 ml/m 2 or fully cover the object to be disinfected). 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use. 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use. 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use. 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use. 4.2. Use description Table 14 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial (food industry) areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.3. Use description Table 15 Use # 3 – Disinfectants used to disinfect the materials and surfaces associated with the housing of animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in veterinary area) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 7 ) OF THE META SPC 7 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment Call 112 or an ambulance for medical assistance. Information to healthcare personnel or a doctor: The eyes should also be rinsed repeatedly on the way to the doctor if eye exposure to alkaline chemicals (pH > 11), amines and acids like acetic acid, formic acid or propionic acid 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION The full titles of the EN standards referenced in section 5.2 "Risk mitigation measures" are: 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 7 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 8 1. META SPC 8 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 8 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 8 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 8 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 8 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 8 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 8 4.1. Use description Table 16 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 17 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 8 ) OF THE META SPC 8 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 8 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.4. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.5. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.6. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.7. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.8. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 9 1. META SPC 9 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 9 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 9 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 9 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 9 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 9 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 9 4.1. Use description Table 18 Use # 1 – Disinfectants not intended for direct application to humans or animals (disinfectants for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 4.2. Use description Table 19 Use # 2 – Food and feed area disinfectants (disinfectant for all washable hard surfaces in domestic, institutional and industrial areas) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use See general instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures See general instructions for use 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment See general instructions for use 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging See general instructions for use 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage See general instructions for use 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 9 ) OF THE META SPC 9 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 9 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3. ( 4 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 4. ( 5 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 5. ( 6 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 6. ( 7 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 7. ( 8 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 8. ( 9 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 9.