COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2022/1439 of 31 August 2022 amending Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 as regards the information to be submitted for active substances and the specific data requirements for micro-organisms (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and repealing Council Directives 79/117/EEC and 91/414/EEC ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 78(1)(b) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Amendments to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 The Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 is amended as follows: Article 2 Transitional measures as regards certain procedures concerning active substances that are micro-organisms 1. Applicants may submit data in accordance with Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 as it stood before being amended by this Regulation in the following cases: 2. Where applicants choose to apply the option provided for in paragraph 1, they shall specify that choice in writing when submitting the application concerned. Such choice shall be irrevocable for the procedure concerned. Article 3 Transitional measures as regards certain procedures concerning plant protection products containing active substances that are micro-organisms 1. For authorisation of plant protection products, within the meaning of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009, containing one or more active substances that are micro-organisms, where the dossiers have been submitted in accordance with Article 2 of this Regulation or a decision on the renewal of the approval has not been taken in accordance with Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 on the basis of Part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 as amended by this Regulation, applicants: 2. Where applicants choose to apply the option provided for in paragraph 1(b), they shall specify that choice in writing when submitting the application concerned. Such choice shall be irrevocable for the procedure concerned. Article 4 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . It shall apply from 21 November 2022. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 31 August 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 283/2013 of 1 March 2013 setting out the data requirements for active substances, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market ( OJ L 93, 3.4.2013, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions A Farm to Fork Strategy for a fair, healthy and environmentally-friendly food system (COM/2020/381 final, ( 4 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1740 of 20 November 2020 setting out the provisions necessary for the implementation of the renewal procedure for active substances, as provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 844/2012 ( OJ L 392, 23.11.2020, p. 20 ). ANNEX I ‘INTRODUCTION Information to be submitted, its generation and its presentation A dossier shall be submitted in accordance with Part A if the active substance is: A dossier shall be submitted in accordance with Part B if the active substance is: 3. Good laboratory practice (GLP) 4. Test material 5. Tests on vertebrate animals ( 1 ) Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2010 on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes ( OJ L 276, 20.10.2010, p. 33 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 February 2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin and amending Council Directive 91/414/EEC ( OJ L 70, 16.3.2005, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2004/10/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of the principles of good laboratory practice and the verification of their applications for tests on chemical substances ( OJ L 50, 20.2.2004, p. 44 ). ( 5 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 284/2013 of 1 March 2013 setting out the data requirements for plant protection products, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market ( OJ L 93, 3.4.2013, p. 85 ). ANNEX II ‘PART B ACTIVE SUBSTANCES THAT ARE MICRO-ORGANISMS INTRODUCTION TO PART B 1. IDENTITY OF THE APPLICANT, IDENTITY OF THE ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURING INFORMATION 1.1. Applicant The name and address of the applicant shall be provided, as well as the name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of a contact point. 1.2. Producer The following information shall be provided: Where, following approval of the micro-organism, there are changes in the address or number of producers, the information required shall again be submitted. 1.3. Identity, taxonomy and phylogeny of the micro-organism The information provided shall allow an unambiguous identification and characterisation of the micro-organism. 1.4. Specification of the microbial pest control agent as manufactured 1.4.1. Content of the active substance The minimum and maximum content of the micro-organism in the MPCA as manufactured shall be derived from the analysis of five representative batches as indicated under point 1.4.3 and reported. The content shall be expressed in appropriate microbial unit that most accurately reflects plant protection action, such as number of active units, colony forming units, or international units per volume or weight or any other manner that is relevant to the risk assessment on the micro-organism. A rationale for the relevance of the microbial unit used in the context of the tests to be conducted shall be provided. The use of such unit shall be consistent along studies and literature data provided. In case of provision of literature data with different units, recalculation based on the units used shall be provided. In case it is claimed that one or more metabolites present in the MPCA as manufactured are part of the plant protection action, the content of these metabolites shall be indicated as provided for in point 1.9 of Part A. 1.4.2. Identity and quantification of additives, relevant contaminating micro-organisms and relevant impurities Data on additives, relevant contaminating micro-organisms, relevant impurities and metabolites of concern, present in the MPCA as manufactured shall be directly derived from the analysis of five representative batches as indicated under point 1.4.3 and reported. 1.4.2.1. Identity and quantification of additives The identity, minimum and maximum content in g/kg of each additive in the MPCA as manufactured shall be provided. 1.4.2.2. Identity and content of relevant contaminating micro-organisms The identity and maximum content of relevant contaminating micro-organisms in the MPCA as manufactured, expressed in the appropriate unit, shall be reported. 1.4.2.3. Identity and quantification of relevant impurities The identity and maximum content of chemical impurities present in the MPCA as manufactured and which are relevant due to undesirable toxicological, ecotoxicological or environmental properties, shall be reported in g/kg, including also metabolites of concern produced by the micro-organism as impurities in the manufacturing batch. 1.4.3. Analytical profile of batches At least five representative batches from recent and current production of the micro-organism shall be analysed. All of the representative batches shall bear a date within the last five years of manufacture. Manufacturing dates of the representative batches and batches size shall be reported. Where the active substance is produced in different manufacturing plants, the information required under this point shall be provided for each of the plants separately. Where the information provided relates to a pilot manufacturing plant production system, the information required shall again be provided once industrial scale production methods and procedures have stabilised. Where available, industrial scale data shall be provided before approval under Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009. Where data on industrial scale production are not available, a justification shall be provided. 1.5. Information on manufacturing process and control measures for the active substance 1.5.1. Production and quality control Information on how the micro-organism is produced in bulk shall be provided for all the steps of the manufacturing process. Such information shall include relevant descriptions of: The type of manufacturing process (e.g. continuous or batch process) shall be indicated. Both production method/process and product shall be subject to a continuous quality control, and the quality assurance criteria shall be submitted. In particular, the possible occurrence of spontaneous changes of characteristics of the micro-organism shall be monitored. It shall be indicated where in the process the quality assurance steps are implemented and it shall be described how the samples for quality assurance screening are taken. The techniques used to ensure a uniform product, and the assay methods for its standardisation, maintenance and purity, to prevent the presence of relevant contaminating micro-organisms and relevant impurities in the MPCA as manufactured shall be described and specified. Information on possible loss of activity of starting cultures shall be provided along with corresponding methods to assess it. If relevant, any method aiming at preventing the micro-organism from losing its effects on the target organism shall be described. 1.5.2. Recommended methods and precautions concerning handling, storage, transport or fire A safety data sheet pursuant to Article 31 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( 4 ) shall be provided for the MPCA as manufactured. 1.5.3. Procedures for destruction or decontamination Methods to dispose safely of the MPCA as manufactured or, where necessary, to render the micro-organism non-viable prior to disposal of the MPCA as manufactured (e.g. chemical methods or autoclaving) and methods to dispose of contaminated packaging and other materials shall be described. Information that makes it possible to establish the effectiveness and safety of these methods shall be provided. 2. BIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF THE MICRO-ORGANISM 2.1. Origin, occurrence and history of use 2.1.1. Origin and isolation source The geographical location and environmental compartment (e.g. substrate, host organisms), from which the micro-organism was isolated, shall be stated. The method of isolation and the selection procedure of the micro-organism shall be reported. 2.1.2. Occurrence The geographical distribution of the micro-organism shall be described. The environmental compartment(s) where the micro-organism is already expected to occur shall be described (e.g. soil, water, rhizosphere, phyllosphere, host organism). When relevant, food or feed commodities where the micro-organism is already expected to occur shall be described. The information referred to in this point shall be provided at the most relevant highest taxonomic level (e.g. strain, species, genus) and the choice of the relevant highest taxonomic level shall be justified. 2.1.3. History of use Previous and current known uses of the micro-organism (e.g. research, commercial, uses evaluated for recommending the Qualified Presumption of Safety ( 5 ) status) shall be described. The description shall include both plant protection and other uses (e.g. uses and/or assessments under other regulatory frameworks, bioremediation, uses in food and feed). The information referred to in this point shall be provided at the most relevant highest taxonomic level (e.g. strain, species, genus). The choice of the relevant highest taxonomic level shall be justified. 2.2. Ecology and life cycle of the micro-organism The known life cycle(s) of the micro-organism, its lifestyle(s) (e.g. parasitic, saprophytic, endophytic, pathogenic) and its ecological niche(s) shall be described, along with all forms that may occur and the type of reproduction. For bacteriophages, information shall be provided on, if applicable, lysogenic and lytic properties. For fungi and bacteria, information shall be provided, if applicable, on: 2.3. Mode of action on the target organism and host range All available information on modes of action against the target organism(s) shall be provided. In case of a pathogenic or parasitic mode of action on the target organism, information on the site of infection and mode of entry into the target organism, the infective dose and the susceptible stages of the target organism shall be given. The results of any experimental studies shall be reported. In case of a mode of action based on a metabolite of concern produced by the micro-organism under assessment and identified as required by point 2.8, information from scientific peer-reviewed literature or any other reliable source on likely mode of action of the metabolite of concern and likely exposure route of the target organism to the metabolite of concern shall be provided. All known host organisms of the micro-organism shall be listed at the relevant taxonomic level. Available information on possible density of host organisms, supporting the indication on natural occurrence of the micro-organisms, shall be provided. 2.4. Growth requirements The conditions required for growth and proliferation of the micro-organism shall be described (e.g. host, nutrients, pH, osmotic potential, humidity). The minimum, optimum and maximum temperature required for growth and proliferation shall be reported. The generation time under favourable growth conditions shall be reported. 2.5. Infectivity to the target organism In case any pathogenic mode(s) of action on the target organism is described under point 2.3, virulence factors and (if applicable) environmental factors affecting them shall be indicated and described. The results of any relevant experimental studies and/or data/information from the existing literature at the relevant taxonomic level shall be reported. 2.6. Relationship to known human pathogens and to pathogens to non-target organisms Where the micro-organism is closely related to any known pathogens to humans, animals, crops or other non-target species, the applicant shall: 2.7. Genetic stability and factors affecting it Where the micro-organism is a non-virulent variant of a plant pathogen virus, the likelihood of regaining virulence through mutation after application under the proposed conditions of use shall be reported, including the information on measures that can be taken to reduce the likelihood of this occurrence and the effectiveness of such measures. 2.8. Information on metabolites of concern The applicant shall identify and list under this point the metabolites of concern produced by the micro-organism, including a summary of the information submitted under points 5.5.1, 8.8.1, 6.1, 7.2.1 and 7.2.2 used to identify or to exclude metabolites as being of concern, unless the micro-organism is a virus. Metabolites of concern may be identified based on the scientific literature, or on observation of toxicity, ecotoxicity or antimicrobial activity in studies conducted with the micro-organism or closely related strains. The absence of the gene(s) required for the production of the identified metabolite(s) of potential concern evidenced by employing appropriate genomic methods (e.g. whole genome sequencing), shall be considered to prove the absence of such hazard for that metabolite(s). All the available information (e.g. scientific literature, experimental studies) on the metabolites and the related identified hazards (e.g. the toxicological characterization) and, where relevant, the exposure to the metabolite shall be submitted under the relevant points (i.e. points 5.5, 6.1, 6.2 and 7.2 if relevant for human and animal health and points 7.2 and 8.8 if relevant for non-target organisms). 2.9. Presence of transferable antimicrobial resistance genes Where the micro-organism is a bacterium, information on any resistance to relevant antimicrobial agents shall be reported at strain level, and information on whether the antimicrobial resistance genes are acquired, transferable and functional shall be reported. The information provided shall be sufficient to perform an evaluation as to the risks for human and animal health due to a possible transfer of relevant antimicrobial resistance genes. 3. FURTHER INFORMATION 3.1. Function and target organism The biological function shall be specified as: 3.2. Field of use envisaged The field(s) of use, existing and proposed, for plant protection product containing the micro-organism shall be specified from among the following: 3.3. Crops or products protected or treated Details of existing or intended use in terms of crops, groups of crops, plants or plant products protected shall be provided. 3.4. Information on possible development of resistance in the target organism(s) Available information from scientific peer-reviewed literature or any other reliable source of information on the possible occurrence of the development of resistance or cross-resistance of the target organism(s) shall be provided. Where possible, appropriate management strategies shall be described. 3.5. Literature data A summary on the systematic review of the scientific peer-reviewed literature employed to provide the data required under Part B shall be provided, including indication on bibliographic databases employed, criteria for relevance and reliability assessment in relation to the data requirements and search strategies, etc. The summary shall list the 4. ANALYTICAL METHODS Introduction Analytical methods shall be used in the context of the analysis of the compliance of manufacturing batches with the agreed specification, where relevant (Section 1) and of the generation of data for the risk assessment on human toxicology or ecotoxicology. Analytical methods shall also support post-approval stages, for instance to monitor residues on crops (Section 6), if applicable. The method used shall be justified. Descriptions of methods shall be provided and include details of equipment, materials and conditions used. The applicability of any internationally recognised method shall be reported. Data on specificity, linearity, accuracy and repeatability, as laid down in points 4.1 and 4.2 of Part A, are also required for analytical chemistry methods used to analyse relevant impurities, metabolites of concern and additives included in the MPCA as manufactured. On request by the rapporteur Member State, the following shall be provided: 4.1. Methods for the analysis of the MPCA as manufactured The following methods shall be described providing validation data: 4.2. Methods to determine the density of the micro-organism and quantify residues The methods used to determine and quantify: on and/or in crops, foodstuffs, feeding stuffs, animal and human body tissues and fluids and in relevant environmental compartments shall be described. Where relevant, methods for post-approval monitoring shall be described. As far as practicable, the post-approval methods shall be as simple as possible, involve a minimum cost and require commonly available equipment. 5. EFFECTS ON HUMAN HEALTH Introduction 5.1. Medical data 5.1.1. Therapeutic and first aid measures Therapeutic regimes and first aid measures for use in the event of ingestion, inhalation or eyes and skin contamination shall be described. Available information based on practical experience or on theoretical grounds shall be provided. Where available and without prejudice to Article 10 of Directive 98/24/EC ( 6 ) , practical data and information relevant to the recognition of the symptoms of infection or pathogenicity and on the effectiveness of therapeutic measures shall be submitted. For micro-organisms excluding viruses, antimicrobial agents with effectiveness against the micro-organism shall be listed. In case of identification of metabolite(s) of concern, as required in point 2.8, the effectiveness of known antagonists of such metabolite(s) shall be reported. 5.1.2. Medical surveillance Available reports of occupational health surveillance programmes shall be submitted. These reports may refer to the strain under assessment, to closely related strains or to metabolites of concern, and shall be supported with information on the design of the programme, on use of appropriate protective measures including personal protective equipment, on exposure to the micro-organism or the metabolites of concern. These reports shall, where available, include data on effects on individuals exposed to the micro-organism or the metabolites of concern in manufacturing plants or after application of the micro-organism (e.g. agricultural or research workers). These reports shall, where available, also cover data on sensitisation and/or allergenic responses. In the case of adverse effects, attention shall be paid to whether the individual’s susceptibility may have been affected by any pre-disposing conditions, e.g. pre-existing disease, medication, compromised immunity, pregnancy or breast-feeding. 5.1.3. Information on sensitisation and allergenicity Available reports from the peer-reviewed published literature on the micro-organism or closely related members of the taxonomic group and relating to sensitisation in humans shall be submitted. Due to the unavailability of an adequate method to assess sensitisation potential of micro-organisms, they shall be considered as potential sensitisers until a validated test is available and the possible absence of sensitisation potential is demonstrated on a case-by-case basis. 5.1.4. Direct observation Available reports from the peer-reviewed published literature on the micro-organism or closely related members of the taxonomic group and relating to clinical cases of infections in humans shall be submitted together with reports of any follow-up studies undertaken. Such reports shall contain descriptions of the nature and level of exposure, as well as the clinical symptoms observed, first aid and therapeutic measures applied and measurements and other observations made. In the case of adverse effects, attention shall be paid to whether the individual’s susceptibility may have been affected by any pre-disposing conditions, e.g. pre-existing disease, medication, compromised immunity, pregnancy or breast-feeding. 5.2. Assessment on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to humans Studies to determine the potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism shall be performed as set out in points 5.3.1 and 5.4, unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that no such effects are to be expected. The weight of evidence approach may be based on the information provided under points 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 2.6 and 5.1, and/or be retrieved from any other reliable sources (e.g. Qualified Presumption of Safety ( 7 ) ). A summary shall take into consideration this information to demonstrate absence of infectivity and pathogenicity to humans, in order to justify the non-submission of the studies required in points 5.3.1 and 5.4. 5.3. Infectivity and pathogenicity studies on the micro-organism 5.3.1. Infectivity and pathogenicity Unless the applicant can demonstrate absence of infectivity and pathogenicity based on a weight of evidence approach as set out in point 5.2, studies, data and information shall be provided and evaluated as required from points 5.3.1.1 to 5.3.1.3. These shall be sufficient to permit the identification of effects following a single exposure to the micro-organism, and in particular to establish or indicate: If these studies are performed, the applicant shall: 5.3.1.1. Oral infectivity and pathogenicity The oral infectivity and pathogenicity following a single exposure to the micro-organism shall be reported. A study in test animals in accordance with relevant guidelines shall be performed, unless the applicant can demonstrate absence of oral infectivity and pathogenicity based on a weight of evidence approach as set out in point 5.2. 5.3.1.2. Intratracheal/ intranasal infectivity and pathogenicity The intratracheal/ intranasal infectivity and pathogenicity following a single exposure to the micro-organism shall be reported. Expert judgement may support the evaluation on which of the two exposure routes is the most appropriate to be investigated, based on biological properties of the micro-organism and available information described in points 5.1 and 5.2. A study in test animals in accordance with relevant guidelines shall be performed, unless the applicant can demonstrate absence of intratracheal/ intranasal infectivity and pathogenicity based on a weight of evidence approach as set out in point 5.2. 5.3.1.3. Intravenous, intraperitoneal or subcutaneous single exposure The intravenous, intraperitoneal or subcutaneous test shall be considered a highly sensitive assay to elicit in particular infectivity. The worst-case scenario – micro-organism bypassing the dermal barrier and entering the body in a high concentration – may be used to assess the results of oral and intratracheal/intranasal testing in case of uncertainties. The choice on which is the most appropriate exposure route to be investigated shall be based on biological properties of the micro-organism and available information required in points 5.1 and 5.2. A study in test animals in accordance with the relevant guidelines shall be performed, unless the applicant can demonstrate absence of intravenous, intraperitoneal or subcutaneous infectivity and pathogenicity based on a weight of evidence approach as set out in point 5.2. 5.3.2. Cell culture study This information shall be reported for intracellular replicating micro-organisms, such as viruses, viroids or, where relevant, bacteria and protozoa, unless the information provided in accordance with Sections 1, 2 and 3 clearly demonstrates that the micro-organism does not replicate in homoeothermic (warm-blooded) organisms. If this information is required, a cell culture study shall be performed in human cell or tissue cultures of different organs. Selection may be based on expected target organs after infection. If human cell or tissue cultures of specific organs are not available, other mammal cell and tissue cultures shall be used. For viruses, particular attention shall be given on the ability to interact with the human genome. 5.4. Specific infectivity and pathogenicity studies on the micro-organism In case, based on expert judgement, available information (see point 5.2) or effects observed in the single dose infectivity and pathogenicity studies (see point 5.3.1) require further investigation, specific infectivity and/or pathogenicity studies shall be carried out, in particular in case of close relatedness to micro-organisms which are pathogenic to humans or animals. If these studies are required, they shall be designed on an individual basis, in the light of the particular parameters to be investigated and the objectives to be achieved. 5.5. Information and toxicity studies on metabolites 5.5.1. Information on metabolites Information (e.g. scientific literature, studies results) on the toxicological characterization of the metabolites and the related identified hazards to human and animal health, collected or generated with the aim to identify the metabolites of concern, or to exclude them as being of concern, shall be submitted. For those metabolites for which a hazard to human or animal health is identified, an estimation of human exposure shall be provided under points 6.1 and 7.2.1. 5.5.2. Additional toxicity studies on metabolites of concern For metabolite(s) of concern, identified based on information provided on hazard to (see point 5.5.1) and exposure of (see points 6.1, 7.2.1 and 7.2.2) humans or animals and listed under point 2.8, toxicological reference value(s) shall be set based on the available toxicological information for each metabolite of concern. The reference values shall allow risk assessments to be performed for operators, workers, bystanders, residents and consumers, as appropriate, unless a risk assessment can be made by other means (e.g. a qualitative assessment or using the Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC) concept). If reference values cannot be set based on already existing information or if reported effects need further investigation, studies may be required and shall be performed based on a case-by-case approach (for example short-term toxicity studies and genotoxicity studies). If any toxicity studies on metabolites are conducted, the requirements set out in Part A for the specific type of study shall be followed. For organisms which have not been extensively studied, i.e. where the amount of published information is not sufficient to conclude on the production of metabolites of concern, a repeated-dose toxicity study on relevant fractions of the MPCA as manufactured shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions set out in Part A for the same type of study. The decision to require further studies shall be based on the type of any toxic effects observed during such repeated-dose toxicity study and on expert judgement. 6. RESIDUES IN OR ON TREATED PRODUCTS, FOOD AND FEED Introduction Data on residues as required in point 6.2 shall be provided, unless: 6.1. Estimation of consumer exposure to residues An estimation of consumer exposure shall be provided for metabolites for which a hazard to human health was identified based on information submitted in accordance with point 5.5.1, considering the intended use. The estimation shall include, for the metabolites for which a hazard to human health was identified, a calculation of the expected residue levels of these metabolites on edible parts of treated crops using worst-case estimates, taking into account the critical good agricultural practice(s), ecology of the micro-organism, such as its lifestyle (e.g. saprophytic, parasitic, endophytic), host range, life cycle, population growth requirements and the conditions which trigger the production and the properties of the metabolite for which a hazard to human health was identified. The estimation of exposure to residues of metabolites, for which a hazard to human health was identified may also be supported by direct measurements of the metabolite, e.g. to show the absence of the metabolite on edible parts at time of harvest. When determining the need for direct measurements, the possibility and relevance of exposure to the metabolite produced after application on the edible parts ( in-situ production) shall be taken into consideration. This may include a comparison between the background level of the metabolite and the elevated level of it due to treatment with the plant protection product containing the active substance. Read across approaches shall be justified. An estimation of exposure to metabolites, for which a hazard to human health was identified, may be supported by the direct measurements of the density of the micro-organism on edible parts of treated crops, e.g. if it cannot be adequately justified that in-situ production of the metabolite is not relevant for the consumers. Such measurements shall be performed under normal conditions of use and in accordance with good agricultural practice. The estimation shall take into consideration, depending on the case, the whole crop life-cycle (e.g. pre-harvest, and post-harvest), in order to allow a proper assessment of the risk to consumers. A weight of evidence approach shall be employed. Where relevant, adequate justification for read-across shall be provided (e.g. between different substances, members of a species, climatic conditions). Based on the exposure estimation, an indicative consumer risk assessment shall be performed to demonstrate that the anticipated exposure to metabolites, for which a hazard to human health was identified, does not constitute an unacceptable dietary consumer risk. 6.2. Data generation on residues For those metabolites of concern identified under point 2.8 and for which it was not adequately demonstrated that the risk to consumers is acceptable based on the information provided under point 6.1, relevant studies of a data package on residues as provided in Section 6 of Part A shall be required. The studies shall be performed with a representative plant protection product aiming at analysing and, if possible, at quantifying the different metabolites of concern identified as described in point 2.8. If a data package on residues is required: 7. ENVIRONMENTAL OCCURRENCE OF THE MICRO-ORGANISM, INCLUDING FATE AND BEHAVIOUR OF METABOLITES OF CONCERN Introduction 7.1. Environmental occurrence of the micro-organism 7.1.1. Predicted environmental density of the micro-organism 7.1.1.1. Soil The predicted environmental density of the micro-organism in soil following treatment with the plant protection product containing that micro-organism under the proposed conditions of use shall be estimated, unless the applicant properly justifies absence of hazard under Section 8. 7.1.1.2. Water The predicted environmental density of the micro-organism in surface water following treatment with the plant protection product containing that micro-organism under the proposed conditions of use shall be estimated, unless the applicant properly justifies absence of hazard under Section 8. 7.1.2. Exposure to micro-organisms known to be pathogenic either for plants or for other organisms For micro-organisms not occurring in the relevant European environments at the relevant highest taxonomic level and which are known to be pathogenic either for plants or for other organisms (see points 2.2 and 2.3), the host organisms in which proliferation of the micro-organism is expected shall be indicated. If non-target organisms indicated under Section 8 may be exposed to the host organisms colonised by the pathogen, information on the likelihood and, if applicable, level of exposure shall be provided. Such information may be provided based on the biological properties (see Section 2), literature data and/or studies required under Section 8. 7.1.3. Qualitative exposure assessment of the micro-organism A qualitative assessment of the exposure to the micro-organism shall be carried out if: If required to provide supporting information for the risk assessment, a qualitative assessment of the exposure to the micro-organism shall be provided employing a weight of evidence approach. Such qualitative assessment shall take into consideration the predicted environmental densities calculated under point 7.1.1, and may be based on the ecology of the micro-organism, such as its lifestyle (e.g. saprophytic, parasitic, endophytic), host range and densities of possible hosts, life cycle, population growth requirements or available monitoring data at the relevant highest taxonomic level. Adequate justification for using read-across shall be provided (e.g., among strains of the same species). 7.1.4. Experimental exposure data of the micro-organism If under consideration of the information provided under points 7.1.1, 7.1.2, 7.1.3 and 7.2 a potential risk is identified for humans or non-target organism(s) or information is not sufficient to conclude about it, the population density of the micro-organism shall be determined in relevant environmental compartment(s) (e.g. soil, water, plant surfaces). The experimental data shall include population densities measured in a time course including pre-application and immediately post-application, aiming at demonstrating the potential decline of population density. 7.2. Fate and behaviour of metabolite(s) of concern 7.2.1. Predicted environmental concentration In case metabolites which are hazardous to humans or non-target organisms (see points 5.5.1 and 8.8.1) are present in the MPCA as manufactured, the predicted environmental concentration of the metabolites in the relevant environmental compartment (i.e. soil, surface water, groundwater or air) shall be provided. If it cannot be adequately demonstrated that in-situ production of the metabolites is not relevant for the risk assessment, provisions set out in point 7.2.2 shall be followed. No predicted environmental concentration calculations are needed for metabolites for which a hazard to human health or non-target organisms was identified that are produced in situ but are not present in the MPCA as manufactured. 7.2.2. Qualitative exposure assessment In case of identification of metabolites for which a hazard to human health or non-target organisms was identified (see points 5.5.1 and 8.8.1), a qualitative exposure assessment shall be performed on such metabolites where the information provided under point 7.2.1 is not sufficient to conclude on acceptable risk to non-target organisms or on no-risks to human health. If required, the assessment may be based on existing knowledge on: A weight of evidence approach shall be employed. Adequate justification for using read-across shall be provided (e.g. between different substances, members of a species, climatic conditions). 7.2.3. Experimental exposure data Experimental exposure data shall be provided for the metabolites of concern identified under point 2.8 for which the information provided under points 7.2.1 and 7.2.2 is not sufficient to conclude on acceptable risk to non-target organisms, or on no-risks to human health. In such cases and if technically possible, sufficient information on the concentration of the metabolite of concern in the relevant environmental compartments (e.g. soil, surface water, groundwater, air, flowers, leaves, roots, host organisms) shall be provided to permit an assessment. The study shall be conducted in accordance with the relevant provisions of Part A for the relevant type of study. 8. ECOTOXICOLOGICAL STUDIES Introduction 8.1. Effects on terrestrial vertebrates A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to terrestrial vertebrates (e.g. mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians) shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3, 5 and 7 and that information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant pathogenicity/infectivity studies shall be performed unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that pathogenicity/infectivity of the micro-organism to non-target terrestrial vertebrates can be assessed based on the summary provided. If these studies are required: 8.2. Effects on aquatic organisms 8.2.1. Effects on fish A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to fish shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant pathogenicity/infectivity studies shall be performed unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that: Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.2.2. Effects on aquatic invertebrates A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to aquatic invertebrates shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant pathogenicity/infectivity studies shall be performed unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that: Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.2.3. Effects on algae A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to algae shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant studies on pathogenic/infective effects on algae growth and growth rate shall be performed if the micro-organism is known to have an herbicidal mode of action or to be closely related to a plant pathogen, unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that: Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.2.4. Effects on aquatic macrophytes A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to aquatic macrophytes shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant studies on pathogenic/infective effects on aquatic macrophytes shall be performed if the micro-organism is known to have an herbicidal mode of action, or to be closely related to a plant pathogen, unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that: Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.3. Effects on bees A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to bees shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant pathogenicity/infectivity studies, including adult and larval stages, shall be performed, unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that: Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. field studies under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.4. Effects on non-target arthropods other than bees A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to non-target arthropods other than bees shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant pathogenicity/infectivity studies shall be performed unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that: If studies are required, they shall be performed on two arthropod species other than bees playing a role in biological control and comprising different taxonomic groups (orders), where possible, for which agreed testing protocols are available, and the applicant shall provide a justification for number and taxonomy of the tested species. Moreover, these tests may require conditions affecting growth or viability of the micro-organism. Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. extended laboratory tests or field studies under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.5. Effects on non-target meso- and macro-organisms in soil A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to non-target soil meso- and macro-organisms shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant pathogenicity/infectivity studies shall be performed unless: If studies are required, they shall be performed on two non-target meso- and macro-organisms species chosen based on the biological properties of the micro-organism under evaluation, where possible, for which agreed testing protocols are available. Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.6. Effects on non-target terrestrial plants A summary on potential infectivity and pathogenicity of the micro-organism to non-target terrestrial plants shall be provided, based on the information already provided under Sections 1, 2, 3 and 7 and on other information which may be retrieved from any other reliable source. Relevant studies on pathogenic/infective effects on non-target terrestrial plants shall be performed if the micro-organism is known to have an herbicidal mode of action or to be closely related to a plant pathogen, unless the applicant demonstrates, by following a weight of evidence approach, that: Where adverse effects are observed in such studies, further relevant studies (e.g. under representative conditions in accordance with the proposed conditions of use) shall be performed. 8.7. Additional studies on the micro-organism Further data may need to be submitted on potential pathogenicity/infectivity of the micro-organism on non-target species different from those species assessed to fulfil the requirements set out in points 8.1 to 8.6. The data may also consist of a summary including the information already provided under Sections 2, 3, 5 and 7 and those which may be retrieved from any other source, or from additional infectivity and pathogenicity studies. 8.8. Information and toxicity studies on metabolites 8.8.1. Information on metabolites Information (e.g. scientific literature, studies results) on the toxicological characterization of the metabolites and the related identified hazards relevant to non-target organisms, collected or generated with the aim to identify the metabolites of concern , or to exclude them as being of concern, shall be submitted. For those metabolites for which a hazard to non-target organisms is identified, an estimation of exposure of the relevant non-target organisms shall be provided under point 7.2.1. 8.8.2. Additional toxicity studies on metabolites of concern For metabolite(s) of concern, identified based on information provided on hazard to (see point 8.8.1) and exposure of (see points 7.2.1 and 7.2.2) non-target organisms and listed under point 2.8, further information on their toxicity to the non-target organisms which are relevant (e.g. based on exposure and indication of toxicity) among those described in points 8.1 to 8.6, shall be provided. In case it is necessary to generate experimental data, relevant studies on ecotoxicology as provided for in Section 8 of Part A shall be submitted.’ ( 1 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/1760 of 26 May 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing the criteria for the designation of antimicrobials to be reserved for the treatment of certain infections in humans ( OJ L 353, 6.10.2021, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on veterinary medicinal products and repealing Directive 2001/82/EC ( OJ L 4, 7. 1.2019, p.43 ). ( 3 ) ( 4 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Council Directive 98/24/EC of 7 April 1998 on the protection of the health and safety of workers from the risks related to chemical agents at work (fourteenth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) ( OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, p. 11 ). ( 7 )