COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/1773 of 17 August 2023 laying down the rules for the application of Regulation (EU) 2023/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards reporting obligations for the purposes of the carbon border adjustment mechanism during the transitional period (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2023/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 establishing a carbon border adjustment mechanism ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 35(7) thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation lays down rules for reporting obligations laid down in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2023/956 in respect of goods listed in Annex I to that Regulation imported into the customs territory of the Union during the transitional period from 1 October 2023 to 31 December 2025 (‘transitional period’). Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: CHAPTER II RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF REPORTING DECLARANTS RELATED TO REPORTING Article 3 Reporting obligations of reporting declarants 1. Each reporting declarant shall provide, based on the data, that the operator may communicate, as provided in Annex III to this Regulation, the following information regarding goods listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2023/956 imported during the quarter to which the CBAM report relates: 2. Each reporting declarant shall provide the following information regarding the embedded emissions of the goods listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2023/956, as listed in Annex I to this Regulation, in the CBAM reports: 3. For specific embedded indirect emissions, each reporting declarant shall report the following information, as listed in Annex I to this Regulation, in the CBAM reports: 4. Where the rules for determining data are different from the ones indicated in Annex III to this Regulation, the reporting declarant shall provide additional information and description on the methodological basis of the rules used to determine the embedded emissions. The rules described shall lead to similar coverage and accuracy of emissions data, including systems boundaries, production processes monitored, emission factors and other methods employed for the calculations and reporting. 5. For the purposes of reporting, the reporting declarant may request that the operator uses an electronic template provided by the Commission and provide the content of the communication in Sections 1 and 2 of Annex IV. Article 4 Calculation of embedded emissions 1. For the purpose of Article 3(2), the specific embedded emissions of goods produced in an installation shall be determined using one of the following methods, which are based on the choice of monitoring methodology determined in accordance with point B.2 of Annex III to this Regulation, consisting of either: 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, until 31 December 2024, the specific embedded emissions of goods produced in an installation may be determined using one of the following monitoring and reporting methods, if they lead to similar coverage and accuracy of emissions data compared to the methods listed in that paragraph: 3. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2, until 31 July 2024 for each import of goods for which the reporting declarant does not have all the information listed in Article 3(2) and (3), the reporting declarant may use other methods for determining the emissions, including default values made available and published by the Commission for the transitional period or any other default values as specified in Annex III. In such cases, the reporting declarant shall indicate and reference in the CBAM reports the methodology followed for establishing such values. Article 5 Use of estimated values By way of derogation from Article 4, up to 20 % of the total embedded emissions of complex goods may be based on estimations made available by the operators of the installations. Article 6 Data collection and reporting regarding inward processing 1. For goods placed under inward processing and subsequently released for free circulation either as the same goods or as processed products, the reporting declarant shall submit in the CBAM reports, for the quarter following the quarter where the discharge from customs procedure occurred in accordance with Article 257 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, the following information: 2. The reporting and calculation of the embedded emissions referred to in paragraph 1 points (b) and (f) shall be done in accordance with Articles 3, 4 and 5. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, when processed products or goods placed under the inward processing are released for free circulation in accordance with Article 170(1) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446, the embedded emissions referred to in paragraph 1 points (b) and (f) shall be calculated on the basis of the weighted average embedded emissions of the totality of the goods of the same CBAM goods category as defined in Annex II to this Regulation placed under the inward processing procedure from 1 October 2023. The embedded emissions referred to in the first subparagraph shall be calculated as follows: Article 7 Reporting of information regarding the carbon price due 1. Where applicable, the reporting declarant shall provide in the CBAM reports the following information regarding the carbon price due in a country of origin for the embedded emissions: 2. The monetary amounts referred to in paragraph 1 point (e), will be converted into euro based on the average exchange rates of the year preceding to the year when the report is due. The yearly average exchange rates shall be based on quotations published by the European Central Bank. For currencies for which a quotation is not published by the European Central Bank, the yearly average exchange rates shall be based on publicly available information about the effective exchange rates. The yearly average exchange rates shall be provided by the Commission in the CBAM Transitional Registry. Article 8 Submission of CBAM reports 1. For each quarter from 1 October 2023 until 31 December 2025 the reporting declarant shall submit the CBAM reports to the CBAM Transitional Registry no later than one month after the end of that quarter. 2. In the CBAM Transitional Registry the reporting declarant shall provide information and indicate, whether: 3. Where an indirect customs representative does not agree to carry out reporting obligations of the importer under this Regulation, the indirect customs representative shall notify the importer of the obligation to comply with this Regulation. The notification shall include the information referred to in Article 33(1) of Regulation (EU) 2023/956. 4. The CBAM reports shall include the information in Annex I to this Regulation. 5. The CBAM report, once submitted in the CBAM Transitional Registry, shall be allocated a unique Report ID. Article 9 Modification and correction of CBAM reports 1. A reporting declarant may modify a submitted CBAM report until two months after the end of the relevant reporting quarter. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, a reporting declarant may modify the CBAM reports for the first two reporting periods until the submission deadline for the third CBAM report. 3. Upon a justified request of the reporting declarant, the competent authority shall assess that request and where appropriate shall allow the reporting declarant to resubmit a CBAM report or to correct it after the deadline referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 and within one year after the end of the relevant reporting quarter. The resubmission of the corrected CBAM report or the correction, as applicable, shall be made no later than a month following the approval by the competent authority. 4. The competent authorities shall motivate the refusal of the request provided in paragraph 3 and inform the reporting declarant on the rights to appeal. 5. A CBAM report pending a dispute may not be modified. It can be replaced to take into account the outcome of that dispute. CHAPTER III ADMINISTRATION REGARDING CBAM REPORTING Article 10 CBAM Transitional Registry 1. The CBAM Transitional Registry shall be a standardised and secure electronic database containing common data elements for reporting during the transitional period, and for providing access, case handling and confidentiality. 2. The CBAM Transitional Registry shall enable communication, checks and information exchange between the Commission, the competent authorities, customs authorities, and reporting declarants in accordance with Chapter V. Article 11 Checks of CBAM reports and use of information by the Commission 1. The Commission may check CBAM reports to assess compliance with the reporting obligations of reporting declarants within the transitional period and until three months after the last CBAM report should have been submitted. 2. The Commission shall use the CBAM Transitional Registry, and the information contained in that Registry to perform the tasks laid down in this Regulation and in Regulation (EU) 2023/956. Article 12 Indicative assessment by the Commission 1. For indicative purposes, the Commission shall communicate to the Member States a list of reporting declarants established in the Member State for which the Commission has reasons to believe they have failed to comply with the obligation to submit a CBAM report. 2. Where the Commission considers that a CBAM report does not contain all the information required in Articles 3 to 7 or considers a report incomplete or incorrect in accordance with Article 13, the Commission shall communicate the indicative assessment regarding that CBAM report to the competent authority in the Member State where the reporting declarant is established. Article 13 Incomplete or incorrect CBAM reports 1. A CBAM report shall be considered incomplete where the reporting declarant has failed to report in accordance with Annex I to this Regulation. 2. A CBAM report shall be considered incorrect in any of the following cases: Article 14 Assessment of CBAM reports and use of information by the competent authorities 1. The competent authority of the Member State of establishment of the reporting declarant shall initiate the review and assess the data, information, list of reporting declarants communicated by the Commission and indicative assessment as referred to in Article 12 within three months from the communication of that list or indicative assessment. 2. The competent authorities shall use the CBAM Transitional Registry, and the information contained in that Registry, to perform the tasks laid down in this Regulation and Regulation (EU) 2023/956. 3. Within the transitional period or thereafter, the competent authorities may initiate the correction procedure regarding any of the following: 4. Where the competent authority initiates the correction procedure, the reporting declarant shall be notified that the report is under review, and that additional information is required. The request for additional information by the competent authority shall include the information required in Articles 3 to 7. The reporting declarant shall submit the additional information through the CBAM Transitional Registry. 5. The competent authority, or any other authority appointed by the competent authroity, shall grant the authorisation to access the CBAM Transitional Registry and manage the registration at national level taking into consideration the EORI number in accordance with the technical arrangement set out in Article 20. Article 15 Confidentiality 1. All decisions of the competent authorities and information acquired by the competent authority in the course of performing its duty related to reporting under this Regulation, which is confidential, or which is provided on a confidential basis shall be covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. Such information shall not be disclosed by the competent authority without the express permission of the person or authority that provided it. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, such information may be disclosed without permission where this Regulation provides for it and where the competent authority is obliged or authorised to disclose it by virtue of Union or national law. 2. Competent authorities may communicate confidential information referred to in paragraph 1 to customs authorities of the Union. 3. Any disclosure or communication of information as referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be made in compliance with applicable data protection provisions. CHAPTER IV ENFORCEMENT Article 16 Penalties 1. Member States shall apply penalties in the following cases: 2. The amount of the penalty shall be between EUR 10 and EUR 50 per tonne of unreported emissions. The penalty shall increase in accordance with the European index of consumer prices. 3. When determining the actual amount of a penalty, for the unreported emissions calculated on the basis of the default values made available and published by the Commission for the transitional period, the competent authorities shall consider the following factors: 4. Higher penalties shall be applied when more than two incomplete or incorrect reports within the meaning of Article 13 have been submitted in a row or the duration of the failure to report exceeds 6 months. CHAPTER V TECHNICAL ELEMENTS REGARDING THE CBAM TRANSITIONAL REGISTRY SECTION 1 Introduction Article 17 Central system in scope 1. The CBAM Transitional Registry shall be interoperable with: 2. The CBAM Transitional Registry shall be interoperable with decentralised systems as developed or upgraded through the Implementing Decision (EU) 2019/2151, for the purpose of retrieving information on Customs Imports Declarations for goods listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2023/956, as specified in Annex VI and Annex VII to this Regulation, and for checking the CBAM reports and ensuring compliance of the reporting declarants when that information is not available in the SURV3 system. Article 18 Contact points for the electronic systems The Commission and Member States shall designate contact points for each of the electronic systems referred to in Article 17 of this Regulation, for the purposes of exchanging information to ensure a coordinated development, operation, and maintenance of those electronic systems. The Commission and Member States shall communicate the details of these contact points to each other and inform each other immediately of any changes to those details. SECTION 2 CBAM Transitional Registry Article 19 Structure of the CBAM Transitional Registry The CBAM Transitional Registry shall consist of the following common components (‘common components’): Article 20 Terms of collaboration in the CBAM Transitional Registry 1. The Commission shall propose the Terms of Collaboration, Service Level Agreement, and security Plan, for agreement with the competent authorities. The Commission shall operate the CBAM Transitional Registry in compliance with the terms agreed. 2. The CBAM Transitional Registry shall be used with respect to the CBAM reports and to the Import Declarations Records to which these reports relate. Article 21 The CBAM User Access Management 1. The authentication and access verification of the reporting declarant for the goods listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2023/956, for the purposes of access to the components of the CBAM Registry shall be done using the UUM&DS system as referred to in Article 17(1), point (a). 2. The Commission shall provide the authentication services allowing the users of the CBAM Transitional Registry to securely access that Registry. 3. The Commission shall use UUM&DS to grant the authorisation to access the CBAM Transitional Registry to its staff and to provide the delegations to the competent authorities to issue their authorisations. 4. The competent authorities shall use UUM&DS to grant the authorisation to access the CBAM Transitional Registry to their staff and to the reporting declarants established in their Member State. 5. A competent authority may opt to use an identity and access management system set up in their Member State pursuant to Article 26 of this Regulation (national Customs eIDAS system) to provide the necessary credentials to access the CBAM Transitional Registry. Article 22 CBAM Trader Portal 1. The CBAM Trader Portal shall be the unique entry point to the CBAM Transitional Registry for the reporting declarants. The portal shall be accessible from the internet. 2. The CBAM Trader Portal shall interoperate with the CBAM Registry Back End services. 3. The CBAM Trader Portal shall be used by the reporting declarant for: 4. The CBAM Trader Portal shall offer facilities for the reporting declarants to store the information about third countries installations and embedded emissions for their later re-use. 5. The access to the CBAM Trader Portal shall be exclusively managed by the CBAM Access Management referred to in Article 26. Article 23 CBAM Competent Authorities Portal (CBAM CAP) for the CBAM National Competent Authorities (CBAM CAP/N) 1. The CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the National Competent Authorities shall be the unique entry point to the CBAM Transitional Registry for the competent authorities. The portal shall be accessible from the internet. 2. The CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the National Competent authorities shall interoperate with the CBAM Registry Back End services via the internal network of the Commission. 3. The CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the National Competent Authorities shall be used by the competent authorities to carry out the tasks laid down in this Regulation and in Regulation (EU) 2023/956. 4. The access to the CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the National Competent Authorities shall be exclusively managed by the CBAM Access Management referred to in Article 26. Article 24 CBAM Competent Authorities Portal (CBAM CAP) for the Commission (CBAM CAP/C) 1. The CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the Commission shall be the unique entry point to the CBAM Transitional Registry for the Commission. The portal shall be accessible on the Commission internal network and the internet. 2. The CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the Commission shall interoperate with the CBAM Registry Back End services over the internal network of the Commission. 3. The CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the Commission shall be used by the Commission to perform the tasks laid down in this Regulation and in Regulation (EU) 2023/956. 4. The access to the CBAM Competent Authorities Portal for the Commission shall be exclusively managed by the CBAM Access Management referred to in Article 26. Article 25 The CBAM Registry Back End Services (CBAM BE) 1. The CBAM Registry Back End Services shall serve all requests placed by: 2. The CBAM Registry Back End Services shall store centrally and manage all the information entrusted to the CBAM Transitional Registry. It shall guarantee their persistence, integrity, and coherence of that information. 3. The CBAM Registry Back End Services shall be managed by the Commission. 4. The access to the CBAM Registry Back End Services shall be exclusively managed by the CBAM Access Management referred to in Article 26. Article 26 Access management system The Commission shall set up the access management system to validate the access requests submitted by reporting declarants and other persons within the UUM&DS system as referred to in Article 17(1), point (a) by connecting the Member States’ identity and the EU identity and access management systems pursuant to Article 27. Article 27 Administration management system The Commission shall set up the administration management system to manage the authentication and authorisation, the identification data of reporting declarants and other persons for the purposes of allowing access to the electronic systems. Article 28 Member States’ identity and access management systems The Member States shall set up or use existing an identity and access management systems to ensure: SECTION 3 Functioning of the electronic systems and training in the use thereof Article 29 Development, testing, deployment, and management of the electronic systems 1. The CBAM Transitional Registry common components shall be developed, tested, deployed, and managed by the Commission, and may be tested by the Member States. The competent authority of the Member State of establishment of the reporting declarant shall communicate the decisions on penalties with the respective outcome of that process to the Commission, by electronic systems developed at national level, linked to enforcement and penalties, or by other means. 2. The Commission shall design and maintain the common specifications of the interfaces with components of electronic systems developed at national level in close cooperation with the Member States. 3. Where appropriate, common technical specifications shall be defined by the Commission in close cooperation with, and subject to review by the Member States, with a view to deploying them in due time. The Member States and, where appropriate, the Commission shall engage in the development and deployment of the systems. The Commission and the Member States shall also collaborate with reporting declarants and other stakeholders. Article 30 Maintenance and changes to the electronic systems 1. The Commission shall perform the maintenance of the common components and the Member States shall perform the maintenance of their national components. 2. The Commission shall ensure uninterrupted operation of the electronic systems. 3. The Commission may change the common components of the electronic systems to correct malfunctions, to add new functionalities or to alter existing ones. 4. The Commission shall inform the Member States of changes and updates to the common components. 5. The Commission shall make the information on the changes and updates to the electronic systems set out in paragraphs 3 and 4 publicly available. Article 31 Temporary failure of the electronic systems 1. In the event of a temporary failure of the CBAM Transitional Registry, reporting declarants and other persons shall submit the information required to fulfil the required formalities by the means determined by the Commission, including by means other than electronic data-processing techniques. 2. The Commission shall inform Member States and reporting declarants about any unavailability of the electronic systems resulting from a temporary failure. 3. The Commission shall prepare a CBAM business continuity plan to be agreed between the Member States and the Commission. In case of temporary failure of the CBAM Transitional Registry, the Commission shall evaluate the conditions to activate it. Article 32 Training support on the use and functioning of the common components The Commission shall support the Member States on the use and functioning of the common components of the electronic systems by providing the appropriate training material. SECTION 4 Data protection, data management and the ownership and security of the electronic systems Article 33 Personal data protection 1. The personal data registered in the CBAM Transitional Registry, and the components of electronic systems developed at national level shall be processed for the purposes of implementing the Regulation (EU) 2023/956 having regard to the specific objectives of those databases as set out in this Regulation. The purposes for which the personal data could be processed shall be the following: 2. The Member States’ national supervisory authorities in the field of personal data protection and the European Data Protection Supervisor shall cooperate, in accordance with Article 62 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, to ensure coordinated supervision of the processing of personal data registered in the CBAM Transitional Registry and the components of electronic systems developed at national level. 3. The provisions contained in this Article shall be without prejudice to the right to rectification of personal data in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Article 34 Limitation of data access and data processing 1. The data registered in the CBAM Transitional Registry by a reporting declarant may be accessed or otherwise processed by that reporting declarant. It may also be accessed and otherwise processed by the Commission and competent authorities. 2. Where incidents and problems in the operational processes are identified in the provision of the services of the systems where the Commission act as a processor, the Commission may have access to the data in these processes only for the purpose of resolving a registered incident or problem. The Commission shall ensure the confidentiality of such data. Article 35 System ownership The Commission shall be the system owner of the CBAM Transitional Registry. Article 36 System security 1. The Commission shall ensure the security of the CBAM Transitional Registry. 2. For those purposes, the Commission and Member States shall take the necessary measures to: 3. The Commission and the Member States shall inform each other of any activities that might result in a breach or a suspected breach of the security of the CBAM Transitional Registry. 4. The Commission and the Member States shall establish security plans concerning the CBAM Transitional Registry. Article 37 Controller for the CBAM Transitional Registry For the CBAM Transitional Registry and in relation to the processing of personal data, the Commission and Member States shall act as joint controllers as defined in Article 4, point (7), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and as defined in Article 3, point (8) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725. Article 38 Data retention period 1. In order to achieve the objectives pursued under this Regulation and Regulation (EU) 2023/956, in particular Article 30 thereof, the data retention period for the data in the CBAM Transitional Registry shall be limited to 5 years from the reception of the CBAM report. 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, where an appeal has been lodged or where court proceedings have begun involving data stored in the CBAM Transitional Registry, those data shall be retained until the appeal procedure or court proceedings are terminated and shall only be used for the purpose of the aforementioned appeal procedure or court proceedings. Article 39 Assessment of the electronic systems The Commission and the Member States shall conduct assessments of the components they are responsible for and shall, in particular, analyse the security and integrity of those components and the confidentiality of the data processed within those components. The Commission and the Member States shall inform each other of the results of those assessments. Article 40 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 17 August 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 130, 16.5.2023, p. 52 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 of 19 December 2018 on the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and amending Commission Regulation (EU) No 601/2012 ( OJ L 334, 31.12.2018, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources ( OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC ( OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32 ). ( 5 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2018 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and Decision No 1247/2002/EC (EU Data Protection Regulation) ( OJ L 295, 21.11.2018, p. 39 ). ( 6 ) Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) ( OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1070 of 1 June 2023 on technical arrangements for developing, maintaining and employing electronic systems for the exchange and storage of information under Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and the Council ( OJ L 143, 2.6.2023, p. 65 ). ( 8 ) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2019/2151 of 13 December 2019 establishing the work programme relating to the development and deployment of the electronic systems provided for in the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 325, 16.12.2019, p. 168 ). ( 9 ) Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (TARIC) ( OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1 ). ( 10 ) Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1 ). ( 11 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code ( OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1 ). ANNEX I Information to be submitted in the CBAM reports The reporting declarant shall follow the CBAM report structure listed in Table 1 of this Annex and provided in the CBAM Transitional Registry, and include the detailed information listed in Table 2 of this Annex, when submitting the CBAM report. Table 1 CBAM report structure Table 2 Detailed information requirements in the CBAM report ( *1 ) Note: Representatives/importers shall be registered either at CBAM report level or at the CBAM goods imported level, which shall depend on whether the same or different representatives/importers are related to CBAM goods imported. ( *2 ) Note: Representatives/importers shall be registered either at CBAM report level or at the CBAM goods imported level, which shall depend on whether the same or different representatives/importers are related to CBAM goods imported. ANNEX II Definitions and production routes for goods 1. DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this Annex and of Annexes III, IV and VIII to IX the following definitions shall apply: 2. MAPPING OF CN CODES TO AGGREGATED GOODS CATEGORIES Table 1 of this Annex defines aggregated goods categories for each CN code listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2023/956. Those categories are used for the purpose of defining system boundaries of production processes for the determination of embedded emissions corresponding to the goods listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2023/956. Table 1 Mapping of CN codes to aggregated goods categories 3. PRODUCTION ROUTES, SYSTEM BOUNDARIES AND RELEVANT PRECURSORS 3.1. Cross-sectoral rules For determining the activity level (quantity produced) of the goods, which is used as denominator in Equations 50 and 51 (Section F.1 of Annex III), the monitoring rules of Section F.2 of Annex III shall apply. Where several production routes are used in the same installation for producing goods falling under the same CN code, and where those production routes are assigned separate production processes, the embedded emissions of those goods shall be calculated separately for each production route. For the monitoring of direct emissions, all emission sources and source streams associated with the production process shall be monitored, taking into account specific requirements laid down in Sections 3.2 to 3.19 of this Annex, where relevant, and the rules laid down in Annex III. Where CO 2 capture is used, the rules of Section B.8.2 of Annex III shall apply. For the monitoring of indirect emissions, the total electricity consumption of each production process shall be determined, within the system boundaries defined in line with Sections 3.2 to 3.19 of this Annex and in accordance with Section A.4 of Annex III, where relevant. The relevant emission factor of electricity shall be determined in accordance with Section D.2 of Annex III. If relevant precursors are specified, they refer to the corresponding aggregated goods categories. 3.2. Calcined clay 3.2.1. Special provisions Clays falling under CN code 2507 00 80 which are not calcined, are assigned embedded emissions of zero. They shall be included in the CBAM report, but no additional information from the producer of the clay is required. The following provisions relate only to clays falling under that CN code and that are calcined. 3.2.2. Production route For calcined clay, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: none. 3.3. Cement clinker 3.3.1. Special provisions No distinction shall be made between grey and white cement clinker. 3.3.2. Production route For cement clinker, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: none. 3.4. Cement 3.4.1. Special provisions 3.4.2. Production route For cement, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.5. Aluminous cement 3.5.1. Special provisions 3.5.2. Production route For aluminous cement, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: none. 3.6. Hydrogen 3.6.1. Special provisions Only the production of pure hydrogen or mixtures of hydrogen with nitrogen usable in ammonia production shall be considered. Not covered are the production of synthesis gas or of hydrogen within refineries or organic chemical installations, where hydrogen is exclusively used within those plants and not used for the production of goods listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2023/956. 3.6.2. Production routes 3.6.2.1. Steam reforming and partial oxidation For those production routes, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: none. 3.6.2.2. Electrolysis of water For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass, if relevant: Indirect emissions: Where the produced hydrogen has been certified to comply with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/1184 ( 1 ) , an emission factor of zero for the electricity may be used. In all other cases, the rules on indirect embedded emissions (Section D of Annex III) shall apply. Relevant precursors: none. Attribution of emissions to products: Where the co-produced oxygen is vented, all emissions of the production process shall be attributed to hydrogen. Where by-product oxygen is used in other production processes at the installation or sold, and where direct or indirect emissions are not equal to zero, the emissions of the production process shall be attributed to hydrogen based on molar proportions using the following equation: Where: 3.6.2.3. Chlor-Alkali electrolysis and production of chlorates For those production routes, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass, if relevant: Indirect emissions: Where the produced hydrogen has been certified to comply with Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/1184, an emission factor of zero for the electricity may be used. In all other cases, the rules on indirect embedded emissions (Section D of Annex III) shall apply. Relevant precursors: none. Attribution of emissions to products: As hydrogen is considered a by-product in this production process, only a molar proportion of the overall process shall be attributed to the fraction of hydrogen sold or used as a precursor within the installation. Provided that direct or indirect emissions are not equal to zero, the emissions of the production process shall be attributed to hydrogen used or sold using the following equations: Chlor-Alkali electrolysis: Production of Sodium Chlorate: Where: 3.7. Ammonia 3.7.1. Special provisions Both hydrous and anhydrous ammonia shall be reported jointly as 100 % ammonia. Where CO 2 from ammonia production is used as feedstock for the production of urea or other chemicals, point (b) of Section B.8.2 of Annex III shall apply. Where a deduction of CO 2 is allowed according to that section and where it would lead to negative specific embedded direct emissions of ammonia, the specific embedded direct emissions of ammonia shall be zero. 3.7.2. Production routes 3.7.2.1. Haber-Bosch process with steam reforming of natural gas or biogas For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: separately produced hydrogen, if used in the process. 3.7.2.2. Haber-Bosch process with gasification of coal or other fuels That route applies where hydrogen is produced by gasification of coal, heavy refinery fuels or other fossil feedstock. Input materials may include biomass, for which the provisions of Section B.3.3 of Annex III shall be taken into account. For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: separately produced hydrogen, if used in the process. 3.8. Nitric acid 3.8.1. Special provisions Amounts of nitric acid produced shall be monitored and reported as 100 % nitric acid. 3.8.2. Production route For nitric acid, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: Ammonia (as 100 % ammonia). 3.9. Urea 3.9.1. Special provisions Where the CO 2 used in the production of urea stems from ammonia production, it is accounted for as subtraction in the embedded emissions of ammonia as precursor of urea, if the provisions of Section 3.7 of this Annex allow such deduction. However, where ammonia produced without direct fossil CO 2 emissions is used as a precursor, the used CO 2 may be deducted from the direct emissions of the installation producing the CO 2 , provided that the delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 12(3b) of Directive 2003/87/EC defines urea production as a case where CO 2 is permanently chemically bound so that it does not enter the atmosphere under normal use, including any normal activity taking place after the end of the life of the product. Where such deduction would lead to negative specific direct embedded emissions of urea, the specific direct embedded emissions of urea shall be zero. 3.9.2. Production route For urea, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: Ammonia (as 100 % ammonia). 3.10. Mixed fertilisers 3.10.1. Special provisions This section applies to the production of all kinds of nitrogen containing fertilisers, including ammonium nitrate, calcium ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulphate, ammonium phosphates, urea ammonium nitrate solutions, as well as nitrogen-phosphorus (NP), nitrogen-potassium (NK) and nitrogen-phosphorus-potassium (NPK) fertilisers. All kinds of operations are included such as mixing, neutralisation, granulation, prilling, irrespective of whether only physical mixing or chemical reactions take place. The amounts of different nitrogen compounds contained in the final product shall be recorded in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1009 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 2 ) : The direct and indirect emissions of the production processes falling under this aggregated goods category may be determined for the whole reporting period and attributed to all mixed fertilisers on a pro-rata basis per tonne of final product. For each fertiliser grade, embedded emissions shall be calculated separately taking into account the relevant mass of precursors used and applying average embedded emissions during the reporting period for each of the precursors. 3.10.2. Production route For mixed fertilisers, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.11. Sintered ore 3.11.1. Special provisions This aggregated goods category includes all kinds of iron ore pellet production (for sale of pellets as well as for direct use in the same installation) and sinter production. To the extent covered by CN code 2601 12 00, also iron ores used as precursors for ferro-chromium (FeCr), ferro-manganese (FeMn) or ferro-nickel (FeNi) may be covered. 3.11.2. Production route For sintered ore, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: none. 3.12. FeMn (Ferro-Manganese), FeCr (Ferro-Chromium) and FeNi (Ferro-Nickel) 3.12.1. Special provisions This process covers only the production of the alloys identified under CN codes 7202 1, 7202 4 and 7202 6. Other iron materials with significant alloy content such as spiegeleisen are not covered. NPI (nickel pig iron) is included if the nickel content is greater than 10 %. Where waste gases or other flue gases are emitted without abatement, CO contained in the waste gas shall be considered as the molar equivalent of CO 2 emissions. 3.12.2. Production route For FeMn, FeCr and FeNi, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: Sintered ore, if used in the process. 3.13. Pig iron 3.13.1. Special provisions This aggregated goods category includes non-alloyed pig iron from blast furnaces as well as alloy-containing pig irons (e.g. spiegeleisen), irrespective of the physical form (e.g. ingots, granules). NPI (nickel pig iron) is included if the nickel content is lower than 10 %. In integrated steel plants, liquid pig iron (‘hot metal’) directly charged to the oxygen converter is the product which separates the production process for pig iron from the production process of crude steel. Where the installation does not sell or transfer pig iron to other installations, there is no need to monitor emissions from pig iron production separately. A common production process including crude steel making and, subject to the rules of Section A.4 of Annex III, further downstream production may be defined. 3.13.2. Production routes 3.13.2.1. Blast furnace route For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.13.2.2. Smelting reduction For this production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.14. DRI (Direct Reduced Iron) 3.14.1. Special provisions There is only one production route defined, although different technologies may use different qualities of ores, which may require pelletisation or sintering, and different reducing agents (natural gas, diverse fossil fuels or biomass, hydrogen). Therefore, precursors sintered ore or hydrogen may be relevant. As products, iron sponge, hot briquetted iron (HBI) or other forms of direct reduced iron may be relevant, including DRI which is immediately fed to electric arc furnaces or other downstream processes. Where the installation does not sell or transfer DRI to other installations, there is no need to monitor emissions from DRI production separately. A common production process including steel making and, subject to the rules of Section A.4 of Annex III, further downstream production may be used. 3.14.2. Production route For this production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.15. Crude steel 3.15.1. Special provisions The system boundaries shall cover all necessary activities and units for obtaining crude steel: 3.15.2. Production routes 3.15.2.1. Basic oxygen steelmaking For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.15.2.2. Electric arc furnace For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.16. Iron or steel products 3.16.1. Special provisions Subject to the rules of Section A.4 of Annex III and Sections 3.11 to 3.15 of this Annex, the production process for iron or steel products may apply to the following cases: Double counting or gaps in the monitoring of production processes of an installation shall be avoided. The following production steps shall be covered by the production process of ‘iron or steel products’: For products that contain more than 5 % by mass of other materials, e.g. insulation materials in CN code 7309 00 30, only the mass of iron or steel shall be reported as the mass of the goods produced. 3.16.2. Production route For iron or steel products, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.17. Unwrought aluminium 3.17.1. Special provisions This aggregated goods category includes non-alloyed as well as alloyed aluminium, in physical form typical for unwrought metals, such as ingots, slabs, billets or granules. In integrated aluminium plants, liquid aluminium directly charged to the production of aluminium products is included, too. Where the installation does not sell or transfer unwrought aluminium to other installations, there is no need to monitor emissions from unwrought aluminium production separately. A common production process including unwrought aluminium and, subject to the rules of Section A.4 of Annex III, further processes to produce aluminium products may be defined. 3.17.2. Production routes 3.17.2.1. Primary (electrolytic) smelting For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: none. 3.17.2.2. Secondary melting (recycling) Secondary melting (recycling) of aluminium uses aluminium scrap as main input. However, where unwrought aluminium from other sources is added, it is treated like a precursor. Furthermore, where the product of this process contains more than 5 % alloying elements, the embedded emissions of the product shall be calculated as if the mass of alloying elements were unwrought aluminium from primary smelting. For that production route, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.18. Aluminium products 3.18.1. Special provisions Subject to the rules of Section A.4 of Annex III and Section 3.17 of this Annex, the production process for aluminium products may apply to the following cases: Double counting or gaps in the monitoring of production processes of an installation shall be avoided. The following production steps shall be covered by the production process of ‘aluminium products’: Where the product contains more than 5 % by mass alloying elements, the embedded emissions of the product are shall be calculated as if the mass of alloying elements were unwrought aluminium from primary smelting. For products that contain more than 5 % by mass of other materials, e.g. insulation materials in CN code 7611 00 00 only the mass of aluminum shall be reported as the mass of the goods produced. 3.18.2. Production route For aluminium products, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: 3.19. Electricity 3.19.1. Special provisions For electricity, only direct emissions shall be monitored and reported. The emission factor for electricity shall be determined in accordance with Section D.2 of Annex III. 3.19.2. Production routes For electricity, direct emissions monitoring shall encompass: Relevant precursors: none. ( 1 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/1184 of 10 February 2023 supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing a Union methodology setting out detailed rules for the production of renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-biological origin ( OJ L 157, 20.6.2023, p. 11 ). ( 2 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 laying down rules on the making available on the market of EU fertilising products and amending Regulations (EC) No 1069/2009 and (EC) No 1107/2009 and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003 ( OJ L 170, 25.6.2019, p. 1 ). ANNEX III Rules for determining data including on emissions at installation level, attributed emissions of production processes, and embedded emissions of goods A. PRINCIPLES A.1. Overall approach A.2. Monitoring principles For the monitoring of actual data at installation level, and for data sets necessary for attributing emissions to goods, the following principles shall apply: A.3. Methods representing the best available data source A.4. Division of installations into production processes Installations shall be divided into production processes with system boundaries which ensure that relevant inputs, outputs and emissions can be monitored in accordance with Sections B to E of this Annex and direct and indirect emissions can be attributed to groups of goods defined in Section 2 of Annex II, by applying the rules of Section F of this Annex. Installations shall be divided into production processes as follows: B. MONITORING OF DIRECT EMISSIONS AT INSTALLATION LEVEL B.1. Completeness of source streams and emission sources The boundaries of the installation and its production processes shall be clearly known to the operator and defined in the monitoring methodology documentation, taking into account the sector-specific requirements laid down in Section 2 of Annex II as well as Section B.9 of this Annex. The following principles shall apply: B.2. Choice of monitoring methodology The applicable methodology shall be either: By way of derogation, other methodologies may be used under the conditions specified in Articles 4(2), 4(3) and 5 of this Regulation. The monitoring methodology that gives the most accurate and reliable results shall be chosen, except where sector-specific requirements in accordance with Section B.9 require one particular methodology. The applied monitoring methodology may be a combination of methodologies such that different parts of the installation’s emissions are monitored by either of the applicable methodologies. The monitoring methodology documentation shall clearly identify: The installation’s emissions shall be determined by Where: B.3. Formulae and parameters for the calculation-based methodology for CO 2 B.3.1. Standard method Emissions shall be calculated separately for each source stream as follows: B.3.1.1. Combustion emissions Combustion emissions shall be calculated using the standard method as follows: Where: The conservative assumption that OF = 1 may always be used in order to reduce monitoring efforts. Provided that this leads to a higher accuracy, the standard method for combustion emissions may be modified as follows: If the emission factor of a fuel i is to be calculated from the analyses of carbon content and NCV, the following equation shall be used: If the emission factor of a material or fuel expressed in t CO 2 /t is to be calculated from an analysed carbon content, the following equation is used: Where: As the emission factor of biomass shall be zero provided that the criteria given in Section B.3.3 are met, this fact may be taken into account for mixed fuels (i.e. fuels which contain both fossil and biomass components) as follows: Where: For fossil fuels and where the biomass fraction is not known, BF i shall be set to the conservative value zero. B.3.1.2. Process emissions Process emissions shall be calculated using the standard method as follows: Where: The conservative assumption that CF j = 1 may always be used in order to reduce monitoring efforts. In the case of mixed process input materials which contain inorganic as well as organic forms of carbon, the operator may choose either: Considering the available measurement systems for activity data and methods for determining the emission factor, for emissions from the decomposition of carbonates, the method giving the more accurate results shall be chosen for each source stream from the following two methods: For CO 2 process emissions other than from carbonates, method A shall be applied. B.3.2. Mass balance method The CO 2 quantities relevant for each source stream shall be calculated based on the carbon content in each material, without distinguishing fuels and process materials. Carbon leaving the installation in products instead of being emitted is taken into account by output source streams, which have therefore negative activity data. The emissions corresponding to each source stream shall be calculated as follows: Where: If the carbon content of a fuel k is calculated from an emission factor expressed in t CO 2 /TJ, the following equation shall be used: If the carbon content of a material or fuel k is calculated from an emission factor expressed in t CO 2 /t, the following equation shall be used: For mixed fuels, meaning fuels which contain both fossil and biomass components or mixed materials, the biomass fraction may be taken into account, provided that the criteria provided in Section B.3.3 are met as follows: Where: For fossil fuels or materials and where the biomass fraction is not known, BF shall be set to the conservative value zero. Where biomass is used as input material or fuel, and output materials contain carbon, the overall mass balance shall treat the biomass fraction conservatively, meaning that the fraction of biomass in total output carbon shall not exceed the total fraction of biomass contained in input materials and fuels, except if the operator provides evidence of a higher biomass fraction in the output materials by a ‘trace the atom’ (stoichiometric) method or by 14 C analyses. B.3.3. Criteria for zero-rating of biomass emissions Where biomass is used as a fuel for combustion, it shall fulfil the criteria of this section. Where the biomass used for combustion does not comply with these criteria, its carbon content shall be considered as fossil carbon. B.3.4. Relevant parameters In line with the formulae given in Sections B.3.1 to B.3.3 of this Annex, the following parameters shall be determined for each source stream: B.4. Requirements for activity data B.4.1. Continual or batch-wise metering Where quantities of fuels or materials, including goods or intermediate products, have to be determined for a reporting period, one of the following methods may be chosen and laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation: Where it is technically not feasible or would incur unreasonable costs to determine quantities in stock by direct measurement, those quantities may be estimated based on one of the following: Where the determination of quantities of products, materials or fuels for the entire reporting period is technically not feasible or would incur unreasonable costs, the next most appropriate day may be chosen to separate a reporting period from the following one. It shall be reconciled accordingly to the reporting period required. The deviations involved for each product, material or fuel shall be clearly recorded to form the basis of a value representative for the reporting period and to be considered consistently in relation to the next year. B.4.2. Operator’s control over measurement systems The preferred method for determining quantities of products, materials or fuels shall be that the operator of the installation uses measurement systems under its own control. Measurement systems outside the operator’s own control, in particular if under the control of the supplier of the material or fuel, may be used in the following cases: In the case that measurement systems outside the operator’s own control are used, applicable data sources shall be the following: B.4.3. Requirements for measurement systems A thorough understanding of the uncertainty associated with metering quantities of fuels and materials, including the influence of the operating environment and, where applicable, the uncertainty of stock determination shall be available. Measuring instrauments shall be chosen that ensure the lowest uncertainty available without incurring unreasonable costs and that are fit for the environment they are used in, in accordance with applicable technical standards and requirements. If available, instruments subject to legal metrological control shall be preferred. In this case, the maximum permissible error in service allowed by the relevant national legislation on legal metrological control for the relevant measuring task may be used as the uncertainty value. Where a measuring instrument needs to be replaced because of malfunction or because calibration demonstrates that requirements are not met anymore, it shall be replaced by instruments that ensure meeting the same or a better uncertainty level compared to the existing instrument. B.4.4. Recommended improvement It is considered a recommended improvement to achieve a measurement uncertainty comensurate with the total emissions of the source stream or emission source, with lowest uncertainty for the biggest parts of the emissions. For orientation purposes, for emissions of more than 500 000 t CO 2 per year, the uncertainty over the full reporting period taking into account stock changes, if applicable, shall be 1,5 % or better. For emissions below 10 000 t CO 2 per year, uncertainty lower than 7,5 % shall be acceptable. B.5. Requirements for calculation factors for CO 2 B.5.1. Methods for determining calculation factors For the determination of calculation factors required for the calculation-based methodology, one of the following methods may be chosen: Calculation factors shall be determined consistently with the state used for related activity data, referring to the fuel’s or material’s state in which the fuel or material is purchased or used in the emission causing process, before it is dried or otherwise treated for laboratory analysis. Where this incurs unreasonable costs or where higher accuracy can be achieved, activity data and calculation factors may be consistently reported referring to the state in which laboratory analyses are carried out. B.5.2. Applicable standard values Type I standard values, shall be applicable only if no type II standard value is available for the same parameter and material or fuel. Type I standard values shall be the following: Type II standard values, shall be the following: In order to ensure consistency over time, any standard values used shall be laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation, and only changed if there is evidence that the new value is more adequate and representative for the fuel or material used than the previous one. Where the standard values change on an annual basis, the authoritative applicable source of that value shall be laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation instead of the value itself. B.5.3. Establishing correlations for determining proxy data A proxy for the carbon content or emission factor may be derived from the following parameters, in combination with an empirical correlation determined at least once per year in accordance with the requirements for laboratory analyses given in Section B.5.4 of this Annex as follows: The correlation has to satisfy the requirements of good industrial practice and may be applied only to values of the proxy which fall into the range for which it was established. B.5.4. Requirements for laboratory analyses Where laboratory analyses are required for determining properties (including moisture, purity, concentration, carbon content, biomass fraction, net calorific value, density) of products, materials, fuels or waste gases, or for establishing correlations between parameters for the purpose of indirect determination of required data, the analyses shall comply with the requirements of this section. The result of any analysis shall be used only for the delivery period or batch of fuel or material for which the samples have been taken, and for which the samples were intended to be representative. When determining a specific parameter, the results of all analyses made shall be used with regard to that parameter. B.5.4.1. Use of standards Any analyses, sampling, calibrations and validations for the determination of calculation factors shall be carried out by applying methods based on corresponding ISO standards. Where such standards are not available, the methods shall be based on suitable EN or national standards or requirements laid down in an eligible monitoring, reporting and verification system. Where no applicable published standards exist, suitable draft standards, industry best practice guidelines or other scientifically proven methodologies may be used, limiting sampling and measurement bias. B.5.4.2. Recommendations on sampling plan and minimum frequency of analyses The minimum frequencies for analyses for relevant fuels and materials listed in Table 1 of this Annex shall be used. Another analysis frequency may be used in the following cases: Where an installation operates for part of the year only, or where fuels or materials are delivered in batches that are consumed over more than one reporting period, a more appropriate schedule for analyses may be chosen, provided that it results in a comparable uncertainty as under the last point of the previous subparagraph. Table 1 Minimum analyses frequencies Samples shall be representative for the total batch or time period of deliveries for which they are taken. In order to ensure representativeness, the heterogenety of the material has to be taken into account, as well as all other relevant aspects such as the avilable sampling equipment, possible segregation of phases or local distribution of particle sizes, stability of samples, etc. The sampling method shall be laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation. It is considered a recommended improvement to use a dedicated sampling plan for each relevant material or fuel, following applicable standards, containing the relevant information on methodologies for the preparation of samples, including information on responsibilities, locations, frequencies and quantities, and methodologies for the storage and transport of samples. B.5.4.3. Recommendations for laboratories Laboratories used to carry out analyses for the determination of calculation factors shall be accredited in accordance with ISO/IEC 17025, for the relevant analytical methods. Laboratories not accredited may be used for the determination of calculation factors only where there is evidence that access to accredited laboratories is technically not feasible or would incur unreasonable costs, and that the non-accredited laboratory is sufficiently competent. A laboratory shall be considered sufficiently competent if it complies with all of the following: B.5.5. Recommended methods for determination of calculation factors It is considered a recommended improvement to apply standard values only for source streams which correspond to minor emission quantities, and to apply laboratory analyses for all major source streams. The following list presents the applicable methods in sequence of increasing data quality: B.6. Requirements for a measurement-based methodology for CO 2 and N 2 O B.6.1. General provisions A measurement-based methodology requires the use of a Continuous Emission Measurement System (CEMS) installed at a suitable measurement point. For the monitoring of N 2 O emissions, the use of the measurement-based methodology, is mandatory. For CO 2 it shall be used only if there is evidence that it leads to more accurate data than the calculation-based methodology. The requirements on uncertainty of measurement systems pursuant to Section B.4.3 of this Annex shall apply. CO emitted to the atmosphere shall be treated as the molar equivalent amount of CO 2 . Where several emission sources exist in one installation and cannot be measured as one emission source, the operator shall measure emissions from those sources separately and add the results to obtain the total emissions of the gas in question over the reporting period. B.6.2. Method and calculation B.6.2.1. Emissions of a reporting period (annual emissions) The total emissions from an emission source over the reporting period shall be determined by summing up over the reporting period all hourly values of the measured greenhouse gas concentration multiplied by the hourly values of the flue gas flow, where the hourly values shall be averages over all individual measurement results of the respective operating hour, applying the formula: Where: The index i refers to the individual operating hour (or reference periods). Hourly averages for each measured parameter shall be calculated before further processing, by using all data points available for that specific hour. Where data for shorter reference periods can be generated without additional cost, those periods shall be used for the determination of the annual emissions. B.6.2.2. Determination of GHG concentration The concentration of the GHG under consideration in the flue gas shall be determined by continuous measurement at a representative point through one of the following: Where: B.6.2.3. CO 2 emissions from biomass Where relevant, any CO 2 amount stemming from biomass which complies with the criteria given in Section B.3.3 of this Annex may be subtracted from the total measured CO 2 emissions, provided one of the following methods is used for the amount of biomass CO 2 emissions: B.6.2.4. Determining CO 2 e emissions from N 2 O In the case of N 2 O measurements, the total annual N 2 O emissions from all emissions sources, measured in tonnes to three decimal places, shall be converted to annual CO 2 e in rounded tonnes, using the following formula and the GWP values given in Annex VIII: CO 2 e [t] = N 2 O annual [t] × GWP N2O (Equation 18) Where: B.6.2.5. Determination of flue gas flow The flue gas flow may be determined by one of the following methods: B.6.2.6. Treatment of measurement gaps Where the continuous measurement equipment for a parameter is out of control, out of range or out of operation for part of the hour or reference period, the related hourly average shall be calculated pro rata to the remaining data points for that specific hour or shorter reference period, provided that at least 80 % of the maximum number of data points for a parameter are available. Where fewer than 80 % of the maximum number of data points for a parameter are available, the following methods shall be used. Where: Where the reporting period is not applicable for determining such substitution values due to significant technical changes at the installation, another sufficiently representative timeframe shall be chosen for determining the average and standard deviation, where possible with the duration of at least 6 months. B.6.3. Quality requirements All measurements shall be carried out applying methods based on: Where no applicable published standards exist, suitable draft standards, industry best practice guidelines or other scientifically proven methodologies shall be used, limiting sampling and measurement bias. All relevant aspects of the continuous measurement system shall be considered, including the location of the equipment, calibration, measurement, quality assurance and quality control. Laboratories carrying out measurements, calibrations and relevant equipment assessments for continuous measurement systems shall be accredited in accordance with ISO/IEC 17025 for the relevant analytical methods or calibration activities. Where the laboratory does not have such accreditation, sufficient competence in line with Section B.5.4.3 of this Annex shall be ensured. B.6.4. Corroborating calculations CO 2 emissions determined by a measurement-based methodology shall be corroborated by calculating the annual emissions of each greenhouse gas in question for the same emission sources and source streams. For this purpose, the requirements laid down in Sections B.4 to B.6 of this Annex may be simplified as appropriate. B.6.5. Minimum requirements for continuous emissions measurements As a minimum requirement, an uncertainty 7,5 % of the GHG emissions of an emission source over the full reporting period shall be achieved. For minor emission sources, or under exceptional circumstances 10 % uncertainty may be allowed. It is a recommended improvement to achieve an uncertainty of 2,5 % at least for emission sources emitting more than 100 000 tonnes of fossil CO 2 e per reporting period. B.7. Requirements for determining perfluorocarbon emissions Monitoring shall cover emissions of perfluorocarbons (PFCs) resulting from anode effects including fugitive emissions of perfluorocarbons. Emissions not related to anode effects shall be determined based on estimation methods in accordance with industry best practice, in particular guidelines provided by the International Aluminium Institute. PFC emissions shall be calculated from the emissions measurable in a duct or stack (‘point source emissions’) as well as fugitive emissions using the collection efficiency of the duct: PFC emissions (total) = PFC emissions (duct)/collection efficiency (Equation 20) The collection efficiency shall be measured when the installation-specific emission factors are determined. The emissions of CF 4 and C 2 F 6 emitted through a duct or stack shall be calculated by using one of the following methods: B.7.1. Calculation Method A – Slope Method The following equations for determining PFC emissions shall be used: CF 4 emissions [t] = AEM × (SEF CF4 /1 000) × Pr Al (Equation 21) C 2 F 6 emissions [t] = CF 4 emissions × F C2F6 (Equation 22) Where: The anode effect minutes per cell-day expresses the frequency of anode effects (number anode effects/cell-day) multiplied by the average duration of anode effects (anode effect minutes/occurrence): AEM = frequency × average duration (Equation 23) Emission factor: The emission factor for CF 4 (slope emission factor, SEF CF4 ) expresses the amount [kg] of CF 4 emitted per tonne of aluminium produced per anode effect minute per cell-day. The emission factor (weight fraction F C2F6 ) of C 2 F 6 expresses the amount [kg] of C 2 F 6 emitted proportionate to the amount [kg] of CF 4 emitted. Minimum requirement: Technology-specific emission factors from Table 2 of this Annex are used. Recommended improvement: Installation-specific emission factors for CF 4 and C 2 F 6 are established through continuous or intermittent field measurements. For the determination of those emission factors industry best practice shall be applied, in particular the most recent guidelines provided by the International Aluminium Institute. The emission factor shall also take into account emissions related to non-anode effects. Each emission factor shall be determined with a maximum uncertainty of ± 15 %. The emission factors shall be determined at least every three years or earlier where necessary due to relevant changes at the installation. Relevant changes shall include a change in the distribution of anode effect duration, or a change in the control algorithm affecting the mix of the types of anode effects or the nature of the anode effect termination routine. Table 2 Technology-specific emission factors related to activity data for the slope method B.7.2. Calculation Method B – Overvoltage Method For the overvoltage method, the following equations shall be used: CF 4 emissions [t] = OVC × (AEO/CE) × Pr Al × 0,001 (Equation 24) C 2 F 6 emissions [t] = CF 4 emissions × F C2F6 (Equation 25) Where: the term AEO/CE (Anode effect overvoltage/current efficiency) expresses the time-integrated average anode effect overvoltage [mV overvoltage] per average current efficiency [%]. Minimum requirement: Technology-specific emission factors from Table 3 of this Annex shall be used. Recommended improvement: Installation-specific emission factors are used for CF 4 [(kg CF 4 /t Al)/(mV)] and C 2 F 6 [t C 2 F 6 /t CF 4 ] established through continuous or intermittent field measurements. For the determination of those emission factors industry best practice shall be applied, in particular the most recent guidelines provided by the International Aluminium Institute. The emission factors shall be determined with a maximum uncertainty of ± 15 % each. The emission factors shall be determined at least every three years or earlier where necessary due to relevant changes at the installation. Relevant changes shall include a change in the distribution of anode effect duration, or a change in the control algorithm affecting the mix of the types of anode effects or the nature of the anode effect termination routine Table 3 Technology-specific emission factors related to overvoltage activity data B.7.3. Determination of CO 2 e emissions CO 2 e emissions shall be calculated from CF 4 and C 2 F 6 emissions as follows, using the global warming potentials listed in Annex VIII. PFC emissions [t CO 2 e] = CF 4 emissions [t] × GWP CF4 + C 2 F 6 emissions [t] × GWP C2F6 (Equation 26) B.8. Requirements for CO 2 transfers between installations B.8.1. CO 2 contained in gases (‘inherent CO 2 ’) Inherent CO 2 that is transferred into an installation, including that contained in natural gas, a waste gas (including blast furnace or coke oven gas) or in process inputs (including synthesis gas), shall be included in the emission factor for that source stream. Where inherent CO 2 is transferred out of the installation as part of a source stream to another installation, it shall not be counted as emissions of the installation where it originates. However, where inherent CO 2 is emitted (e.g. vented or flared) or transferred to entities that do not themselves monitor emissions for the purpose of this Regulation or an eligible monitoring, reporting and verification system, it shall be counted as emissions of the installation where it originates. B.8.2. Eligibility to deduct stored or used CO 2 In the following cases CO 2 originating from fossil carbon and originating from combustion or processes leading to process emissions, or which is imported from other installations, including in the form of inherent CO 2 , may be accounted for as not emitted: CO 2 transferred to another installation for the purposes given in points 1 and 2 may be accounted for as not emitted only to the extent evidence is provided across the whole chain of custody to the storage site or installation of CO 2 use and including any transport operators, of the fraction of CO 2 actually stored or used for the production of chemically stable products compared to the total amount of CO 2 transferred out of the originating installation. If CO 2 is used within the same installation for the purposes in points 1 and 2, the monitoring methods given in Sections 21 to 23 of Annex IV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 shall be applied. B.8.3. Monitoring rules for CO 2 transfers The identity and contact data of a responsible person of the receiving installations or entities shall be clearly laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation. The amount of CO 2 considered not emitted shall be reported in the communication pursuant to Annex IV. The identity and contact data of a responsible person of the installations or entities from which CO 2 was received shall be clearly laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation. The amount of CO 2 received shall be reported in the communication pursuant to Annex IV. For the determination of the quantity of CO 2 transferred from one installation to another, a measurement-based methodology shall be used. For the amount of CO 2 permanently chemically bound in products, a calculation-based methodology shall be used, preferably using a mass balance. The chemical reactions applied, and all relevant stoichiometric factors shall be laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation. B.9. Sector-specific requirements B.9.1. Additional rules for combustion units Combustion emissions shall cover all CO 2 emissions from the combustion of carbon-containing fuels, including wastes, independent of any other classification of such emissions or fuels. Where it is unclear if a material acts as fuel or as process input, e.g. for reducing metal ores, that material’s emissions shall be monitored the same way as combustion emissions. All stationary combustion units shall be considered, including boilers, burners, turbines, heaters, furnaces, incinerators, calciners, kilns, ovens, dryers, engines, fuel cells, chemical looping combustion units, flares, thermal or catalytic post-combustion units. Monitoring shall furthermore include CO 2 process emissions from flue gas scrubbing, in particular CO 2 from limestone or other carbonates for desulphurisation and similar scrubbing, and from urea used in de-NO x units. B.9.1.1. Desulphurisation and other acid gas scrubbing Process CO 2 emissions from the use of carbonates for acid gas scrubbing from the flue gas stream shall be calculated on the basis of carbonate consumed (Method A). In the case of desulphurisation, calculation may be based alternatively on the quantity of gypsum produced (Method B). In the latter case, the emission factor shall be the stoichiometric ratio of dry gypsum (CaSO 4 × 2H 2 O) to CO 2 emitted: 0,2558 t CO 2 /t gypsum. B.9.1.2. De-NO x If urea is used as reduction agent in a de-NO x unit, process CO 2 emissions from its use shall be calculated using method A, applying an emission factor based on the stoichiometric ratio of 0,7328 t CO 2 /t urea. B.9.1.3. Monitoring of flares When calculating emissions from flares, routine flaring as well as operational flaring (trips, start-up, and shutdown as well as emergency relieves) shall be covered. Inherent CO 2 in in the flared gases is to be included. If more accurate monitoring is technically not feasible or would lead to unreasonable costs, a reference emission factor of 0,00393 t CO 2 /Nm 3 shall be used, derived from the combustion of pure ethane used as a conservative proxy for flare gases. It is a recommended improvement to determine installation-specific emission factors derived from an estimate of the molecular weight of the flare stream, using process modelling based on industry standard models. By considering the relative proportions and the molecular weights of each of the contributing streams, a weighted annual average figure shall be derived for the molecular weight of the flare gas. For activity data, higher measurement uncertainty than for other fuels combusted is acceptable. B.9.2. Additional rules for emissions from cement clinker production B.9.2.1. Additional rules for Method A (input-based) Where method A (kiln input-based) is used for determining process emissions, the following special rules shall apply: B.9.2.2. Additional rules for Method B (output-based) Where method B (clinker output-based) is used for determining process emissions, the following special rules shall apply: Activity data shall be determined as the clinker production [t] over the reporting period in one of the following ways: Where: The clinker to cement ratio shall either be derived separately for each of the different cement products based on laboratory analyses in line with the provisions of Section B.5.4 or calculated as ratio from the difference of cement deliveries and stock changes and all materials used as additives to the cement including by-pass dust and cement kiln dust. As minimum requirement to determine the emission factor, a standard value of 0,525 t CO 2 /t clinker shall be applied. B.9.2.3. Emissions related to discarded dust CO 2 process emissions from bypass dust or cement kiln dust (CKD) leaving the kiln system, shall be added to the emissions, corrected for a partial calcination ratio of CKD. Minimum requirement: An emission factor of 0,525 t CO 2 /t dust shall be applied. Recommended improvement: The emission factor (EF) is determined at least once annually in line with the provisions of Section B.5.4 of this Annex and using the following formula: Where: B.9.3. Additional rules for emissions from nitric acid production B.9.3.1. General rules for N 2 O measurement N 2 O emissions shall be determined using a measurement-based methodology. N 2 O concentrations in the flue gas from each emission source shall be measured at a representative point, after the NO x /N 2 O abatement equipment, where abatement is used. Techniques capable of measuring N 2 O concentrations of all emission sources during both abated and unabated conditions shall be applied. All measurements shall be adjusted to a dry gas basis where required and consistently reported. B.9.3.2. Determination of flue gas flow For monitoring flue gas flow, the mass balance method set out in Section B.6.2.5 of this Annex shall be used, unless it is technically not feasible. In that case, an alternative method may be used, including by another mass balance method based on significant parameters such as ammonia input load, or determination of flow by continuous emissions flow measurement. The flue gas flow shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula: V flue gas flow [Nm 3 /h] = V air × (1 — O 2 , air )/(1 — O 2 , flue gas ) (Equation 29) Where: All measurements shall be adjusted to a dry gas basis and reported consistently. B.9.3.3. Oxygen (O 2 ) concentrations Where necessary for calculating the flue gas flow in accordance with Section B.9.3.2 of this Annex, the oxygen concentrations in the flue gas shall be measured, applying the requirements laid down in Section B.6.2.2 of this Annex. All measurements shall be adjusted to a dry gas basis and reported consistently. C. HEAT FLOWS C.1. Rules for determining net measurable heat C.1.1. Principles All specified amounts of measurable heat shall always refer to net amount of measurable heat, determined as the heat content (enthalpy) of the heat flow transmitted to the heat-consuming process or external user minus the heat content of the return flow. Heat-consuming processes necessary for operating the heat production and distribution, such as deaerators, make-up water preparation, and regular blow offs, shall be taken into account in the efficiency of the heat system and shall be accounted for in the embedded emissions of goods. Where the same heat medium is used by several consecutive processes and its heat is consumed starting from different temperature levels, the quantity of heat consumed by each heat-consuming process shall be determined separately, unless the processes are part of the overall production process of the same goods. Re-heating of the transfer medium between consecutive heat-consuming processes shall be treated like additional heat production. Where heat is used to provide cooling via an absorption cooling process, that cooling process shall be considered as the heat-consuming process. C.1.2. Methodology for determining net amounts of measurable heat For the purpose of selecting data sources for quantification of energy flows in accordance with Section A.4 of this Annex, the following methods for determining net amounts of measurable heat shall be considered: C.1.2.1. Method 1: Using measurements Under this method, all relevant parameters shall be measured, in particular temperature, pressure, state of the transmitted as well as the returned heat medium. In the case of steam, the state of the medium shall refer to its saturation or degree of superheating. The (volumetric) flow rate of the heat transfer medium shall be measured. Based on the measured values, the enthalpy and the specific volume of the heat transfer medium shall be determined using suitable steam tables or engineering software. The mass flow rate of the medium shall be calculated as Where: As the mass flow rate is considered the same for transmitted and returned medium, the heat flow rate shall be calculated using the difference in enthalpy between the transmitted flow and the return, as follows: Where: In the case of steam or hot water used as heat transfer medium, where the condensate is not returned, or where it is not feasible to estimate the enthalpy of the returned condensate, h return shall be determined based on a temperature of 90 °C. If the mass flow rates are known to be not identical, the following shall apply: For determining the annual net heat flow from the above data, one of the following methods shall be used, subject to the measurement equipment and data processing available: C.1.2.2. Method 2: Calculation of a proxy based on measured efficiency The amounts of net measurable heat shall be determined based on the fuel input and the measured efficiency related to the heat production: Where: The value of η H is either measured over a reasonably long period, which sufficiently takes into account different load states of the installation or taken from the manufacturer's documentation. In that regard the specific part load curve shall be taken into account by using an annual load factor, as follows: Where: The efficiency shall be based on a situation in which all condensate is returned. A temperature of 90 °C shall be assumed for the returned condensate. C.1.2.3. Method 3: Calculating a proxy based on the reference efficiency This method is identical to method 3, but using a reference efficiency of 70 % ( η Ref,H = 0,7) in Equation 32. C.1.3. Special rules Where an installation consumes measurable heat produced from exothermic chemical processes other than combustion, such as in ammonia or nitric acid production, that amount of heat consumed shall be determined separately from other measurable heat and that heat consumption shall be assigned zero CO 2 e emissions. Where measurable heat is recovered from non-measurable heat generated from fuels and used in production processes after that use, e.g. from exhaust gases, for avoiding double counting, the relevant amount of net measurable heat divided by a reference efficiency of 90 % is subtracted from the fuel input. C.2. Determining the fuel mix emission factor of measurable heat Where a production process consumes measurable heat produced within the installation, the heat-related emissions shall be determined using one of the following methods. C.2.1. Emission factor of measurable heat produced in the installation other than by cogeneration For measurable heat produced from the combustion of fuels within the installation except heat produced by cogeneration, the emission factor of the relevant fuel mix shall be determined and the emissions attributable to the production process shall be calculated as: Em Heat = EF mix · Q consumed /η (Equation 35) Where: EF mix = (Σ AD i · NCV i · EF i + Em FGC )/(Σ AD i · NCV i ) (Equation 36) Where: Where a waste gas is part of the fuel mix used, and where the emission factor of the waste gas is higher than the standard emission factor of natural gas given in Table 1 of Annex VIII, that standard emission factor shall be used to calculate EF mix instead of the emission factor of the waste gas. C.2.2. Emission factor of measurable heat produced in the installation by cogeneration Where measurable heat and electricity are produced by cogeneration (i.e. by combined heat and power (CHP)), the relevant emissions attributed to measurable heat and electricity shall be determined as required by this section. The rules regarding electricity shall also apply to the production of mechanical energy, if relevant. The emissions of a cogeneration unit shall be determined as follows: Where: The energy input to the CHP unit shall be calculated in accordance with Equation 33. The respective average efficiencies over the reporting period of heat production and electricity (or mechanical energy, if applicable) production shall be calculated as follows: Where: Where the determination of the efficiencies η heat and η el is technically not feasible or would incur unreasonable costs, values based on technical documentation (design values) of the installation shall be used. If no such values are available, conservative standard values of η heat = 0,55 and η el = 0,25 shall be used. The attribution factors for heat and electricity from CHP shall be calculated as follows: Where: The appropriate fuel-specific reference efficiencies are given in Annex IX. The specific emission factor of the CHP-related measurable heat to be used for the attribution of heat-related emissions to production processes shall be calculated as EF CHP,Heat = Em CHP · F CHP,Heat /Q net (Equation 42) Where: The specific emission factor of the CHP-related electricity to be used for the attribution of indirect emissions to production processes shall be calculated as: EF CHP,El = Em CHP · F CHP,El /E El,prod (Equation 43) Where: Where a waste gas is part of the fuel mix used, and where the emission factor of the waste gas is higher than the standard emission factor of natural gas given in Table 1 of Annex VIII, that standard emission factor is used to calculate EF mix instead of the emission factor of the waste gas. C.2.3. Emission factor of measurable heat produced outside the installation Where a production process consumes measurable heat produced outside the installation, the heat-related emissions shall be determined using one of the following methods. D. ELECTRICITY D.1. Calculation of the emissions related to electricity The emissions relating to electricity production or consumption for the purpose of calculating embedded emissions in accordance with section F.1 shall be calculated using the following equation: Where: D.2. Rules for determining the emission factor of electricity as imported goods For determining the specific actual embedded emissions of electricity as imported goods, only direct emissions shall be applicable in accordance with Section 2 of Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2023/956. The emission factor for calculating the specific actual embedded emissions of electricity shall be established as follows: D.2.1. CO 2 emission factor based on specific default values In accordance with Section 4.2.1 of Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2023/956, CO 2 emission factors in the third country, group of third countries or region within a third country, shall be used, based on the best data available to the Commission. For the purpose of this Regulation, these CO 2 emission factors shall be based on data from the International Energy Agency (IEA) and shall be provided by the Commission in the CBAM Transitional Registry. D.2.2. CO 2 emission factor of the EU Pursuant to Section 4.2.2 of Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2023/956, the CO 2 emission factor for the Union shall apply. For the purpose of this Regulation, the CO 2 emission factor for the Union shall be based on data from the International Energy Agency (IEA) and shall be provided by the Commission in the CBAM Transitional Registry. D.2.3. CO 2 emission factor based on reliable data demonstrated by the reporting declarant For the purpose of point (c) of Section D.2 of this Annex, the reporting declarant shall provide the datasets from alternative official sources, including national statistics for the five-years period ending two years before the reporting. In order to reflect the impact of decarbonisation policies, such as the increase in renewable energy production, as well as climatic conditions, such as particularly cold years, on the yearly electricity supply in the countries concerned, the reporting declarant shall calculate the CO 2 emission factor on the basis of the weighted average of the CO 2 emission factor for the five-years period ending two years before the reporting. For this purpose, the reporting declarant shall calculate the yearly CO 2 emission factors per fossil fuel technology and its respective gross electricity generation in the third country capable of exporting electricity to the EU, based on the following equation: Where: The reporting declarant shall calculate the CO 2 emission factor as a moving average of those years starting with the current year minus two, based on the following equation: Where: D.2.4. CO 2 emission factor based on actual CO 2 emissions of the installation Pursuant to Section 5 of Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2023/956, a reporting declarant may apply actual embedded emissions instead of default values for the calculation of embedded emissions of the imported electricity if the cumulative criteria (a) to (d) provided in that section are met. D.3. Rules for determining electricity quantities used for the production of goods other than electricity For the purpose of determining embedded emissions, metering of electricity quantities shall apply to real power, not apparent power (complex power). Only the active power component shall be metered, and the reactive power shall be disregarded. For the production of electricity, the activity level shall refer to net electricity leaving the system boundaries of the power plant or cogeneration unit, after subtraction of internally consumed electricity. D.4. Rules for determining the embedded indirect emissions of electricity as an input for the production of goods other than electricity During the transitional period, emission factors for electricity shall be determined based on either: By derogation from the points (a) and (b), acctual emission factors for eletricity may be used for the cases specified in Sections D.4.1 to D.4.3. D.4.1. Emission factor of electricity produced in the installation other than by cogeneration For electricity produced from the combustion of fuels within the installation except electricity produced by cogeneration, the emission factor of electricity EF El shall be determined based on the relevant fuel mix and the emissions attributable to the electricity production shall be calculated as: EF El = (Σ AD i · NCV i · EF i + Em FGC )/El prod (Equation 47) Where: Where a waste gas is part of the fuel mix used, and where the emission factor of the waste gas is higher than the standard emission factor of natural gas given in Table 1 of Annex VIII, that standard emission factor shall be used to calculate EF El instead of the emission factor of the waste gas. D.4.2. Emission factor of electricity produced in the installation by cogeneration The emission factor of electricity production from by cogeneration shall be determined accrding to Section C.2.2 of this Annex. D.4.3. Emission factor of electricity produced outside the installation E. MONITORING OF PRECURSORS Where the description of production routes for the production processes defined for the installation indicates relevant precursors, the quantity of each precursor consumed within the installation’s production processes shall be determined in order to calculate the total embedded emissions of the complex goods produced in accordance with Section G of this Annex. By way of derogation from the previous paragraph, where the production and use of a precursor are covered by the same production process, only the quantity of additional precursor used and obtained from other installations or from other production processes shall be determined. The quantity used and emission properties shall be determined separately for each installation from which the precursor is sourced. The methods used for determining the required data shall be laid down in the monitoring methodology documentation of the installation, applying the following provisions: F. RULES FOR ATTRIBUTING EMISSIONS OF AN INSTALLATION TO GOODS F.1. Calculation methods For the purpose of assigning the installation’s emissions to goods, the emissions, inputs, and outputs shall be attributed to production processes defined in accordance with Section A.4 of this Annex using Equation 48 for direct emissions and Equation 49 for indirect emissions, using total figures over the whole reporting period for the parameters given in the equation. The attributed direct and indirect emissions shall then be converted into specific embedded direct and indirect emissions of the goods resulting from the production process using Equations 50 and 51. Where AttrEm Dir is calculated to have a negative value, it shall be set to zero. Where: Measurable heat: Where fuels are consumed for the production of measurable heat which is consumed outside the production process under consideration, or which is used in more than one production process (which includes situations with imports from and exports to other installations), the fuels’ emissions are not included in the directly attributable emissions of the production process, but added under the parameter Em H,import in order to avoid double counting. Waste gases: The emissions caused by waste gases produced and fully consumed within the same production process are included in DirEm*. The emissions from the combustion of waste gases exported from the production process are fully included in DirEm* irrespective of where they are consumed. However, for exports of waste gases the term WG corr,export shall be calculated. Emissions from the combustion of waste gases imported from other production processes are not taken into account in DirEm*. Instead the term WG corr,import shall be calculated; Emissions related to measurable heat imported to the production process include imports from other installations, other production processes within the same installation, as well as heat received from a technical unit (e.g. a central power house at the installation, or a more complex steam network with several heat producing units) that supplies heat to more than one production process. Emissions from measurable heat shall be calculated using the following formula: Where: Heat recovered from electricity-driven processes and from nitric acid production shall not be accounted; Where: Where: F.2. Monitoring methodology for activity levels The activity level of a production process shall be calculated as the total mass of all goods leaving the production process during the reporting period for the goods listed in Annex I of Regulation (EU) 2023/956 by the aggregated goods category according to Section 2 of Annex II to which the production process relates. Where production processes are defined such that also the production of precursors is included, double counting shall be avoided by counting only the final products leaving the system boundaries of the production process. Any special provisions laid down for the production process or production route in Section 3 of Annex II shall be taken into account. Where several production routes are used at the same installation for producing goods falling under the same CN code, and where those production routes are assigned separate production processes, the embedded emissions of the goods shall be calculated separately for each production route. Only goods which can be sold or directly used as precursor in another production process shall be taken into account. Off-spec products, by-products, waste, and scrap produced in a production process, irrespective of whether they are returned to production processes, delivered to other installations, or disposed of, shall not be included in the determination of the activity level. They shall therefore be assigned zero embedded emissions when entering another production process. For determining activity levels, the metering requirements laid down in Section B.4 of this Annex apply. F.3. Monitoring methods required for attributing emissions to production processes F.3.1. Principles for attributing data to production processes F.3.2. Procedure for tracking CN codes of goods and precursors For the purpose of correct attribution of data to production processes, the installation shall maintain a list of all goods and precursors produced at the installation as well as of precursors obtained from outside the installation, and their applicable CN codes. Based on this list: To this end a procedure shall be established, documented, implemented, and maintained for regular checking whether the goods and precursors produced in the installation correspond to the CN codes applied when setting up the monitoring methodology documentation. This procedure shall furthermore contain provisions to identify if the installation produces new goods and to ensure that the applicable CN code for the new product is determined and added it to the list of goods for attributing related inputs, outputs, and emissions to the appropriate production process. F.4. Further rules for the attribution of direct emissions F.5. Further rules for the attribution of emissions from measurable heat The general calculation principles given in Section F.1 of this Annex shall apply. The relevant heat flows shall be determined in line with Section C.1 of this Annex and the emission factor of measurable heat by applying Section C.2 of this Annex. Where losses of measurable heat are determined separately from the amounts used in production processes, emissions related to these heat losses shall be added proportionally to the emissions of all production processes in which measurable heat produced in the installation is used, in order to ensure that 100 % of the quantity of net measurable heat produced within the installation, or imported or exported by the installation, as well as quantities transferred between production processes, shall be attributed to production processes without any omission or double counting. G. CALCULATION OF SPECIFIC EMBEDDED EMISSIONS OF COMPLEX GOODS In accordance with Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2023/956, the specific embedded emissions SEE g of complex goods g shall be calculated as follows: Where: In this calculation, only precursors not covered by the same production process as goods g are taken into account. Where the same precursor is obtained from different installations, the precursor from each installation shall be treated separately. Where a precursor i itself has precursors, those precursors are first taken into account using the same calculation method in order to calculate the embedded emissions of the precursor i before they are used for calculating the embedded emissions of goods g . This method is used recursively to all precursors which are complex goods. The parameter M i refers to the total mass of precursor required to produce the amount AL g . It also includes quantities of the precursor which do not end up in the complex goods but may be spilt, cut off, combusted, chemically modified, etc. in the production process and leave the process as by-products, scrap, residues, wastes, or emissions. In order to provide data which can be used independently of activity levels, the specific mass consumption m i for each precursor i shall be determined and included in the communication pursuant to Annex IV: Thereby the specific embedded emissions of complex goods g may be expressed as: Where: H. OPTIONAL MEASURES TO INCREASE QUALITY OF DATA ( 1 ) United Nations International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. ( *1 ) The installation has to determine the factor by own measurements. If this is technically not feasible or involves unreasonable costs, the values for CWPB methodology shall be used. ANNEX IV Content of the recommended communication from operators of installations to reporting declarants 1. CONTENT OF THE EMISSIONS DATA COMMUNICATION TEMPLATE General information Recommended improvement of the general information 2. SECTOR-SPECIFIC PARAMETERS TO BE INCLUDED IN THE COMMUNICATION ANNEX V EORI data Table 1 contains the information on the economic operators as found in EOS, which shall be interoperable with the CBAM Transitional Registry. Table 1 EORI data ANNEX VI Data Requirements complement for Inward Processing Table 1 contains the information from the decentralised customs systems, which shall be interoperable with the CBAM Transitional Registry in accordance with Article 17 of this Regulation. Table 1 Additional information for inward processing ANNEX VII National system data Table 1 contains the information from the decentralised systems, which shall be interoperable with the CBAM Transitional Registry in accordance with Article 17 of this Regulation. Table 1 ANNEX VIII Standard factors used in the monitoring of direct emissions at installation level 1. FUEL EMISSION FACTORS RELATED TO NET CALORIFIC VALUES (NCV) Table 1 Fuel emission factors related to net calorific value (NCV) and net calorific values per mass of fuel Table 2 Fuel emission factors related to net calorific value (NCV) and net calorific values per mass of biomass material 2. EMISSION FACTORS RELATED TO PROCESS EMISSIONS Table 3 Stoichiometric emission factor for process emissions from carbonate decomposition (Method A) Table 4 Stoichiometric emission factor for process emissions from carbonate decomposition based on alkali earth oxides (Method B) Table 5 Emission factors for process emissions from other process materials (production of iron or steel, and processing of ferrous metals) ( 8 ) 3. GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIALS FOR NON-CO 2 GREENHOUSE GASES Table 6 Global warming potentials ( 1 ) This value is the preliminary emission factor, i.e. before application of a biomass fraction, if applicable. ( 2 ) Based on NCV of 10,12 TJ/t. ( 3 ) Based on NCV of 50,01 TJ/t. ( 4 ) The given emission factor assumes around 15 % water content of the wood. Fresh wood can have water content of up to 50 %. For determining the NCV of completely dry wood, the following equation shall be used: Where NCV dry is the NCV of the absolute dry material, w is the water content (mass fraction) and ( 5 ) The NCV value is taken from Annex III to Directive (EU) 2018/2001. ( 6 ) For landfill gas, sludge gas and other biogas: Standard values refer to pure Biomethane. For arriving at the correct standard values, a correction is required for the methane content of the gas. ( 7 ) The IPCC guidelines also give values for the fossil fraction of municipal waste: EF = 91,7 t CO 2 /TJ; NCV = 10 GJ/t. ( 8 ) IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. ANNEX IX Harmonised efficiency reference values for separate production of electricity and heat In the tables below the harmonised efficiency reference values for separate production of electricity and heat are based on net calorific value and standard atmospheric ISO conditions (15 °C ambient temperature, 1,013 bar, 60 % relative humidity). Table 1 Reference efficiency factors for electricity production Table 2 Reference efficiency factors for heat production ( 1 ) If steam plants do not account for the condensate return in their calculation of CHP (combined heat and power) heat efficiencies, the steam efficiencies shown in the table above shall be increased by 5 percentage points. ( 2 ) Values for direct use of exhaust gases shall be used if the temperature is 250 °C or higher.