REGULATION (EU) 2023/1542 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 12 July 2023 concerning batteries and waste batteries, amending Directive 2008/98/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and repealing Directive 2006/66/EC (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 114 thereof and Article 192(1) thereof in relation to Articles 54 to 76 of this Regulation, Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments, Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee ( 1 ) , After consulting the Committee of the Regions, Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ) , Whereas: HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: CHAPTER I General provisions Article 1 Subject matter and scope 1. This Regulation lays down requirements on sustainability, safety, labelling, marking and information to allow the placing on the market or putting into service of batteries within the Union. It also lays down minimum requirements for extended producer responsibility, the collection and treatment of waste batteries and for reporting. 2. This Regulation imposes battery due diligence obligations on economic operators placing batteries on the market or putting them into service. It also lays down requirements for green public procurement when procuring batteries or products into which batteries are incorporated. 3. This Regulation applies to all categories of batteries, namely portable batteries, starting, lighting and ignition batteries (SLI batteries), light means of transport batteries (LMT batteries), electric vehicle batteries and industrial batteries, regardless of their shape, volume, weight, design, material composition, chemistry, use or purpose. It shall also apply to batteries that are incorporated into or added to products or that are specifically designed to be incorporated into or added to products. For the purposes of Chapter II, where batteries placed on the market can be considered to fall under more than one category, they shall be deemed to fall under the category to which the strictest requirements apply. 4. In cases where battery cells or battery modules are made available on the market for end use, without any further incorporation or assembly into larger battery packs or batteries, they shall be considered to have been placed on the market as batteries for the purposes of this Regulation, and the requirements for the most similar battery category shall apply. In cases where it can be considered that such battery cells or battery modules fall under more than one battery category, they shall be deemed to fall under the category to which the strictest requirements apply. 5. This Regulation does not apply to batteries that are incorporated into or that are specifically designed to be incorporated into: 6. Chapters III and VIII of this Regulation do not apply to equipment specifically designed for the safety of nuclear installations, as defined in Article 3 of Council Directive 2009/71/Euratom ( 42 ) . Article 2 Objectives The objectives of this Regulation are to contribute to the efficient functioning of the internal market, while preventing and reducing the adverse impacts of batteries on the environment, and to protect the environment and human health by preventing and reducing the adverse impacts of the generation and management of waste batteries. Article 3 Definitions 1. For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: 2. In addition to the definitions referred to in paragraph 1, the following definitions apply: Article 4 Free movement 1. Member States shall not, for reasons relating to the sustainability, safety, labelling and information requirements for batteries covered by this Regulation, prohibit, restrict or impede the making available on the market or the putting into service of batteries that comply with this Regulation. 2. At trade fairs, exhibitions, demonstrations or similar events, Member States shall not prevent the showing of batteries which do not comply with this Regulation, provided that a visible sign clearly indicates that those batteries do not comply with this Regulation and that they cannot be made available on the market or put into service until they have been brought into conformity with this Regulation. During demonstrations of such batteries, the relevant economic operator shall take adequate measures to ensure the safety of persons. Article 5 Sustainability, safety, labelling and information requirements for batteries 1. Batteries shall only be placed on the market or put into service if they meet the following requirements: 2. For any aspects not covered by Chapters II and III, batteries placed on the market or put into service pursuant to paragraph 1 shall not present a risk to human health, to the safety of persons, to property or to the environment. CHAPTER II Sustainability and safety requirements Article 6 Restrictions on substances 1. In addition to the restrictions set out in Annex XVII to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 and in Article 4(2), point (a), of Directive 2000/53/EC, batteries shall not contain substances for which Annex I to this Regulation contains a restriction unless the conditions of that restriction are complied with. 2. In the event of an unacceptable risk to human health or the environment, arising from the use of a substance in the manufacture of batteries or from the presence of a substance in the batteries when they are placed on the market, or arising during their subsequent life cycle stages, including during repurposing or the treatment of waste batteries, that is not adequately controlled and needs to be addressed on a Union-wide basis, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to amend the restrictions in Annex I, pursuant to the procedure laid down in Articles 86, 87 and 88. 3. Restrictions adopted pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article shall not apply to the use of a substance in scientific research and development as defined in Article 3, point (23), of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, carried out in relation to batteries. 4. Where a restriction adopted pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article does not apply to product and process orientated research and development, as defined in Article 3, point (22), of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, that exemption, as well as the maximum quantity of the substance exempted, shall be specified in Annex I to this Regulation. 5. By 31 December 2027, the Commission, assisted by the European Chemicals Agency set up under Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 (‘the Agency’), shall prepare a report on substances of concern, namely substances having an adverse effect on human health or the environment or hampering recycling for safe and high quality secondary raw materials, present in batteries or used in their manufacture. The Commission shall submit that report to the European Parliament and to the Council detailing its findings and shall consider the appropriate follow-up measures including the adoption of delegated acts as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. Article 7 Carbon footprint of electric vehicle batteries, rechargeable industrial batteries and LMT batteries 1. For electric vehicle batteries, rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh and LMT batteries a carbon footprint declaration shall be drawn up for each battery model per manufacturing plant, in accordance with the implementing act referred to in the fourth subparagraph and containing, at least, the following information: The carbon footprint declaration shall apply from: Until it becomes accessible via the QR code referred to in Article 13(6), the carbon footprint declaration shall accompany the battery. The Commission shall, by 18 February 2024 for electric vehicle batteries, 18 February 2025 for rechargeable industrial batteries, except those with external storage, 18 February 2027 for LMT batteries and 18 February 2029 for industrial batteries with external storage, adopt: 2. Electric vehicle batteries, rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh and LMT batteries shall bear a conspicuous, clearly legible and indelible label indicating the carbon footprint of the battery referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (d) and declaring the carbon footprint performance class to which the relevant battery model per manufacturing plant corresponds. For batteries referred to in the first subparagraph, the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII shall demonstrate that the carbon footprint declared and the related classification into a carbon footprint performance class have been calculated in accordance with the methodology set out in the delegated acts adopted by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 1, fourth subparagraph, point (a) and the fourth subparagraph, point (a), of this paragraph. The carbon footprint performance class requirements in the first subparagraph shall apply from: The Commission shall, by 18 February 2025 for electric vehicle batteries, 18 August 2026 for rechargeable industrial batteries except those with exclusively external storage, 18 August 2028 for LMT batteries and 18 August 2030 for rechargeable industrial batteries with external storage, adopt: The Commission shall, in accordance with the conditions set out in point 8 of Annex II, review the number of performance classes and the thresholds between them, every three years and, where appropriate, adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the number of performance classes and thresholds between them with a view to keeping them representative of the market reality and expected developments in the market. 3. For electric vehicle batteries, rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh and LMT batteries, the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII shall demonstrate that the declared life cycle carbon footprint value for the relevant battery model per manufacturing plant, is below the maximum threshold established in the delegated act adopted pursuant to the third subparagraph. The requirement for a maximum life cycle carbon footprint threshold referred to in the first subparagraph shall apply as of: The Commission shall, by 18 August 2026 for electric vehicle batteries, 18 February 2028 for rechargeable industrial batteries, except those with external storage, 18 February 2030 for LMT batteries and 18 February 2032 for industrial batteries with external storage, adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by determining the maximum life cycle carbon footprint threshold referred to in the first subparagraph. In preparing that delegated act, the Commission shall take into account the relevant conditions set out in point 9 of Annex II. The introduction of a maximum life cycle carbon footprint threshold shall trigger, if necessary, a reclassification of the carbon footprint performance classes referred to in paragraph 2. 4. By 31 December 2030, the Commission shall assess the feasibility of extending the requirements in this Article to portable batteries, and the requirement laid down in paragraph 3 to rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity of 2 kWh or less. To that end, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council and consider taking the appropriate measures, including the adoption of legislative proposals. 5. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply to a battery that has been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, if the battery had already been placed on the market or put into service before undergoing such operations. Article 8 Recycled content in industrial batteries, electric vehicle batteries, LMT batteries and SLI batteries 1. From 18 August 2028 or 24 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated act referred to in the third subparagraph, whichever is the latest, industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except those with exclusively external storage, electric vehicle batteries and SLI batteries that contain cobalt, lead, lithium or nickel in active materials, shall be accompanied by documentation containing information about the percentage share of cobalt, lithium or nickel that is present in active materials and that has been recovered from battery manufacturing waste or post-consumer waste, and the percentage share of lead that is present in the battery and that has been recovered from waste, for each battery model per year and per manufacturing plant. The first subparagraph shall apply from 18 August 2033 to LMT batteries that contain cobalt, lead, lithium or nickel in active materials. By 18 August 2026, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing, for the batteries referred to in the first and second subparagraphs, the methodology for the calculation and verification of the percentage share of cobalt, lithium or nickel that is present in active materials and that has been recovered from battery manufacturing waste or post-consumer waste, and the percentage share of lead that is present in the battery and that has been recovered from waste, and the format for the documentation. 2. From 18 August 2031, for industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except those with exclusively external storage, electric vehicle batteries and SLI batteries that contain cobalt, lead, lithium or nickel in active materials, the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII shall demonstrate that those batteries contain, in active materials, the following minimum percentage share of, respectively, cobalt, lithium or nickel that has been recovered from battery manufacturing waste or post-consumer waste, and the minimum percentage share of lead that is present in the battery and that has been recovered from waste, for each battery model per year and per manufacturing plant: 3. From 18 August 2036, for industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except those with exclusively external storage, electric vehicle batteries, LMT batteries and SLI batteries that contain cobalt, lead, lithium or nickel in active materials, the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII shall demonstrate that those batteries contain, in the active materials, the following minimum percentage share of, respectively, cobalt, lithium or nickel that has been recovered from battery manufacturing waste or post-consumer waste, and the minimum percentage share of lead that is present in the battery and that has been recovered from waste, for each battery model per year and per manufacturing plant: 4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply to batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, if the batteries had already been placed on the market or put into service before undergoing such operations. 5. After the date of entry into force of the delegated act adopted under paragraph 1, and no later than 31 December 2028, the Commission shall assess whether, due to the existing availability, and the forecasted availability for 2030 and 2035, of cobalt, lead, lithium or nickel recovered from waste, or lack thereof, and in view of technical and scientific progress, it is appropriate to revise the targets laid down in paragraphs 2 and 3. Where justified and appropriate on the basis of the assessment made under the first subparagraph or due to other considerable changes in battery technology impacting the type of materials recovered, the Commission shall adopt, by 18 August 2029, a delegated act in accordance with Article 89, to amend the targets laid down in paragraphs 2 and 3. 6. Where justified and appropriate due to market developments regarding battery chemistries impacting the type of materials that can be recovered, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89, to amend this Regulation by adding materials other than cobalt, lead, lithium and nickel, with specific minimum shares of recycled content per specific material in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article. Article 9 Performance and durability requirements for portable batteries of general use 1. From 18 August 2028 or 24 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated act referred to in paragraph 2, whichever is the latest, portable batteries of general use, excluding button cells, shall meet the minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Annex III as laid down in the delegated act adopted pursuant to paragraph 2. 2. By 18 August 2027, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing mandatory minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Annex III for portable batteries of general use, excluding button cells. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the minimum values referred to in the first subparagraph or add electrochemical performance and durability parameters to those set out in Annex III in view of technical and scientific progress. In preparing the delegated act referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall consider the need to reduce the life cycle environmental impact of portable batteries of general use, including by means of increasing the resource efficiency thereof, and shall take into consideration relevant international standards and labelling schemes. The Commission shall also ensure that the provisions laid down by the delegated act referred to in the first subparagraph do not have a significant adverse impact on the safety and functionality of those batteries or the appliances, light means of transport or other vehicles into which those batteries are incorporated, the affordability and the cost for end-users and the industry’s competitiveness. 3. By 31 December 2030, the Commission shall assess the feasibility of measures to phase out non-rechargeable portable batteries of general use with a view to minimising their environmental impact based on the life cycle assessment methodology and viable alternatives for end-users. To that end, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council and consider taking the appropriate measures, including the adoption of legislative proposals for either the phase out or the setting of eco-design requirements. Article 10 Performance and durability requirements for rechargeable industrial batteries, LMT batteries and electric vehicle batteries 1. From 18 August 2024, rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, LMT batteries and electric vehicle batteries shall be accompanied by a document containing values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV. For batteries referred to in the first subparagraph, the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII shall contain an explanation of the technical specifications, standards and conditions used to measure, calculate or estimate the values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters. That explanation shall include, at least, the elements set out in Part B of Annex IV. 2. From either 18 August 2027 or 18 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated act referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 5, whichever is the latest, rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except those with exclusively external storage, shall meet the minimum values laid down in the delegated act adopted pursuant to the first subparagraph of paragraph 5 for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV. 3. From either 18 August 2028 or 18 months after the date of entry into force of the delegated act referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 5, whichever is the latest, LMT batteries shall meet the minimum values laid down in the delegated act adopted pursuant to the second subparagraph of paragraph 5 for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV. 4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall not apply to a battery that has been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, where the economic operator placing that battery on the market or putting it into service demonstrates that the battery, before undergoing such operations, has been placed on the market or put into service before the dates on which those obligations become applicable in accordance with those paragraphs. 5. By 18 February 2026, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV that rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except those with exclusively external storage, shall attain. By 18 February 2027, the Commission shall adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing minimum values for the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Part A of Annex IV that LMT batteries shall attain. In preparing the delegated acts referred to in the first and second subparagraph, the Commission shall consider the need to reduce the life cycle environmental impact of rechargeable industrial batteries with a capacity greater than 2 kWh, except of those with exclusively external storage, and of LMT batteries, and ensure that the requirements laid down therein do not have a significant adverse impact on the functionality of those batteries or the appliances, light means of transport or other vehicles into which those batteries are incorporated, their affordability and industry’s competitiveness. 6. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the electrochemical performance and durability parameters set out in Annex IV in light of market developments and technical and scientific progress, including, in particular, related to technical specifications of the informal UNECE Working Group on Electric Vehicles and the Environment. Article 11 Removability and replaceability of portable batteries and LMT batteries 1. Any natural or legal person that places on the market products incorporating portable batteries shall ensure that those batteries are readily removable and replaceable by the end-user at any time during the lifetime of the product. That obligation shall only apply to entire batteries and not to individual cells or other parts included in such batteries. A portable battery shall be considered readily removable by the end-user where it can be removed from a product with the use of commercially available tools, without requiring the use of specialised tools, unless provided free of charge with the product, proprietary tools, thermal energy, or solvents to disassemble the product. Any natural or legal person that places on the market products incorporating portable batteries shall ensure that those products are accompanied with instructions and safety information on the use, removal and replacement of the batteries. Those instructions and that safety information shall be made available permanently online, on a publicly available website, in an easily understandable way for end-users. This paragraph shall be without prejudice to any specific provisions ensuring a higher level of protection of the environment and human health relating to the removability and replaceability of portable batteries by end-users laid down in any Union law on electrical and electronic equipment as defined in Article 3(1), point (a), of Directive 2012/19/EU. 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the following products incorporating portable batteries may be designed in such a way as to make the battery removable and replaceable only by independent professionals: The derogation set out in point (a) of this paragraph shall only be applicable where such derogation is required to ensure the safety of the user and the appliance. 3. The obligations laid down in paragraph 1 shall not apply where continuity of power supply is necessary and a permanent connection between the product and the respective portable battery is required to ensure the safety of the user and the appliance or, for products that collect and supply data as their main function, for data integrity reasons. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend paragraph 2 of this Article by adding further products to be exempted from the removability and replaceability requirements laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article. Such delegated acts shall be adopted only on account of market developments and technical and scientific progress, and provided that there are scientifically grounded concerns over the safety of end-users removing or replacing the portable battery, or in cases where there is a risk that the removal or the replacement of the battery by end-users would be in violation of any product safety requirements provided for by applicable Union law. 5. Any natural or legal person that places on the market products incorporating LMT batteries shall ensure that those batteries, as well as individual battery cells included in the battery pack, are readily removable and replaceable by an independent professional at any time during the lifetime of the product. 6. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 5, a portable battery or LMT battery shall be considered readily replaceable where, after its removal from an appliance or light means of transport, it can be substituted by another compatible battery without affecting the functioning, the performance or the safety of that appliance or light means of transport. 7. Any natural or legal person that places on the market products incorporating portable batteries or LMT batteries shall ensure that those batteries are available as spare parts of the equipment that they power for a minimum of five years after placing the last unit of the equipment model on the market, with a reasonable and non-discriminatory price for independent professionals and end-users. 8. Software shall not be used to impede the replacement of a portable battery or LMT battery, or of their key components, with another compatible battery or key components. 9. The Commission shall publish guidelines to facilitate the harmonised application of this Article. Article 12 Safety of stationary battery energy storage systems 1. Stationary battery energy storage systems placed on the market or put into service shall be safe during their normal operation and use. 2. By 18 August 2024, the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII shall: The technical documentation shall be reviewed if a battery is prepared for re-use, prepared for repurposing, remanufactured or repurposed. 3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the safety parameters set out in Annex V in view of technical and scientific progress. CHAPTER III Labelling, marking and information requirements Article 13 Labelling and marking of batteries 1. From 18 August 2026 or 18 months after the date of entry into force of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 10, whichever is the latest, batteries shall bear a label containing the general information on batteries set out in Part A of Annex VI. 2. From 18 August 2026 or 18 months after the date of entry into force of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 10, whichever is the latest, rechargeable portable batteries, LMT batteries and SLI batteries shall bear a label containing information on their capacity. 3. From 18 August 2026 or 18 months after the date of entry into force of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 10, whichever is the latest, non-rechargeable portable batteries shall bear a label containing information on their minimum average duration when used in specific applications and a label indicating ‘non-rechargeable’. 4. From 18 August 2025, all batteries shall be marked with the symbol for separate collection of batteries (‘separate collection symbol’) as shown in Part B of Annex VI. The separate collection symbol shall cover at least 3 % of the area of the largest side of the battery up to a maximum size of 5 × 5 cm. In the case of cylindrical battery cells, the separate collection symbol shall cover at least 1,5 % of the surface area of the battery and shall have a maximum size of 5 × 5 cm. Where the size of the battery is such that the separate collection symbol would be smaller than 0,47 × 0,47 cm, the battery does not need to be marked with that symbol. Instead, a separate collection symbol measuring at least 1 × 1 cm shall be printed on the packaging. 5. All batteries containing more than 0,002 % cadmium or more than 0,004 % lead, shall be marked with the chemical symbol for the metal concerned: Cd or Pb. The relevant chemical symbol indicating the heavy metal content shall be printed beneath the separate collection symbol and shall cover an area of at least one-quarter the size of that symbol. 6. From 18 February 2027, all batteries shall be marked with a QR code as described in Part C of Annex VI. The QR code shall provide access to the following: This information shall be complete, up-to-date and accurate. 7. The labels and the QR code referred to in paragraphs 1 to 6 shall be printed or engraved visibly, legibly and indelibly on the battery. Where this is not possible or not warranted on account of the nature and size of the battery, the labels and the QR code shall be affixed to the packaging and to the documents accompanying the battery. 8. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend this Regulation to provide for alternative types of smart labels for use instead of or in addition to the QR code, in view of technical and scientific progress. 9. Batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing shall bear new labels or shall be marked with markings in accordance with this Article, and containing information on their change of status in accordance with point 4 of Annex XIII, which shall be accessible through the QR code. 10. The Commission shall, by 18 August 2025, adopt implementing acts to establish harmonised specifications for the labelling requirements referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). Article 14 Information on the state of health and expected lifetime of batteries 1. From 18 August 2024, up-to-date data for the parameters for determining the state of health and expected lifetime of batteries as set out in Annex VII shall be contained in the battery management system of stationary battery energy storage systems, LMT batteries and electric vehicle batteries. 2. Read-only access to the data for the parameters set out in Annex VII through the battery management system referred to in paragraph 1 shall be provided, respecting the intellectual property rights of the battery manufacturer, on a non-discriminatory basis to the natural or legal person who has legally purchased the battery, including independent operators or waste management operators, or any third party acting on their behalf at any time, for the purpose of: 3. The battery management system shall include a software reset function, in case economic operators carrying out preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing need to upload different battery management system software. If the software reset function is used, the original battery manufacturer shall not be held liable for any breach of the safety or functionality of the battery that could be attributed to battery management system software uploaded after that battery was placed on the market. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to amend the parameters for determining the state of health and expected lifetime of batteries set out in Annex VII in view of market developments and technical and scientific progress and to ensure synergies with parameters set in UN Global Technical Regulation No 22 on in-vehicle battery durability for electrified vehicles, with due regard to the intellectual property rights of the battery manufacturer. 5. The provisions of this Article shall apply in addition to those laid down in Union law on type approval of vehicles. CHAPTER IV Conformity of batteries Article 15 Presumption of conformity of batteries 1. For the purposes of compliance and verification of compliance of batteries with the requirements laid down in Articles 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 and 78, tests, measurements and calculations shall be made using reliable, accurate and reproducible methods which take into account the generally recognised state-of-the-art methods, and the results of which are deemed to be of low uncertainty, including methods set out in standards for which 2. Harmonised standards shall aim to simulate real-life usage as far as possible while maintaining standard tests. 3. Batteries which are in conformity with harmonised standards, or parts thereof, for which Article 16 Common specifications 1. In exceptional cases, the Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down common specifications for the requirements laid down in Articles 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 and 78 or tests referred to in Article 15(1), where: Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). When preparing the draft implementing act establishing the common specifications, the Commission shall take into account the views of relevant bodies or the expert group and shall duly consult all relevant stakeholders. 2. Batteries which are in conformity with common specifications or parts thereof shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirements laid down in Articles 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 and 78 to the extent that those requirements are covered by such common specifications or parts thereof, and, if applicable, to the extent that the minimum values established for those requirements pursuant to Articles 9 and 10 are attained. 3. Where a harmonised standard is adopted by an European standardisation organisation and proposed to the Commission for the purpose of publishing its reference in the Official Journal of the European Union , the Commission shall assess the harmonised standard in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. When the reference of a harmonised standard is published in the Official Journal of the European Union , the Commission shall repeal the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1, or parts thereof which cover the same requirements or tests referred to in paragraph 1. Article 17 Conformity assessment procedures 1. Conformity assessment of batteries with the requirements laid down in Articles 6, 9, 10, 12, 13 and 14 shall be carried out in accordance with one of the following procedures: 2. Conformity assessment of batteries with requirements laid down in Articles 7 and 8 shall be carried out in accordance with one of the following procedures: 3. An additional conformity assessment of batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, shall be carried out in accordance with the procedure ‘Module A – Internal production control’, set out in Part A of Annex VIII, taking into account the requirements laid down in Articles 6, 9, 10, 12, 13 and 14. 4. Records and correspondence relating to the conformity assessment procedures of batteries shall be drawn up in the official language or languages of the Member State where the notified body carrying out the conformity assessment procedures is established, or in one or more languages accepted by that body. Article 18 EU declaration of conformity 1. The EU declaration of conformity shall state that the compliance with the requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14 has been demonstrated. 2. The EU declaration of conformity shall have the model structure set out in Annex IX, shall contain the elements specified in the relevant modules set out in Annex VIII, and shall be kept up to date. It shall be translated into the language or languages required by the Member State in which the battery is placed or made available on the market or put into service. It shall be drawn up in electronic format and, where requested, it shall be provided in paper format. 3. Where a battery is subject to more than one Union act requiring an EU declaration of conformity, a single EU declaration of conformity shall be drawn up in respect of all such Union acts. That declaration shall state the Union acts concerned and their publication 4. By drawing up the EU declaration of conformity, the manufacturer shall assume responsibility for the compliance of the battery with the requirements laid down in this Regulation. 5. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, a single EU declaration of conformity may be made up of one or more individual EU declarations of conformity already drawn up in compliance with a different Union act or acts, in order to reduce the administrative burden on economic operators. Article 19 General principles of the CE marking The CE marking shall be subject to the general principles set out in Article 30 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. Article 20 Rules and conditions for affixing the CE marking 1. The CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and indelibly to the battery. Where that is not possible or not warranted due to the nature of the battery, it shall be affixed to the packaging and to the documents accompanying the battery. 2. The CE marking shall be affixed before the battery is placed on the market or put into service. 3. The CE marking shall be followed by the identification number of the notified body where required under Annex VIII. That identification number shall be affixed by the notified body itself or, under its instructions, by the manufacturer or by its authorised representative. 4. The CE marking and the identification number referred to in paragraph 3 may be followed, if applicable, by any pictogram or other mark indicating a special risk, use or any danger linked to the use, storage, treatment or transport of the battery. 5. Member States shall build upon existing mechanisms to ensure correct application of the regime governing the CE marking and shall take appropriate action in the event of improper use of that marking. CHAPTER V Notification of conformity assessment bodies Article 21 Notification Member States shall notify the Commission and the other Member States of the conformity assessment bodies authorised to carry out conformity assessment tasks in accordance with this Regulation. Article 22 Notifying authorities 1. Member States shall designate a notifying authority that shall be responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures for the assessment and notification of conformity assessment bodies and the monitoring of notified bodies, including compliance with Article 27. 2. Member States may decide that the assessment and monitoring referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out by a national accreditation body as defined in Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 and in accordance with the provisions of that Regulation. 3. Where the notifying authority delegates or otherwise entrusts the assessment, notification or monitoring referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article to a body, which is not a governmental entity, that body shall be a legal entity, comply mutatis mutandis with the requirements laid down in Article 23 and have arrangements to cover liabilities arising from its activities. 4. The notifying authority shall take full responsibility for the tasks performed by the body referred to in paragraph 3. Article 23 Requirements relating to notifying authorities 1. A notifying authority shall be established in such a way that no conflict of interest with conformity assessment bodies occurs. 2. A notifying authority shall be organised and operated in such a way that the objectivity and impartiality of its activities are safeguarded. 3. A notifying authority shall be organised in such a way that each decision relating to notification of a conformity assessment body is taken by competent persons different from those who carried out the assessment of the conformity assessment bodies applying for notification in accordance with Article 28. 4. A notifying authority shall not offer or provide any activities that conformity assessment bodies perform and shall not provide consultancy services on a commercial or competitive basis. 5. A notifying authority shall safeguard the confidentiality of the information it obtains. However, it shall exchange information on notified bodies with the Commission as well as with notifying authorities of other Member States and other relevant national authorities. 6. A notifying authority shall have a sufficient number of competent personnel and sufficient funding at its disposal for the proper performance of its tasks. Article 24 Information obligation on notifying authorities Member States shall inform the Commission of their procedures for the assessment and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for the monitoring of notified bodies, and of any changes thereto. The Commission shall make that information publicly available. Article 25 Requirements relating to notified bodies 1. For the purposes of notification, a conformity assessment body shall meet the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2 to 11. 2. A conformity assessment body shall be established under the national law of a Member State and shall have legal personality. 3. A conformity assessment body shall be a third-party body independent from business and as regards the batteries it assesses, in particular from battery manufacturers, the battery manufacturers’ trade partners, shareholding investors on the battery manufacturers’ plants and from other notified bodies and the notified bodies’ business associations, parent companies or subsidiaries. 4. A conformity assessment body, its top level management and the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity assessment tasks shall not be the designer, manufacturer, supplier, importer, distributor, installer, purchaser, owner, user or maintainer of the batteries which they assess, nor the representative of any of those parties. That prohibition shall not preclude the use of assessed batteries that are necessary for the operations of the conformity assessment body or the use of such batteries for personal purposes. A conformity assessment body, its top level management and the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity assessment tasks shall not be directly involved in the design, manufacture, marketing, importation, distribution, installation, use or maintenance of those batteries, or represent the parties engaged in those activities. They shall not engage in any activity that could conflict with their independence of judgement or their integrity in relation to conformity assessment activities for which they are notified. This shall in particular apply to consultancy services. A conformity assessment body shall ensure that the activities of its parent or sister companies, subsidiaries or subcontractors do not affect the confidentiality, objectivity or impartiality of its conformity assessment activities. 5. A conformity assessment body and its personnel shall carry out the conformity assessment activities with the highest degree of professional integrity and the requisite technical competence in the specific field and shall be free from all pressures and inducements, particularly financial, which might influence their judgement or the results of their conformity assessment activities, especially as regards persons or groups of persons with an interest in the results of those activities. 6. A conformity assessment body shall be capable of carrying out all the conformity assessment tasks assigned to it in Annex VIII, periodical audits in accordance with Article 48(2) and third-party verification in accordance with Article 51 in relation to which it has been notified, whether those tasks are carried out by the conformity assessment body itself or on its behalf and under its responsibility. At all times, and for each conformity assessment procedure set out in Annex VIII, for periodical audits in accordance with Article 48(2) and third-party verification in accordance with Article 51, and for each category of batteries in relation to which it has been notified, a conformity assessment body shall have at its disposal: A conformity assessment body shall have the means necessary to perform the technical and administrative tasks related to its conformity assessment activities in an appropriate manner and shall have access to all necessary information, testing equipment or facilities. This shall include establishment and the supervision of internal procedures, general policies, codes of conduct or other internal rules, the assignment of personnel to specific tasks, and conformity assessment decisions, without delegating them to a subcontractor or a subsidiary. 7. The personnel responsible for carrying out conformity assessment tasks shall have the following: 8. The impartiality of a conformity assessment body, its top level management and the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity assessment tasks shall be guaranteed. The remuneration of the top-level management and the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity assessments tasks shall not depend on the number of conformity assessments carried out or on the results of those assessments. 9. A conformity assessment body shall take out liability insurance unless liability is assumed by the state in accordance with national law in the notifying Member State, or the Member State itself is directly responsible for the conformity assessment. 10. The personnel of a conformity assessment body shall observe professional secrecy with regard to all information obtained in carrying out the conformity assessment tasks in accordance with Annex VIII, periodical audits in accordance with Article 48(2), or third-party verification in accordance with Article 51, except in relation to the notifying authority and national authorities of the Member State in which its activities are carried out. Proprietary rights shall be protected. 11. A conformity assessment body shall participate in, or ensure that its personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity assessment tasks is informed of, the relevant standardisation activities and the activities of the sectoral coordination group of notified bodies established pursuant to Article 37 and shall apply as general guidance the administrative decisions and documents produced by that group. Article 26 Presumption of conformity of notified bodies Where a conformity assessment body demonstrates its conformity with the criteria laid down in the relevant harmonised standards, or parts thereof, for which Article 27 Subsidiaries of and subcontracting by notified bodies 1. Where a notified body subcontracts specific tasks related to conformity assessment or has recourse to a subsidiary, it shall ensure that the subcontractor or the subsidiary meets the requirements laid down in Article 25 and shall inform the notifying authority accordingly. 2. A notified body shall take full responsibility for the tasks performed by subcontractors or subsidiaries wherever those are established. 3. A notified body may subcontract activities or have activities carried out by a subsidiary only with the agreement of the client. 4. A notified body shall keep at the disposal of the notifying authority the relevant documents concerning the assessment of the qualifications of the subcontractor or the subsidiary and concerning the work carried out by them under Article 48(2) and Article 51 and under Annex VIII. Article 28 Application for notification 1. A conformity assessment body shall submit an application for notification to the notifying authority of the Member State in which it is established. 2. The application for notification shall be accompanied by a description of the conformity assessment activities, of the conformity assessment module or modules set out in Annex VIII or the procedures set out in Article 48(2) and Article 51, and of the batteries for which the conformity assessment body claims to be competent, as well as by an accreditation certificate, where applicable, issued by a national accreditation body attesting that the conformity assessment body meets the requirements laid down in Article 25. 3. Where the conformity assessment body concerned cannot provide an accreditation certificate as referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, it shall provide the notifying authority with all the documentary evidence necessary for the verification, recognition and regular monitoring of its compliance with the requirements laid down in Article 25, including appropriate documentation demonstrating that the conformity assessment body is independent within the meaning of Article 25(3). Article 29 Notification procedure 1. A notifying authority shall only notify conformity assessment bodies which meet the requirements laid down in Article 25. 2. The notifying authority shall send a notification to the Commission and the notifying authorities of the other Member States of each conformity assessment body referred to in paragraph 1 using the electronic notification tool developed and managed by the Commission. 3. The notification shall include full details of the conformity assessment activities, the conformity assessment module or modules or the procedures set out in Article 48(2) and Article 51, the categories of batteries concerned and the relevant attestation of competence. 4. Where a notification is not based on an accreditation certificate as referred to in Article 28(2), the notifying authority shall provide the Commission and the other Member States with documentary evidence which attests to the conformity assessment body’s competence and the arrangements in place to ensure that that body will be monitored regularly and will continue to meet the requirements laid down in Article 25. 5. The conformity assessment body concerned shall perform the activities of a notified body only where no objections are raised by the Commission or the other Member States within two weeks of the notification, where it includes an accreditation certificate referred to in Article 28(2), or within two months of the notification, where it includes documentary evidence referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article. Only such a conformity assessment body shall be considered to be a notified body for the purposes of this Regulation. 6. The notifying authority shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of any subsequent changes to the notification referred to in paragraph 2. Article 30 Identification numbers and lists of notified bodies 1. The Commission shall assign an identification number to each notified body. It shall assign a single number even where the body is notified under several Union acts. 2. The Commission shall make publicly available and keep updated a list of bodies notified under this Regulation, including the identification numbers that have been assigned to them and the conformity assessment activities for which they have been notified. Article 31 Changes to notifications 1. Where a notifying authority has ascertained or has been informed that a notified body no longer meets the requirements laid down in Article 25 or that it is failing to fulfil its obligations, the notifying authority shall restrict, suspend or withdraw the notification, as appropriate, depending on the seriousness of the failure to meet those requirements or fulfil those obligations. It shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States accordingly. 2. In the event of restriction, suspension or withdrawal of notification pursuant to paragraph 1, or where a notified body has ceased its activity, the notifying authority shall take appropriate steps to ensure that the files of that body are either processed by another notified body or kept available for the responsible notifying and market surveillance authorities at their request. Article 32 Challenge to the competence of notified bodies 1. The Commission shall investigate all cases where it has a doubt, or a doubt is brought to its attention, in particular by economic operators and other relevant stakeholders, regarding the competence of a notified body or the continued fulfilment by a notified body of the requirements and responsibilities to which it is subject. 2. The notifying authority shall provide the Commission, on request, with all information relating to the basis for the notification or the maintenance of the competence of the notified body concerned. 3. The Commission shall ensure that all sensitive information obtained in the course of its investigations is treated confidentially. 4. Where the Commission ascertains that a notified body does not meet or no longer meets the requirements for its notification, it shall adopt an implementing act requiring the notifying Member State to take the necessary corrective action, including withdrawal of the notification if necessary. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the advisory procedure referred to in Article 74(2). Article 33 Operational obligations of notified bodies 1. A notified body shall carry out conformity assessments in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures set out in Article 48(2), Article 51 or Annex VIII, as determined by the scope of the notification made in accordance with Article 29. 2. A notified body shall carry out conformity assessments in a proportionate manner, avoiding the creation of an unnecessary burden for economic operators, and taking due account of the size of an undertaking, the sector in which the undertaking operates, the structure of the undertaking, the degree of complexity of the battery to be assessed and the mass or serial nature of the production process. The notified body shall nevertheless respect the degree of rigour and the level of protection required for the compliance of the battery and of economic operators with this Regulation. 3. Where a notified body finds that the applicable requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13, 14, 49 and 50, in corresponding harmonised standards referred to in Article 15, common specifications referred to in Article 16 or other technical specifications have not been met, it shall require the manufacturer or other relevant economic operator to take appropriate corrective action in anticipation of a second and final conformity assessment, unless the deficiencies cannot be remedied. Where the deficiencies cannot be remedied, the notified body shall not issue the certificate of conformity or approval decision. 4. Where, in the course of the monitoring of conformity following the issue of an approval decision, a notified body finds that there is no longer compliance, it shall require the manufacturer or the economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) as applicable, to take appropriate corrective action and shall suspend or withdraw the approval decision, if necessary. 5. Where corrective action as referred to in paragraph 4 is not taken or does not have the required effect, the notified body shall restrict, suspend or withdraw the approval decision, as appropriate. Article 34 Appeal against decisions of notified bodies Member States shall ensure that an appeal procedure against the decisions of notified bodies is available. Article 35 Information obligation on notified bodies 1. A notified body shall inform the notifying authority of the following: 2. A notified body shall provide other notified bodies carrying out similar conformity assessment activities covering the same categories of batteries with relevant information on issues relating to: Article 36 Exchange of experience and good practice The Commission shall provide for the organisation of exchange of experience and good practice between the Member States’ authorities responsible for notification policy. Article 37 Coordination of notified bodies The Commission shall ensure that appropriate coordination and cooperation between notified bodies are put in place and properly operated in the form of a sectoral coordination group of notified bodies. Notified bodies shall participate in the work of the sectoral coordination group, directly or by means of designated representatives. CHAPTER VI Obligations of economic operators other than the obligations in Chapters VII and VIII Article 38 Obligations of manufacturers 1. When placing a battery on the market or putting it into service, including for the manufacturers’ own purposes, manufacturers shall ensure that the battery: 2. Before placing a battery on the market or putting it into service, manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII and carry out the relevant conformity assessment procedure, referred to in Article 17, or have it carried out. 3. Where compliance of a battery with the applicable requirements has been demonstrated by the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 17, manufacturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity in accordance with Article 18 and affix the CE marking in accordance with Articles 19 and 20. 4. Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation referred to in Annex IX and the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of national authorities for 10 years after the battery has been placed on the market or put into service. 5. Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for a battery that is part of a series production to remain in conformity with this Regulation. In doing so, manufacturers shall adequately take into account changes in the production process or in battery design or characteristics and changes in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 15, common specifications referred to in Article 16 or other technical specifications by reference to which the conformity of the battery is declared or by application of which its conformity is verified. 6. Manufacturers shall ensure that batteries which they place on the market bear a model identification and batch or serial number, or product number or another element allowing their identification. Where the size or nature of the battery does not allow it, the required information shall be provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the battery. 7. Manufacturers shall indicate on the battery their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, their postal address, indicating a single contact point, and, if available, web and email address. Where that is not possible, the required information shall be provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the battery. The contact details shall be indicated in a language or languages which can be easily understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities, as determined by the Member State in which the battery is to be placed on the market or put into service, and shall be clear, understandable and legible. 8. Manufacturers shall provide access to the data for the parameters set out in Annex VII in the battery management system referred to in Article 14(1), in accordance with the requirements laid down in that Article. 9. Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that a battery which they have placed on the market or put into service is not in conformity with one or more of the applicable requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14 shall immediately take the corrective action necessary to bring that battery into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, manufacturers shall immediately inform the market surveillance authority of the Member State in which they made the battery available on the market, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken. 10. Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the battery with the requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, in a language or languages which can be easily understood by that national authority. That information and documentation shall be provided in electronic format and, on request, in paper format. Manufacturers shall cooperate with the national authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by a battery which they have placed on the market or put into service. 11. Economic operators that carry out preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, and place on the market or put into service a battery that has undergone any of those operations, shall be considered to be manufacturers for the purposes of this Regulation. Article 39 Obligations of suppliers of battery cells and battery modules Suppliers of battery cells and battery modules shall provide the information and documentation necessary to comply with the requirements of this Regulation when supplying battery cells or modules to a manufacturer. That information and documentation shall be provided free of charge. Article 40 Obligations of authorised representatives 1. A manufacturer may, by a written mandate, designate an authorised representative. The authorised representative’s mandate shall be valid only when accepted in writing by the authorised representative. 2. The obligations laid down in Article 38(1) and Articles 48 to 52 and the obligation to draw up technical documentation shall not form part of the authorised representative’s mandate. 3. An authorised representative shall perform the tasks specified in the mandate received from the manufacturer. The authorised representative shall have the appropriate means to perform the tasks specified in the mandate. The authorised representative shall provide a copy of the mandate to the market surveillance authority, upon request, in a Union language determined by that authority. The mandate shall include at least the following tasks: 4. Where the battery presents a risk, authorised representatives shall immediately inform the market surveillance authorities thereof. Article 41 Obligations of importers 1. Importers shall only place on the market a battery which is compliant with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14. 2. Before placing a battery on the market, importers shall verify that: Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that a battery is not in conformity with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, the importer shall not place that battery on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, the importer shall inform the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities giving details of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken. 3. Importers shall indicate on the battery their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, their postal address, indicating a single contact point, and, if available, web and email address. Where that is not possible, the required information shall be provided on the packaging or in a document accompanying the battery. The contact details shall be in a language or languages which can be easily understood by end-users, as determined by the Member State in which the battery is to be made available on the market, and shall be clear, understandable and legible. 4. Importers shall ensure that, while a battery is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14. 5. When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by a battery, importers shall, to protect the human health and safety of consumers, carry out sample testing of marketed batteries, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming batteries and battery recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of such monitoring. 6. Importers who consider or have reason to believe that a battery which they have placed on the market is not in conformity with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, shall immediately take the corrective action necessary to bring that battery into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, importers shall immediately inform the market surveillance authority of the Member State in which they made the battery available on the market, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken. 7. Importers shall, for 10 years after the battery has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of conformity at the disposal of the national authorities and ensure that the technical documentation referred to in Annex VIII is made available to those authorities, upon request. 8. Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a national authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a battery with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, in a language or languages which can be easily understood by that authority. That information and the documentation shall be provided in electronic format and, on request, in paper format. Importers shall cooperate with the national authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by batteries, which they have placed on the market. Article 42 Obligations of distributors 1. When making a battery available on the market, distributors shall act with due care in relation to the requirements of this Regulation. 2. Before making a battery available on the market, distributors shall verify that: 3. Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that a battery is not in conformity with Articles 6 to 10 or Article 12, 13 or 14, the distributor shall not make the battery available on the market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, the distributor shall inform the manufacturer or the importer as well as the market surveillance authorities. 4. Distributors shall ensure that, while a battery is under their responsibility, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14. 5. Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that a battery which they have made available on the market is not in conformity with Articles 6 to 10 or Article 12, 13 or 14 shall make sure that the corrective action necessary to bring that battery into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, as appropriate, is taken. Furthermore, where the battery presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the market surveillance authorities of the Member States in which they made the battery available on the market, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective action taken. 6. Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a national authority, provide it with all the information and the documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a battery with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14 in a language or languages which can be easily understood by that national authority. That information and the documentation shall be provided in electronic format and, on request, in paper format. Distributors shall cooperate with the national authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by batteries that they have made available on the market. Article 43 Obligations of fulfilment service providers Fulfilment service providers shall ensure that, for batteries that they handle, the conditions during warehousing, packaging, addressing or dispatching, do not jeopardise the batteries’ compliance with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14. Without prejudice to the obligations of the relevant economic operators laid down in this Chapter, fulfilment service providers shall, in addition to the requirement referred to in the first paragraph, perform the tasks laid down in Article 40(3), point (c), and Article 40(4). Article 44 Case in which obligations of manufacturers apply to importers and distributors An importer or distributor shall be considered a manufacturer for the purposes of this Regulation and shall be subject to the obligations of a manufacturer under Article 38, where any of the following applies: Article 45 Obligations of economic operators placing on the market or putting into service batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing 1. Economic operators placing on the market or putting into service batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing shall ensure that the examination, performance testing, packing and shipment of those batteries, and of such batteries’ components subject to any of those operations, is carried out following adequate quality control and safety instructions. 2. Economic operators placing on the market or putting into service batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing shall ensure that the battery complies with the requirements of this Regulation, any relevant product, environmental, human health protection and transport safety requirements in other Union law, taking into account the fact that, as a result of those operations, the battery might fall under a different battery category. For remanufacturing operations, such economic operators shall provide, upon request, market surveillance authorities with the documentation necessary to demonstrate that the battery has been subject to remanufacturing in accordance with this Regulation. Article 46 Identification of economic operators 1. Economic operators shall, upon a request of a national authority, provide the following information to the market surveillance authorities: 2. Economic operators shall ensure that they are able to provide the information referred to in paragraph 1 for 10 years after they have been supplied with the battery and for 10 years after they have supplied the battery. CHAPTER VII Obligations of economic operators as regards battery due diligence policies Article 47 Scope of this Chapter This Chapter does not apply to economic operators that had a net turnover of less than EUR 40 million in the financial year preceding the last financial year, and that are not part of a group, consisting of parent and subsidiary undertakings, which, on a consolidated basis, exceeds the limit of EUR 40 million. This Chapter does not apply to economic operators in relation to the placing on the market or putting into service of batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, if such batteries had already been placed on the market or put into service before undergoing such operations. This Chapter applies without prejudice to the provisions laid down in Union law on due diligence obligations in relation to minerals and metals originating from conflict-affected and high-risk areas. Article 48 Battery due diligence policies 1. From 18 August 2025, economic operators that place batteries on the market or put them into service shall fulfil the due diligence obligations laid down in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, and in Articles 49, 50 and 52 and shall, to that end, set up and implement battery due diligence policies. 2. Economic operators referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall have their battery due diligence policies verified by a notified body in accordance with Article 51 (‘third-party verification’) and periodically audited by that notified body to make sure that the battery due diligence policies are maintained and applied in accordance with Articles 49, 50 and 52. The notified body shall provide the audited economic operator with an audit report. 3. Economic operators referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall keep documentation demonstrating their fulfilment of the obligations laid down in Articles 49, 50 and 52, including the verification report and approval decision referred to in Article 51 and the audit reports referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, for 10 years after the last battery manufactured under the relevant battery due diligence policy has been placed on the market. 4. Without prejudice to the individual responsibility of economic operators for their battery due diligence policies, economic operators referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may, for the purposes of compliance with the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52, collaborate with other actors, including through due diligence schemes recognised under this Regulation. 5. By 18 February 2025, the Commission shall publish guidelines as regards the application of the due diligence requirements laid down in Articles 49 and 50, with regard to the risks referred to in point 2 of Annex X, and in line, in particular, with the international instruments referred to in points 3 and 4 of Annex X. 6. Member States may, in order to provide information and support to economic operators in fulfilling the due diligence obligations under this Regulation, set up and operate, individually or jointly, dedicated websites, platforms or portals. 7. The Commission may complement the Member State support measures referred to in paragraph 6, by building on existing Union action to support due diligence in the Union and in third countries, and may devise new measures to help economic operators fulfil their obligations under this Regulation. 8. The Commission shall regularly assess the need to update the list of raw materials and risk categories set out in Annex X. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to: Article 49 Economic operator’s management system 1. Each economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall: 2. The system referred to in paragraph 1, point (d), shall be supported by documentation that provides at least the following information: Third party verification reports referred to in point (e) of the first subparagraph shall be made available by suppliers as referred to in Article 50(3) to the downstream operators of the supply chain. Article 50 Risk management obligations 1. The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall: 2. If the economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) pursues risk mitigation efforts while continuing trade or temporarily suspending trade, it shall consult with suppliers and with the stakeholders concerned, including local and national government authorities, international or civil society organisations and affected third parties such as local communities, before establishing a strategy for measurable risk mitigation in the risk management plan referred to in paragraph 1, point (b)(iii), of this Article. 3. The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall identify and assess the probability of adverse impacts in the risk categories listed in point 2 of Annex X, in its supply chain. That economic operator shall identify and assess the risks in its supply chain as part of its own risk management systems. The economic operator shall carry out third party verifications of its own due diligence chains via a notified body in accordance with Article 51. The economic operator may use third-party verification reports issued pursuant to Article 51(2) by such a notified body concerning battery due diligence policies implemented by suppliers in that chain in accordance with this Chapter. The economic operator may also use those third-party verification reports to assess, as appropriate, the due diligence practices of those suppliers. 4. The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall report the findings of the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article to its top management level to which responsibility has been assigned in accordance with Article 49(1), point (c), and shall implement the strategy referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), of this Article. Article 51 Third-party verification of battery due diligence policies 1. The notified body shall carry out third-party verifications. Such third-party verifications shall: 2. The notified body shall issue a verification report that records the activities undertaken in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article and their outcomes. Where the battery due diligence policies referred to in Article 48 fulfil the obligations laid down in Articles 49, 50 and 52, the notified body shall issue an approval decision. Article 52 Disclosure of information on battery due diligence policies 1. The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall make available upon request to Member States’ market surveillance authorities or national authorities the verification report and approval decision issued in accordance with Article 51, the audit reports referred to in Article 48(2) and available evidence of compliance with a due diligence scheme recognised by the Commission in accordance with Article 53. 2. The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall make available to its immediate downstream purchasers all relevant information gained and maintained pursuant to its battery due diligence policy, with due regard for business confidentiality and other competitive concerns. 3. The economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) shall on an annual basis review and make publicly available, including on the internet, a report on its battery due diligence policy. That report shall contain, in a manner that is easily comprehensible for end-users and clearly identifies the batteries concerned, the data and information on steps taken by that economic operator to comply with the requirements laid down in Articles 49 and 50, including findings of significant adverse impacts in the risk categories listed in point 2 of Annex X, and how they have been addressed, as well as a summary report of the third-party verifications carried out in accordance with Article 51, including the name of the notified body, with due regard for business confidentiality and other competitive concerns. That report shall also cover, where relevant, access to information, public participation in decision-making and access to justice in environmental matters in relation to the sourcing, processing and trading of the raw materials present in batteries. 4. Where the economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) can demonstrate that the raw materials listed in point 1 of Annex X, that are present in the battery are derived from recycled sources, it shall publicly disclose its conclusions in reasonable detail, with due regard for business confidentiality and other competitive concerns. Article 53 Recognition of due diligence schemes 1. Governments, industry associations and groupings of interested organisations that have developed and oversee due diligence schemes (‘scheme owners’) may apply to have their due diligence schemes recognised by the Commission. The Commission is empowered to adopt implementing acts establishing the information requirements that the application for recognition is to contain. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). 2. Where, on the basis of the evidence and information provided pursuant to the paragraph 1 of this Article, the Commission determines that the due diligence scheme referred to in that paragraph, enables economic operators to meet the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52, it shall adopt an implementing act granting that scheme a recognition of equivalence with the requirements laid down in this Regulation. The OECD Centre for Responsible Business Conduct shall be consulted prior to the adoption of that implementing act. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). When making a determination on the recognition of a due diligence scheme, the Commission shall take into account the diverse industry practices covered by that scheme and shall have regard to the risk-based approach and method used by that scheme to identify risks. 3. The Commission shall adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 setting out the criteria and the methodology according to which the Commission is to determine, in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, whether due diligence schemes enable economic operators to meet the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52. The Commission shall also, as appropriate, periodically verify that recognised due diligence schemes continue to fulfil the criteria that led to a decision to grant recognition of equivalence pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article. 4. The owner of a due diligence scheme for which the recognition of equivalence was granted in accordance with paragraph 2 shall inform the Commission without delay of any changes or updates made to that scheme. The Commission shall assess whether such changes or updates affect the recognition of equivalence of that scheme and take appropriate action. 5. If there is evidence of repeated or significant cases where economic operators implementing a scheme recognised in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article have failed to meet the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52, the Commission shall examine, in consultation with the owner of the recognised due diligence scheme, whether those cases indicate deficiencies in the scheme. 6. Where the Commission identifies a failure to comply with the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52 or deficiencies in a recognised due diligence scheme, it may grant the scheme owner an appropriate period to take remedial action. 7. Where the scheme owner fails or refuses to take the necessary remedial action, and where the Commission has determined that the failure or deficiencies referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article compromise the ability of the economic operator referred to in Article 48(1) implementing the scheme to comply with the requirements laid down in Articles 48, 49, 50 and 52 or where repeated or significant cases of non-compliance by economic operators implementing a scheme are due to deficiencies in the scheme, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act withdrawing the recognition of equivalence of the scheme. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). 8. The Commission shall establish and keep up-to-date a register of recognised due diligence schemes. That register shall be made publicly available on the internet. CHAPTER VIII Management of waste batteries Article 54 Competent authority 1. Member States shall designate one or more competent authorities responsible for the obligations under this Chapter, in particular for monitoring and verifying fulfilment by producers and producer responsibility organisations of their obligations under this Chapter. 2. Each Member State may also designate one contact point, among the competent authorities referred to in paragraph 1, for the purpose of communicating with the Commission pursuant to paragraph 4. 3. Member States shall lay down the details of the competent authority’s or authorities’ organisation and operation, including the administrative and procedural rules for: 4. By 18 November 2025, Member States shall notify the Commission of the names and addresses of the competent authorities designated pursuant to paragraph 1. Member States shall inform the Commission without undue delay of any changes to the names or addresses of those competent authorities. Article 55 Register of producers 1. Member States shall establish a register of producers which shall serve to monitor compliance of producers with the requirements of this Chapter. 2. Producers shall register in the register referred to in paragraph 1. They shall to that end submit an application for registration in each Member State where they make a battery available on the market for the first time. Producers shall submit the application for registration via an electronic data-processing system as referred to in paragraph 9, point (a). Producers shall only make available batteries, including those incorporated in appliances, light means of transport or other vehicles, on the market of a Member State, if they or, in the case of authorisation, their authorised representatives for extended producer responsibility, are registered in that Member State. 3. The application for registration shall include the following information: 4. Without prejudice to paragraph 3 of this Article, the information laid down in point (d) of that paragraph shall be provided either in the application for registration under paragraph 3 of this Article or in the application for authorisation under Article 58. Such application for authorisation shall include at least information on either individual or collective fulfilment of the extended producer responsibility obligations. 5. Member States may request additional information or documents, as necessary, to use the register of producers in an efficient manner. 6. Where a producer has appointed a producer responsibility organisation in accordance with Article 57(1), the obligations under this Article shall be met by that organisation mutatis mutandis unless otherwise specified by the Member State. 7. The obligations under this Article may be fulfilled on a producer’s behalf by an authorised representative for extended producer responsibility. Where obligations under this Article are fulfilled on a producer’s behalf by an authorised representative for extended producer responsibility that represents more than one producer, in addition to the information required under paragraph 3, that authorised representative shall provide the name and the contact details for each of the represented producers separately. 8. Member States may decide that the registration procedure pursuant to this Article and the authorisation procedure pursuant to Article 58 constitute a single procedure, provided that the application meets the requirements laid down in paragraphs (3) to (7) of this Article. 9. The competent authority shall: 10. The competent authority may: 11. The competent authority may refuse to register a producer or withdraw the producer’s registration where the information referred to in paragraph 3 and related documentary evidence are not provided or are not sufficient, or where the producer no longer meets the requirements laid down in paragraph 3, point (d). The competent authority shall withdraw the producer’s registration if it has ceased to exist. 12. The producer, or, where applicable, authorised representative for extended producer responsibility or the producer responsibility organisation appointed on behalf of the producers it represents shall without undue delay notify the competent authority of any changes to the information contained in the registration and of any permanent cessation as regards the making available on the market within the territory of the Member State of the batteries referred to in the registration. 13. Where the information in the register of producers is not publicly accessible, Member States shall ensure that providers of online platforms allowing consumers to conclude distance contracts with producers are granted access, free of charge, to the information in the register. Article 56 Extended Producer Responsibility 1. Producers shall have extended producer responsibility for batteries that they make available on the market for the first time within the territory of a Member State. Such producers shall comply with the requirements of Articles 8 and 8a of Directive 2008/98/EC and of this Chapter. 2. An economic operator that makes available on the market for the first time within the territory of a Member State a battery that results from preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing operations shall be considered to be the producer of such battery for the purposes of this Regulation and shall have extended producer responsibility. 3. A producer as defined in Article 3, point (47)(d) shall appoint an authorised representative for extended producer responsibility in each Member State in which it sells batteries. Such appointment shall be made by written mandate. 4. The financial contributions to be paid by the producer shall cover the following costs for the products that the producer makes available on the market in the Member State concerned: 5. In the case of making available batteries that have been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, both the producers of the original batteries and the producers of the batteries that are placed on the market as a result of those operations, may establish and adjust a cost sharing mechanism, based on the actual attribution of costs between the different producers, for the costs referred to in paragraph 4, points (a), (c) and (d). Where a battery referred to in paragraph 2 is subject to more than one extended producer responsibility, the first producer making that battery available on the market shall not bear additional costs as a result of the cost sharing mechanism referred to in the first subparagraph. The Commission shall facilitate the exchange of information and sharing of best practices among Member States regarding such cost sharing mechanisms. Article 57 Producer Responsibility Organisation 1. Producers may appoint a producer responsibility organisation authorised in accordance with Article 58 to fulfil the extended producer responsibility obligations on their behalf. Member States may adopt measures to make the appointment of a producer responsibility organisation mandatory. Such measures shall be justified on the basis of the specific characteristics of a given category of batteries placed on the market and related waste management characteristics. 2. In the case of a collective fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, producer responsibility organisations shall ensure equal treatment of producers regardless of their origin or size, without placing a disproportionate burden on producers of small quantities of batteries, including small- and medium-sized enterprises. They shall also ensure that the financial contributions paid to them by producers: 3. Where, in a Member State, multiple producer responsibility organisations are authorised to fulfil extended producer responsibility obligations on behalf of producers, they shall ensure coverage across the whole territory of the Member State of the activities referred to in Article 59(1), Article 60(1) and Article 61(1). Member States shall designate the competent authority or appoint an independent third party to ensure that producer responsibility organisations fulfil their obligations in coordinated manner. 4. Producer responsibility organisations shall ensure the confidentiality of the data in its possession as regards proprietary information or information directly attributable to individual producers or their authorised representatives for extended producer responsibility. 5. In addition to the information referred to in Article 8a(3), point (e), of Directive 2008/98/EC, producer responsibility organisations shall publish on their websites at least each year, subject to commercial and industrial confidentiality, the information on the rate of separate collection of waste batteries, recycling efficiencies and the levels of recovery of materials achieved by the producers which appointed the producer responsibility organisation. 6. In addition to the information referred to in paragraph 5, producer responsibility organisations shall make publicly available information on the selection procedure for waste management operators selected in accordance with paragraph 8. 7. Where necessary to avoid distortion of the internal market, the Commission is empowered to adopt an implementing act laying down criteria for the application of paragraph 2, point (a), of this Article. That implementing act shall not concern the precise determination of the level of the contributions and shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). 8. Waste management operators shall be subject to a non-discriminatory selection procedure, based on transparent award criteria, carried out by producers or producer responsibility organisations and which does not place a disproportionate burden on small- and medium-sized enterprises. Article 58 Authorisation on fulfilment of extended producer responsibility 1. A producer, in the case of individual fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, and producer responsibility organisations appointed in the case of collective fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, shall apply for an authorisation on fulfilment of extended producer responsibility from the competent authority. 2. The authorisation shall be granted only where it is demonstrated: 3. Member States shall, in their measures laying down administrative and procedural rules referred to in Article 54(3), point (b), include the details of the authorisation procedure, which may differ according to whether it relates to individual or collective fulfilment of the extended producer responsibility obligations, and the modalities for verifying compliance of producers or producer responsibility organisations, including the information to be provided by producers or producer responsibility organisations to that end. The authorisation procedure shall include requirements on the verification of the arrangements put in place to ensure compliance with the requirements laid down in Article 59(1) and (2) and in Article 60(1), (2) and (4), and timeframes for the verification, which shall not exceed 12 weeks from the submission of a complete application dossier. The verification may be carried out by an independent expert, which shall issue a verification report on the result of verification. 4. The producer or the producer responsibility organisations shall notify the competent authority without undue delay of any changes to the information contained in the authorisation, of any changes that concern the terms of the authorisation or of the permanent cessation of operations. 5. The self-control mechanism provided for in Article 8a(3), point (d), of Directive 2008/98/EC shall be carried out regularly, and at least every three years, and upon request by the competent authority, in order to verify that the provisions in that point are complied with and the conditions for authorisation referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article continue to be met. The producer or the producer responsibility organisation shall, upon request, present a self-control report and, where necessary, the draft corrective action plan to the competent authority. Without prejudice to the competencies under paragraph 6 of this Article, the competent authority may make observations on the self-control report and on the draft corrective action plan, and shall communicate any such observations to the producer or the producer responsibility organisation. The producer or the producer responsibility organisation shall draw up and implement the corrective action plan based on those observations. 6. The competent authority may decide to revoke the authorisation if collection targets laid down in Article 59(3) or Article 60(3) are not met or the producer or producer responsibility organisation no longer meets the requirements with regard to the organisation of the collection and treatment of waste batteries or fails in relation to reporting to the competent authority or fails to notify it of any changes that concern the terms of the authorisation, or has ceased operations. 7. A producer, in the case of individual fulfilment of extended producer responsibility obligations, and producer responsibility organisations appointed in the case of collective fulfilment of extended producer responsibility, shall provide a guarantee intended to cover the costs related to waste management operations due by the producer, or the producer responsibility organisation, in the event of non-compliance with the extended producer responsibility obligations, including in the event of permanent cessation of their operations or insolvency. Member States may specify additional requirements concerning such guarantee. In the case of a state-run producer responsibility organisation, such guarantee may be provided otherwise than by the organisation itself and may take the form of a public fund that is financed by producers’ fees and for which the Member State running the organisation is jointly and severally liable. Article 59 Collection of waste portable batteries 1. Producers of portable batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall ensure that all waste portable batteries, regardless of their nature, chemical composition, condition, brand or origin, are collected separately in the territory of a Member State where they make portable batteries available on the market for the first time. For that purpose they shall: 2. Producers of portable batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall ensure that the waste portable battery take-back and collection system: 3. Producers of portable batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall attain, and maintain durably, at least the following collection targets for waste portable batteries: Producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall calculate the collection rate referred to in this paragraph in accordance with Annex XI. 4. End-users shall be able to discard waste portable batteries at collection points referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), and shall not be charged or be obliged to buy a new battery or to have bought the portable battery from the producers who set up the collection points. 5. Collection points set up in accordance with paragraph 2, points (a)(i), (iii) and (iv), shall not be subject to the registration or permit requirements of Directive 2008/98/EC. 6. Member States may adopt measures to require that the collection points referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), of this Article may collect waste portable batteries only if they have concluded a contract with the producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations. 7. In view of the expected development of the market and increase of the expected lifetime of rechargeable portable batteries, and in order to better ascertain the actual volume of waste portable batteries available for collection, the Commission is empowered to adopt, by 18 August 2027 delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the methodology to calculate the collection rate of portable batteries set out in Annex XI and to amend the collection target laid down in paragraph 3 of this Article to adapt that collection target to the new methodology while maintaining equivalent ambition and timelines. Article 60 Collection of waste LMT batteries 1. Producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall ensure that all waste LMT batteries, regardless of their nature, chemical composition, condition, brand or origin, are collected separately in the territory of a Member State where they make batteries available on the market for the first time. For that purpose they shall: 2. Producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall ensure that the take back and collection system for waste LMT batteries: 3. Producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall attain, and maintain durably, at least the following collection targets of waste LMT batteries: Producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations shall calculate the collection rate referred to in this paragraph in accordance with Annex XI. 4. Producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall: 5. End-users shall be able to discard waste LMT batteries at collection points referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), and shall not be charged or be obliged to buy a new battery or to have bought the LMT battery from the producers who set up the collection points. 6. Collection points set up in accordance with paragraph 2, points (a)(i), (iii) and (iv), shall not be subject to the registration or permit requirements of Directive 2008/98/EC. 7. Member States may adopt measures to require that the collection points referred to in paragraph 2, point (a), of this Article may collect waste LMT batteries only if they have concluded a contract with the producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations. 8. In view of the expected development of the market and increase of the expected lifetime of LMT batteries, and in order to better ascertain the actual volume of waste LMT batteries available for collection, the Commission is empowered to adopt, by 18 August 2027, delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the methodology to calculate the collection rate of waste LMT batteries set out in Annex XI and to amend the collection target laid down in paragraph 3 of this Article to adapt the collection target to the new methodology while maintaining equivalent ambition and timelines. Article 61 Collection of waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries 1. Producers of SLI batteries, industrial batteries and electric vehicle batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall take back, free of charge and without an obligation on the end-user to buy a new battery, nor to have bought the battery from them, and shall ensure that all waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries regardless of their nature, chemical composition, condition, brand, or origin of the respective category that they have made available on the market for the first time in the territory of that Member State are collected separately. For that purpose, they shall accept to take back waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries from end-users, or from take-back and collection systems which include collection points set up by them in cooperation with: Member States may adopt measures to require that the entities referred to in the first subparagraph, points (a) to (d), may collect waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries only if they have concluded a contract with the producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations. Where waste industrial batteries require prior dismantling at the premises of private, non-commercial users, the obligation of the producer to take back those waste batteries shall not result in any costs related to the dismantling and collection of those waste batteries being borne by those users. 2. The take-back arrangements put in place in accordance with paragraph 1 shall cover the whole territory of a Member State taking into account population size and density, expected volume of waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries, accessibility for and proximity to end-users, not being limited to areas where the collection and subsequent management of waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries is profitable. 3. Producers of SLI batteries, industrial batteries and electric vehicle batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, shall: 4. The entities referred to in paragraph 1, points (a) to (d), of this Article may hand over collected waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries to waste management operators selected in accordance with Article 57(8) with a view to their treatment in accordance with Article 70. In such cases, the obligation of producers pursuant to paragraph 3, point (c), of this Article shall be deemed to be met. Article 62 Obligations of distributors 1. Distributors shall take back waste batteries from the end-user free of charge and without imposing an obligation on the end-user to buy or to have bought a new battery, regardless of their chemical composition, brand or origin as follows: 2. The take back obligation laid down in paragraph 1: 3. Distributors shall hand over waste batteries that they have taken back to the producers or producer responsibility organisations who are responsible for collecting those waste batteries in accordance with Articles 59, 60 and 61 respectively, or to a waste management operator selected in accordance with Article 57(8) with a view to their treatment in accordance with Article 70. 4. The obligations under this Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to distributors that supply batteries by means of distance contracts to end-users. Those distributors shall provide for a sufficient number of collection points covering the whole territory of a Member State and taking into account population size and density, expected volume of waste portable batteries, waste LMT batteries, waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries respectively, and accessibility for and proximity to end-users, allowing end-users to return batteries. 5. In the case of sales with delivery, distributors shall offer to take back waste portable batteries, waste LMT batteries, waste industrial batteries, waste SLI batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries free of charge at the point of delivery to the end-user or at a local collection point. The end-user shall be informed when ordering a battery of the take back arrangements for a waste battery. 6. For the purposes of compliance with Article 30(1), points (d) and (e), of Regulation (EU) 2022/2065, providers of online platforms, falling within the scope of Section 4 of Chapter III of that Regulation, that allow consumers to conclude distance contracts with producers shall obtain the following information from producers offering batteries, including batteries incorporated in appliances, light means of transport or other vehicles, to consumers located in the Union: Article 63 Deposit return systems for batteries By 31 December 2027, the Commission shall assess the feasibility and potential benefits of establishment of deposit return systems for batteries, in particular for portable batteries of general use. To that end, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council and consider taking appropriate measures, including the adoption of legislative proposals. Article 64 Obligations of end-users 1. End-users shall discard waste batteries separately from other waste streams, including from mixed municipal waste. 2. End-users shall discard waste batteries in designated separate collection points set up by, or in accordance with the specific arrangements concluded with, the producer or a producer responsibility organisation, in accordance with Articles 59, 60 and 61. Article 65 Obligations of operators of treatment facilities 1. Operators of treatment facilities subject to Directives 2000/53/EC or 2012/19/EU shall hand over waste batteries resulting from the treatment of end-of-life vehicles or waste electrical and electronic equipment to producers of the relevant category of batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, or to waste management operators selected in accordance with Article 57(8) with a view to their treatment in accordance with Article 70. 2. The operators of treatment facilities referred to in paragraph 1 shall keep records of those handover transactions. Article 66 Participation of public waste management authorities 1. Waste batteries originating from private, non-commercial end-users may be discarded in separate collection points set up by public waste management authorities. 2. Public waste management authorities shall ensure that collected waste batteries are treated in accordance with Article 70, either by: Article 67 Participation of voluntary collection points 1. Voluntary collection points for waste portable batteries shall hand over collected waste portable batteries to the producers of portable batteries or third parties acting on their behalf, including producer responsibility organisations, or to waste management operators selected in accordance with Article 57(8) with a view to their treatment in accordance with Article 70. 2. Voluntary collection points for waste LMT batteries shall hand over collected waste LMT batteries to the producers of LMT batteries or third parties acting on their behalf, including producer responsibility organisations, or to waste management operators selected in accordance with Article 57(8) with a view to their treatment in accordance with Article 70. Article 68 Restrictions regarding handover of waste portable batteries and waste LMT batteries 1. Member States may restrict the ability of distributors, operators of waste treatment facilities referred to in Article 65, public waste management authorities referred to in Article 66 and voluntary collection points referred to in Article 67 to hand over collected waste portable batteries and waste LMT batteries either to producers or producer responsibility organisations, or to a waste management operator to carry out treatment in accordance with Article 70. Member States shall ensure that such restrictions do not have an adverse impact on the collection and recycling systems. 2. Member States may also adopt measures to allow public waste management authorities referred to in Article 66 to carry out treatment in accordance with Article 70 themselves. Article 69 Obligations for Member States regarding collection targets for waste portable batteries and waste LMT batteries 1. Member States shall adopt the necessary measures for the achievement by producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, of the collection targets laid down in Article 59(3), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), with regard to waste portable batteries, and laid down in Article 60(3), first subparagraph, points (a) and (b), with regard to waste LMT batteries. 2. In particular, Member States shall regularly, at least once a year, monitor producers’ or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations’ collection rates to verify that they have taken adequate measures to achieve the collection targets laid down in Article 59(3), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c) with regard to waste portable batteries, and laid down in Article 60(3), first subparagraph, points (a) and (b) with regard to waste LMT batteries. Such monitoring shall be based in particular on the information reported to the competent authorities in accordance with Article 75 and shall include the verification of that information, and of whether the producer has complied with the calculation methodology set out in Annex XI and the results of the compositional survey referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article and any other information available to the Member State. 3. Where, on the basis of the monitoring referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, a Member State finds that a producer or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), a producer responsibility organisation, has not taken measures consistent with the achievement of the collection targets laid down in Article 59(3), first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c) with regard to waste portable batteries, or laid down in Article 60(3), first subparagraph, points (a) and (b) with regard to waste LMT batteries, the competent authority of that Member State shall request that producer or producer responsibility organisation to take appropriate corrective action ensuring that it can achieve the collection targets laid down in either of those Articles, as applicable. 4. Without prejudice to the self-control mechanism referred to in Article 58(5), the producer or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisation shall present a draft corrective action plan to the competent authority within three months of the request by the competent authority referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article. That competent authority may make observations on the draft plan, and shall communicate any such observations to the producer or the producer responsibility organisation within one month of the reception of the draft corrective action plan. Where the competent authority communicates its observations on the draft corrective action plan, the producer or the producer responsibility organisations shall, within one month of receipt of those observations, draw up the corrective action plan, taking into account those observations, and shall implement it accordingly. The content of the corrective action plan and the compliance with it by the producer or the producer responsibility organisation shall be taken into account when evaluating whether the conditions for the registration laid down in Article 55 and, where applicable, the authorisation laid down in Article 58 continue to be met. 5. By 1 January 2026 and every five years thereafter, Member States shall carry out a compositional survey of collected mixed municipal waste and waste electrical and electronic equipment streams for the preceding calendar year to determine the share of waste portable batteries and waste LMT batteries therein. On the basis of those surveys, the competent authorities may require that the producers of portable batteries, producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), the respective producer responsibility organisations take corrective action to increase their network of connected collection points and carry out information campaigns in accordance with Article 74(1). Article 70 Treatment 1. Collected waste batteries shall not be disposed of or be the subject of an energy recovery operation. 2. Without prejudice to Directive 2010/75/EU, permitted facilities shall ensure that treatment for waste batteries complies, as a minimum, with Part A of Annex XII to this Regulation and with best available techniques defined in Article 3, point (10), of Directive 2010/75/EU. 3. Where batteries are collected while still incorporated in a waste appliance, a waste light means of transport or an end-of-life vehicle, they shall be removed from the waste appliance, waste light means of transport or end-of-life vehicle in accordance with, where applicable, the requirements laid down in Directives 2000/53/EC or 2012/19/EU. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the treatment requirements for waste batteries set out in Part A of Annex XII in light of technical and scientific progress and emerging new technologies in waste management. 5. Member States may set up incentive schemes for economic operators that achieve higher rates than the targets set out in Parts B and C of Annex XII for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials respectively. Article 71 Targets for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials 1. Each permitted facility shall ensure that all waste batteries made available to that facility are accepted and undergo preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing or recycling. 2. Recyclers shall ensure that recycling achieves the targets for recycling efficiency and the targets for recovery of materials set out in Parts B and C of Annex XII respectively. 3. The rates for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials shall be calculated in accordance with the rules laid down in a delegated act adopted pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Article. 4. The Commission shall, by 18 February 2025, adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to supplement this Regulation by establishing the methodology for calculation and verification of rates for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials, in accordance with Part A of Annex XII, and the format for the documentation. 5. By 18 August 2026 and at least every five years thereafter, the Commission shall assess whether, due to market developments, in particular concerning battery technologies impacting the type of materials recovered and the existing and forecasted availability of cobalt, copper, lead, lithium or nickel or the lack thereof, and in view of technical and scientific progress, it is appropriate to revise the targets for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials set out in Parts B and C of Annex XII. Where justified and appropriate on the basis of that assessment, the Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89 to amend the targets for recycling efficiency and recovery of materials set out in Parts B and C of Annex XII. 6. Where appropriate due to market developments impacting the type of materials that can be recovered and in light of technical and scientific progress, including emerging new technologies in waste management, the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89, to amend Part C of Annex XII, by adding further materials with specific targets for recovery of material per specific material, and Part B of Annex XII, by adding further battery chemistries with specific targets for recycling efficiency. Article 72 Shipment of waste batteries 1. Treatment may be undertaken outside the Member State concerned or outside the Union, provided that the shipment of waste batteries or fractions thereof, is in compliance with Regulations (EC) No 1013/2006 and (EC) No 1418/2007. 2. In order to distinguish between used batteries and waste batteries, the competent authorities of Member States may inspect shipments of used batteries suspected to be waste batteries for compliance with the minimum requirements set out in Annex XIV and monitor such shipments accordingly. Where the competent authorities in a Member State establish that an intended shipment of used batteries consists of waste batteries, the costs of appropriate analyses, inspections and storage of the used batteries suspected to be waste may be charged to the producers of the relevant category of batteries, to third parties acting on their behalf or to other persons arranging the shipment. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89, supplementing the minimum requirements set out in Annex XIV, in particular on the state of health, to distinguish between the shipment of used batteries and waste batteries. 3. Waste batteries or fractions thereof exported from the Union in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article shall only count towards the fulfilment of obligations, efficiencies and targets laid down in Articles 70 and 71 if the exporter of the waste batteries or fractions thereof provides documentary evidence approved by the competent authority of destination that the treatment took place in conditions that are equivalent to those required by this Regulation and in accordance with other Union law regarding human health and environmental protection. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt a delegated act in accordance with Article 89, to lay down detailed rules supplementing those in paragraph 3 of this Article, by laying down the criteria for the assessment of equivalent conditions. Article 73 Preparation for re-use or preparation for repurposing of waste LMT batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries 1. In order to document that a waste LMT battery, waste industrial battery and waste electric vehicle battery subject to preparation for re-use or preparation for repurposing, is no longer waste, the battery holder shall demonstrate the following upon request by a competent authority: 2. The information referred to in paragraph 1, point (a), shall be made available to end-users and third parties acting on their behalf, on equal terms and conditions, as part of the documentation accompanying the battery referred to in paragraph 1 when placed on the market or put into service. 3. The provision of information in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be without prejudice to obligations to preserve the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information under the relevant Union and national law. 4. The Commission is empowered to adopt an implementing act establishing detailed technical and verification requirements that waste LMT batteries, waste industrial batteries or waste electric vehicle batteries are to fulfil to cease being waste. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). Article 74 Information on prevention and management of waste batteries 1. In addition to the information referred to in Article 8a(2) of Directive 2008/98/EC, producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations shall make available to end-users and distributors the following information regarding the prevention and management of waste batteries with regard to the categories of batteries that they supply within the territory of a Member State: That information shall be made available: 2. Producers shall make available to distributors and operators referred to in Articles 62, 65 and 66 and other waste management operators carrying out preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, or treatment, information regarding the safety and protective measures, including on occupational safety, applicable to the storage and collection of waste batteries. 3. From the moment that a battery is supplied within the territory of a Member State producers shall make available electronically, free of charge and upon request, to waste management operators carrying out preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing or treatment, as far as it is needed by those operators to carry out those activities, the following battery model specific information regarding the proper and environmentally sound treatment of waste batteries: The information referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph shall identify the components and materials and the location of all hazardous substances in a battery, as far as it is needed by operators carrying out preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing or treatment, in order to enable them to comply with the requirements of this Regulation. That information shall be made available in a language or languages, which can be easily understood by the operators mentioned in the first subparagraph, as determined by the Member State on whose market the battery is to be made available. 4. Distributors that supply batteries to end-users shall permanently provide in their retail premises in an easily accessible and clearly visible manner for the end-users of the batteries, the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, and information on how the end-users may return waste batteries free of charge to the respective collection points established at retail outlets or on behalf of an online platform. That obligation shall be limited to the categories of batteries which the distributor or retailer has, or had, as new batteries in its offer. Distributors shall provide the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 also when they sell their products through online platforms that allow consumers to conclude distance contracts with traders. 5. The costs covered by the producer under Article 56(4), points (a) to (d), shall be shown separately to the end-user at the point of sale of a new battery. 6. Producers of the relevant category of batteries or producer responsibility organisations shall conduct awareness campaigns and offer incentives to encourage end-users to discard waste batteries in a manner that is in line with the information made available to end-users regarding the prevention and management of waste batteries in accordance with paragraph 1. 7. Where information is provided publicly to end-users under this Article, the confidentiality of commercially sensitive information in conformity with the relevant Union and national law shall be preserved. Article 75 Minimum requirements for reporting to the competent authorities 1. Producers of portable batteries and producers of LMT batteries or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations shall report to the competent authority, for each calendar year, at least the following information according to the chemistry and category of batteries and waste batteries: Where waste management operators other than producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, collect waste portable batteries or waste LMT batteries from distributors or other collection points for waste portable batteries or waste LMT batteries, they shall report to the competent authority for each calendar year the amount of waste portable batteries and waste LMT batteries collected according to their chemistry. 2. Producers of SLI batteries, industrial batteries and electric vehicle batteries or where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1) producer responsibility organisations, shall report to the competent authority for each calendar year the following information, according to chemistries and categories of waste batteries: 3. Where waste management operators collect waste batteries from distributors or other collection points for waste SLI batteries, waste industrial batteries and waste electric vehicle batteries or from end-users, they shall report to the competent authority for each calendar year the following information according to chemistries and categories of waste batteries: 4. The information referred to in paragraph 1, points (a) to (g), of this Article shall include information on batteries incorporated into vehicles and appliances, and waste batteries removed from vehicles and appliances in accordance with Article 65. 5. Waste management operators carrying out treatment and recyclers shall report to the competent authorities of the Member State where treatment of waste batteries takes place, for each calendar year and by Member State where the waste batteries were collected, the following information: Reporting on the recycling efficiency and recovery of materials shall cover all individual steps of recycling and all corresponding output fractions. Where recycling operations are carried out at more than one facility, the first recycler shall be responsible for collecting the information and reporting that information to the competent authorities. The competent authority of the Member State where the treatment of waste batteries takes place, shall provide the information referred to in this paragraph to the competent authority of the Member State where the batteries were collected, if different. Waste batteries sent to another Member State for treatment in that other Member State shall be included in the recycling efficiency and recovery of materials data and shall count towards the attainment of the targets set out in Annex XII by the Member State in which that waste was collected. 6. Where waste holders other than those referred to in paragraph 5 export batteries for treatment they shall report the data on the amount of separately collected waste batteries exported for treatment and the data referred to in paragraph 5, points (b) and (c) to the competent authorities of the Member States where they are located. 7. Producers or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), producer responsibility organisations, waste management operators and waste holders referred to in this Article shall report within six months of the end of the reporting year for which the data are collected. The first reporting period shall concern the first full calendar year after the entry into force of the implementing act that establishes the format for reporting to the Commission, in accordance with Article 76(5). 8. The competent authorities shall establish electronic systems through which data shall be reported to them and specify the formats to be used. 9. Member State may allow competent authorities to request any additional information necessary to ensure that the data reported are reliable. Article 76 Reporting to the Commission 1. Member States shall make publicly available in an aggregated form for each calendar year and in the format established by the Commission in the implementing act adopted pursuant to paragraph 5, the following data on portable batteries, LMT batteries, SLI batteries, industrial batteries and electric vehicle batteries, according to battery categories and their chemistries: Member States shall make those data available within 18 months of the end of the reporting year for which the data are collected. They shall make those data public electronically in the format established by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 5, using easily accessible data services. The data shall be machine readable, sortable and searchable, and shall respect open standards for third party use. Member States shall notify the Commission when the data referred to in the first subparagraph are made available. The first reporting period shall concern the first full calendar year after the entry into force of the implementing act that establishes the format for reporting to the Commission, in accordance with paragraph 5. In addition to the obligations under Directives 2000/53/EC and 2012/19/EU, data referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a) to (d), of this Article shall include batteries incorporated into vehicles and appliances, and waste batteries removed from those vehicles and appliances in accordance with Article 65. 2. Reporting on the recycling efficiency and recovery of materials referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (d), shall cover all individual steps of recycling and all corresponding output fractions. 3. The data made available by Member States in accordance with this Article shall be accompanied by a quality check report to be presented in the format established by the Commission in accordance with paragraph 5. 4. The Commission shall collect and review the information made available in accordance with this Article. The Commission shall publish a report assessing the organisation of the data collection, the sources of data and the methodology used in Member States as well as the completeness, reliability, timeliness and consistency of those data. That assessment may include specific recommendations for improvement. The report shall be drawn up within 6 months of the first reporting of the data by Member States and every four years thereafter. 5. The Commission shall, by 18 August 2025, adopt implementing acts laying down the format for the data and information to be reported to the Commission, as well as assessment methods and operational conditions related to collection and treatment of waste batteries, for the purpose of paragraphs 1 and 4 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). CHAPTER IX Digital battery passport Article 77 Battery passport 1. From 18 February 2027 each LMT battery, each industrial battery with a capacity greater than 2 kWh and each electric vehicle battery placed on the market or put into service shall have an electronic record (‘battery passport’). 2. The battery passport shall contain information relating to the battery model and information specific to the individual battery, including resulting from the use of that battery, as set out in Annex XIII. The information in the battery passport shall comprise: The purposes for accessing and processing the information as referred to in point (c) of the second subparagraph, shall: The information referred to in the second subparagraph shall be included in the battery passport to the extent applicable to the category or sub-category of battery concerned. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend Annex XIII as regards the information to be included in the battery passport in view of technical and scientific progress. 3. The battery passport shall be accessible through the QR code referred to in Article 13(6) which links to a unique identifier that the economic operator placing the battery on the market shall attribute to it. The QR code and the unique identifier shall comply with the ISO/IEC standards 15459-1:2014, 15459-2:2015, 15459-3:2014, 15459-4:2014, 15459-5:2014 and 15459-6:2014 or their equivalent. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 to amend the second subparagraph of this paragraph in light of technical and scientific progress by replacing the standards referred to in that subparagraph or adding other European or international standards with which the QR code and the unique identifier shall comply. 4. The economic operator placing the battery on the market shall ensure that the information in the battery passport is accurate, complete and up to date. It may give written authorisation to any other operator to act on its behalf. 5. All information included in the battery passport shall be based on open standards and be in an interoperable format, transferable through an open interoperable data exchange network without vendor lock-in, machine-readable, structured and searchable, in accordance with the essential requirements laid down in Article 78. 6. The access to information included in the battery passport shall be regulated in accordance with the essential requirements laid down in Article 78. 7. For a battery that has been subject to preparation for re-use, preparation for repurposing, repurposing or remanufacturing, the responsibility for the fulfilment of the obligations under paragraph 4 of this Article shall be transferred to the economic operator that has placed that battery on the market or has put it into service. Such battery shall have a new battery passport linked to the battery passport or passports of the original battery or batteries. Where the status of a battery changes to that of a waste battery, the responsibility for the fulfilment of the obligations under paragraph 4 of this Article shall be transferred either to the producer or, where appointed in accordance with Article 57(1), the producer responsibility organisation, or the waste management operator selected in accordance with Article 57(8). 8. A battery passport shall cease to exist after the battery has been recycled. 9. By 18 August 2026, the Commission shall adopt implementing acts specifying which persons are to be considered persons with a legitimate interest as referred to in points 2 and 4 respectively of Annex XIII for the purposes of paragraph 2, point (c), of this Article and to which information listed in those points they shall have access, and to what extent they can download, share, publish and re-use that information. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). The criteria for specifying the persons referred to in paragraph 2, point (c), and for determining the extent to which they can download, share, publish and re-use the information referred to in points 2 and 4 of Annex XIII shall be the following: Article 78 Technical design and operation of the battery passport The technical design and operation of the battery passport shall comply with the following essential requirements: CHAPTER X Union market surveillance and Union safeguard procedures Article 79 Procedure at national level for dealing with batteries presenting a risk 1. Without prejudice to Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, where the market surveillance authorities of one Member State have sufficient reason to believe that a battery covered by this Regulation presents a risk to human health or safety of persons, to property or to the environment, they shall carry out an evaluation in relation to the battery concerned covering all relevant requirements laid down in this Regulation. Where, in the course of the evaluation referred to in the first subparagraph, the market surveillance authorities find that the battery does not comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation (‘non-compliant battery’), they shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate corrective action, within a reasonable period prescribed by the market surveillance authorities and commensurate with the nature of the risk, to bring the battery into compliance with those requirements, to withdraw it from the market, or to recall it. The market surveillance authorities shall inform the relevant notified body accordingly. 2. The market surveillance authorities shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which they have required the economic operator to take. 3. The economic operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the non-compliant batteries that the economic operator has made available on the market throughout the Union. 4. Where the relevant economic operator does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, the market surveillance authorities shall take all appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or restrict the non-compliant batteries being made available on their national market, to withdraw those batteries from that market or to recall them. The market surveillance authorities shall inform the Commission and the other Member States, without delay, of those measures. 5. The information referred to in paragraph 4, second subparagraph, shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant battery, the origin of that battery, the nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the relevant economic operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to any of the following: 6. Member States other than the Member State initiating the procedure under this Article shall without delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the battery concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the adopted national measure, of their objections. 7. Where, within three months of receipt of the information referred to in paragraph 4, second subparagraph, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by market surveillance authorities, that measure shall be deemed justified. 8. Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures, such as withdrawal of the non-compliant battery from the market, are taken in respect of the non-compliant battery without delay. Article 80 Union safeguard procedure 1. Where, on completion of the procedure set out in Article 79(4), (6) and (7), objections are raised against a measure taken by market surveillance authorities, or where the Commission considers a national measure to be contrary to Union law, the Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measure. The Commission shall endeavour to conclude that evaluation within one month. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act determining whether the national measure is justified or not. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). 2. The Commission shall address the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, second subparagraph, to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators. If the national measure is considered justified, all Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the non-compliant battery is withdrawn from their market, and shall inform the Commission accordingly. If the national measure is considered unjustified, the Member State concerned shall withdraw that measure. 3. Where the national measure is considered justified and the non-compliance of the battery is attributed to shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in Article 15 of this Regulation, the Commission shall apply the procedure provided for in Article 11 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. 4. Where the national measure is considered justified and the non-compliance of the battery is attributed to shortcomings in the common specifications referred to in Article 16, the Commission shall, without delay, adopt an implementing act amending or repealing the common specifications concerned. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). Article 81 Compliant batteries which present a risk 1. Where, having carried out an evaluation under Article 79(1), a Member State finds that although a battery is in compliance with Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14, it presents a risk to the human health or safety of persons, to the protection of property or to the environment (‘compliant battery which presents a risk’), it shall without delay require the relevant economic operator to take all appropriate measures, within a reasonable period prescribed by the market surveillance authorities and commensurate with the nature of the risk, to ensure that the compliant battery which presents a risk, when made available on the market, no longer presents that risk, to withdraw that battery from the market or to recall it. 2. The economic operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all the compliant batteries which present a risk that the economic operator has made available on the market throughout the Union. 3. The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States where the situation referred to in paragraph 1 occurs. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of compliant batteries which present a risk, the origin and the supply chain of such batteries, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken. 4. The Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with the Member States and the relevant economic operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act determining whether the national measure is justified or not and, where necessary, proposing appropriate measures. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 90(3). 5. On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the protection of human health and the safety of persons, and to the protection of property or the environment, the Commission shall adopt an immediately applicable implementing act in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 90(4). 6. The Commission shall address the implementing act referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5 to all Member States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant economic operator or operators. Article 82 Joint activities Market surveillance authorities may carry out joint activities with organisations representing economic operators or end-users. Such joint activities may include the setting up by Member States or market surveillance authorities of battery competence centres, with a view to promoting compliance, identifying non-compliance, raising awareness and providing guidance in relation to the requirements laid down in this Regulation, in accordance with Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. Article 83 Formal non-compliance 1. Without prejudice to Article 79, where a Member State makes one of the following findings, it shall require the relevant economic operator to put an end to the non-compliance concerned: 2. Where the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1 persists, the Member State concerned shall take all appropriate measures to restrict or prohibit the battery being made available on the market or ensure that it is withdrawn from the market or recalled. Article 84 Non-compliance with due diligence obligations 1. Where a Member State finds that an economic operator does not fulfil its due diligence obligations laid down in Articles 48, 49 and 50, it shall require the relevant economic operator to put an end to the non-compliance concerned. 2. Where the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1 persists and where there is no other effective means available to put an end to the non-compliance, the Member State concerned shall take all appropriate measures to restrict or prohibit the batteries made available on the market by the economic operator referred to in paragraph 1 from being made available on the market and, if the non-compliance is serious, ensure that they are withdrawn from the market or recalled. CHAPTER XI Green public procurement and procedure for amending restrictions on substances Article 85 Green public procurement 1. Contracting authorities, as defined in Article 2(1), point (1), of Directive 2014/24/EU or Article 3(1) of Directive 2014/25/EU, or contracting entities, as defined in Article 4(1) of Directive 2014/25/EU shall, when procuring batteries or products containing batteries in situations covered by those Directives, take account of the environmental impacts of those batteries over their life cycle with a view to ensuring that such impacts are kept to a minimum. 2. From 12 months after the date of entry into force of the first delegated act referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, establishing award criteria for procurement procedures, the obligation laid down in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be fulfilled through the application of those award criteria. Any procurement procedure carried out by contracting authorities or contracting entities for the purchase of batteries, or products containing batteries, that fall within the scope of Articles 7 to 10 shall make reference in its technical specifications and award criteria to that first delegated act to ensure that those batteries, or products containing batteries, are procured with significantly lower environmental impacts over their life cycle. 3. The Commission shall, 12 months after the adoption of the latest of the delegated acts referred to in Article 7(2), fourth subparagraph, point (a), Article 8(1), Article 9(2) and Article 10(5), adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 89 supplementing this Regulation by establishing award criteria for procurement procedures for batteries, or products containing batteries, based on the sustainability requirements laid down in Articles 7 to 10. Article 86 Restriction procedure for substances 1. If the Commission considers that the use of a substance in the manufacture of batteries, or the presence of a substance in the batteries when they are placed on the market, or during their subsequent life cycle stages, including during repurposing or treatment of waste batteries, poses a risk to human health or the environment that is not adequately controlled and needs to be addressed on a Union-wide basis, it shall request the Agency to prepare a restriction dossier which conforms to the requirements of Annex XV to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. The restriction dossier shall include a socioeconomic assessment, including an analysis of alternatives. 2. Within 12 months of the receipt of the request from the Commission referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and if the restriction dossier prepared by the Agency pursuant to that paragraph demonstrates that action is necessary on a Union-wide basis, in addition to any measures already in place, the Agency shall suggest restrictions in order to initiate the process described in paragraphs 4 to 9 of this Article and Articles 87 and 88. 3. If a Member State considers that the use of a substance in the manufacture of batteries, or the presence of a substance in the batteries when they are placed on the market, or during their subsequent life cycle stages, including during repurposing or treatment of waste batteries, poses a risk to human health or the environment that is not adequately controlled and needs to be addressed on a Union-wide basis, it shall notify the Agency that it proposes to prepare a restriction dossier. The Member State shall prepare a restriction dossier. The restriction dossier shall include a socioeconomic assessment, including an analysis of alternatives. If the restriction dossier demonstrates that action on a Union-wide basis is necessary, in addition to any measures already in place, the Member State shall submit it to the Agency in the format set out in Annex XV to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, in order to initiate the process described in paragraphs 4 to 9 of this Article, and Articles 87 and 88. 4. For the purposes of the restriction dossier and the restriction process, the Agency or Member States shall take into account any dossier, chemical safety report or risk assessment submitted to the Agency or a Member State under the Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. The Agency or Member States shall also take into account any available information and refer to any relevant risk assessment submitted for the purposes of other Union law covering the life cycle of the substance used in the battery, including the waste phase. To this end, other bodies established under Union law and carrying out a similar task shall provide information to the Agency or Member State concerned on request. 5. Access to information held by the Agency in performing the tasks defined in Article 6 of this Regulation and in this Article shall be subject to Article 118 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. 6. The Agency shall maintain a list of substances for which a restriction dossier under this Article is planned by or in progress in either the Agency or a Member State. 7. The Committee for Risk Assessment, set up pursuant to Article 76(1)(c) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, and the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis, set up pursuant to Article 76(1)(d) of that Regulation, shall check whether the restriction dossier submitted conforms to the requirements of Annex XV to that Regulation. Within 30 days of receipt of the dossier, the respective Committee shall inform the Agency or the Member State suggesting restrictions, as to whether the dossier conforms. If the dossier does not conform, the reasons shall be given to the Agency or the Member State in writing within 45 days of receipt. The Agency or the Member State shall bring the dossier into conformity within 60 days of the date of receipt of the reasons from the respective Committee, otherwise the procedure under this Article shall be terminated. 8. The Agency shall publish without delay the intention of the Commission or a Member State to initiate the restriction process for a substance, under this Article, and shall inform stakeholders concerned. 9. The Agency shall make publicly available on its website the restriction dossier, including the restrictions suggested pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3 without delay, clearly indicating its date of publication. The Agency shall invite all stakeholders concerned to submit individually or jointly, within four months of the date of publication: 10. The delegated acts referred to in Article 6(2) shall be adopted within nine months following the receipt of the opinion of the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis of the Agency referred to in Article 87(2). If the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis does not adopt an opinion by the deadline set in Article 87(2) or (5), as applicable, the Commission shall take into account the socioeconomic impact of the restriction, including the availability of alternatives for the substance and shall adopt a delegated act by the deadline set in Article 87(2). 11. Where the draft amendment to Annex I diverges from the original proposal of the restriction dossier, prepared pursuant to the procedure laid down in this Article and Articles 87 and 88, or if it does not take the opinions from the Agency into account, the Commission shall attach a detailed explanation of the reasons for the differences. Article 87 Opinion of the Agency’s Committees 1. Within 12 months of the date of publication referred to in Article 86(9), the Committee for Risk Assessment shall adopt an opinion as to whether the suggested restrictions are appropriate in reducing the risk to human health or the environment, based on its consideration of the relevant parts of the restriction dossier. This opinion shall take account of the restriction dossier prepared by the Agency at the request of the Commission or by the Member State, and the views of interested parties referred to in Article 86(9), point (a). 2. Within 15 months of the date of publication referred to in Article 86(9), the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis shall adopt an opinion on the suggested restrictions, based on its consideration of the relevant parts of the restriction dossier and the socioeconomic impact. Prior to that, it shall prepare a draft opinion on the suggested restrictions and on the related socioeconomic impact, taking account of the analyses or information according to Article 86(9), point (b), if there are any. 3. The Agency shall publish the draft opinion of the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis on its website without delay and invite interested parties to provide their comments on the draft opinion no later than 60 days from the publication of that draft opinion. 4. The Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis shall without delay adopt its opinion, taking into account where appropriate further comments received by the deadline set in paragraph 3 of this Article. That opinion shall take account of the comments of interested parties submitted under Article 86(9), point (b), and paragraph 3 of this Article. 5. Where the opinion of the Committee for Risk Assessment diverges significantly from the restrictions suggested in the restriction dossier, the Agency shall postpone the deadline for the opinion of the Committee for Socioeconomic Analysis by a maximum of 90 days. 6. Where the Committees for Risk Assessment and Socioeconomic Analysis provide an opinion pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, they shall make use of rapporteurs under Article 87 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 and in line with the conditions provided therein. Article 88 Submission of an opinion to the Commission 1. The Agency shall submit to the Commission without delay the opinions of the Committees for Risk Assessment and Socioeconomic Analysis on restrictions suggested pursuant to Article 86. Where the opinions of the Committees for Risk Assessment and Socioeconomic Analysis diverge significantly from the suggested restrictions, the Agency shall submit an explanatory note to the Commission providing a detailed explanation of the reasons for such differences. If one or both of the Committees do not adopt an opinion by the deadline set in Article 87(1) and (2), respectively, the Agency shall inform the Commission accordingly, stating the reasons. 2. The Agency shall publish the opinions of the two Committees on its website without delay. 3. The Agency shall provide the Commission or a Member State on request with all documents and evidence submitted to or considered by it. CHAPTER XII Delegated powers and committee procedure Article 89 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 6(2), Article 7(1), (2) and (3), Article 8(1) and (5), Article 9(2), Article 10(5) and (6), Article 11(4), Article 12(3), Article 13(8), Article 14(4), Article 48(8), Article 53(3), Article 59(7), Article 60(8), Article 70(4), Article 71(4), (5) and (6), Article 72(4), Article 77(2) and (3), and Article 85(3) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 17 August 2023. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power no later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension no later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 6(2), Article 7(1), (2) and (3), Article 8(1) and(5), Article 9(2), Article 10(5) and (6), Article 11(4), Article 12(3), Article 13(8), Article 14(4), Article 48(8), Article 53(3), Article 59(7), Article 60(8), Article 70(4), Article 71(4), (5) and (6), Article 72(4), Article 77(2) and (3), and Article 85(3) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force. 4. Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making. 5. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council. 6. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 6(2), Article 7(1), (2) and (3), Article 8(1) and (5), Article 9(2), Article 10(5) and(6), Article 11(4), Article 12(3), Article 13(8), Article 14(4), Article 48(8), Article 53(3), Article 59(7), Article 60(8), Article 70(4), Article 71(4), (5) and (6), Article 72(4), Article 77(2) and (3), or 85(3) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of three months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council. Article 90 Committee procedure 1. The Commission shall be assisted by the committee established by Article 39 of Directive 2008/98/EC. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. 2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. 3. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. Where the committee delivers no opinion, the Commission shall not adopt the draft implementing act and Article 5(4), third subparagraph, of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply. 4. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, in conjunction with Article 5 thereof, shall apply. CHAPTER XIII Amendments Article 91 Amendments to Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 is amended as follows: Article 92 Amendment to Directive 2008/98/EC In Article 8a(7) of Directive 2008/98/EC, the following subparagraph is added: ‘For batteries, as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of Council ( *4 ) , Member States shall take measures to ensure that extended producer responsibility schemes that have been established before 4 July 2018, comply with this Article by 18 August 2025. CHAPTER XIV Final provisions Article 93 Penalties By 18 August 2025 Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties applicable to infringements of this Regulation and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall, without delay, notify the Commission of those rules and of those measures and shall notify it, without delay, of any subsequent amendment affecting them. Article 94 Review 1. By 30 June 2031, the Commission shall review and draw up a report on the application of this Regulation and its impact on the environment, human health and the functioning of the internal market and submit it to the European Parliament and to the Council. 2. Taking account of technical progress and practical experience gained in Member States, the Commission shall, in its report, include an evaluation on the following aspects of this Regulation: Where appropriate, the report referred to in paragraph 1 shall be accompanied by a legislative proposal for amendment of the relevant provisions of this Regulation. 3. Taking into account the revision of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, the Commission shall in its report include a specific evaluation of the need for a legislative proposal to amend Articles 6, 86, 87 and 88 of this Regulation. 4. The Commission shall assess whether any amendment to Chapter VII is necessary in the light of the adoption, if any, of Union legislative acts laying down rules on sustainable corporate governance and due diligence, including obligations for companies regarding human rights adverse impacts and environmental adverse impacts in relation to their own operations, the operations of their subsidiaries and branches, and their value chain operations. The Commission shall publish a report containing the results of such assessment by 12 months after the date of entry into force of any of the legislative acts referred to in the first subparagraph, or by 30 June 2031, whichever is the earliest. Where appropriate, the Commission shall accompany its report with a legislative proposal amending Chapter VII. 5. By 30 June 2031, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council assessing the feasibility and the technical consequences of extending the scope of the definition of ‘LMT battery’ in Article 3, point (11), in particular by including batteries powering non-wheeled vehicles. The report shall be accompanied, where appropriate, by a legislative proposal. 6. By 1 January 2025, the Commission shall assess how best to introduce harmonised standards for a common charger for, respectively, rechargeable batteries designed for light means of transport, as well as for rechargeable batteries incorporated into specific categories of electrical and electronic equipment covered by Directive 2012/19/EU. Charging devices for categories and classes of radio equipment under Article 3(4) of Directive 2014/53/EU shall be excluded from the scope of that assessment. Article 95 Repeal and transitional rules Directive 2006/66/EC is repealed with effect from 18 August 2025. However, the following provisions shall continue to apply as set out below: Article 96 Entry into force and application 1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . 2. It shall apply from 18 February 2024, save as set out in the second subparagraph and in other provisions of this Regulation. The following provisions shall apply as follows: This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Strasbourg, 12 July 2023. For the European Parliament The President R. METSOLA For the Council The President P. NAVARRO RÍOS ( 1 ) OJ C 220, 9.6.2021, p. 128 . ( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 14 June 2023 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 28 June 2023. ( 3 ) Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators and repealing Directive 91/157/EEC ( OJ L 266, 26.9.2006, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Directive 2009/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on the safety of toys ( OJ L 170, 30.6.2009, p. 1 ). ( 5 ) Directive (EU) 2019/771 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2019 on certain aspects concerning contracts for the sale of goods, amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2394 and Directive 2009/22/EC, and repealing Directive 1999/44/EC ( OJ L 136, 22.5.2019, p. 28 ). ( 6 ) Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the approval and market surveillance of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No 595/2009 and repealing Directive 2007/46/EC ( OJ L 151, 14.6.2018, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 8 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 9 ) Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 September 2000 on end-of life vehicles ( OJ L 269, 21.10.2000, p. 34 ). ( 10 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 617/2013 of 26 June 2013 implementing Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ecodesign requirements for computers and computer servers ( OJ L 175, 27.6.2013, p. 13 ). ( 11 ) Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products ( OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10 ). ( 12 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC ( OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 1 ). ( 13 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices and repealing Directive 98/79/EC and Commission Decision 2010/227/EU ( OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 176 ). ( 14 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/2144 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on type-approval requirements for motor vehicles and their trailers, and systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles, as regards their general safety and the protection of vehicle occupants and vulnerable road users, amending Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Regulations (EC) No 78/2009, (EC) No 79/2009 and (EC) No 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulations (EC) No 631/2009, (EU) No 406/2010, (EU) No 672/2010, (EU) No 1003/2010, (EU) No 1005/2010, (EU) No 1008/2010, (EU) No 1009/2010, (EU) No 19/2011, (EU) No 109/2011, (EU) No 458/2011, (EU) No 65/2012, (EU) No 130/2012, (EU) No 347/2012, (EU) No 351/2012, (EU) No 1230/2012 and (EU) 2015/166 ( OJ L 325, 16.12.2019, p. 1 ). ( 15 ) Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 December 2001 on general product safety ( OJ L 11, 15.1.2002, p. 4 ). ( 16 ) Directive 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of radio equipment and repealing Directive 1999/5/EC ( OJ L 153, 22.5.2014, p. 62 ). ( 17 ) Directive (EU) 2019/882 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on the accessibility requirements for products and services ( OJ L 151, 7.6.2019, p. 70 ). ( 18 ) Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on common rules for the internal market for electricity and amending Directive 2012/27/EU ( OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 125 ). ( 19 ) Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on European standardisation, amending Council Directives 89/686/EEC and 93/15/EEC and Directives 94/9/EC, 94/25/EC, 95/16/EC, 97/23/EC, 98/34/EC, 2004/22/EC, 2007/23/EC, 2009/23/EC and 2009/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Decision 87/95/EEC and Decision No 1673/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 316, 14.11.2012, p. 12 ). ( 20 ) Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 ( OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30 ). ( 21 ) Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 on a common framework for the marketing of products, and repealing Council Decision 93/465/EEC ( OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 82 ). ( 22 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on market surveillance and compliance of products and amending Directive 2004/42/EC and Regulations (EC) No 765/2008 and (EU) No 305/2011 ( OJ L 169, 25.6.2019, p. 1 ). ( 23 ) Regulation (EU) 2017/821 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017 laying down supply chain due diligence obligations for Union importers of tin, tantalum and tungsten, their ores, and gold originating from conflict-affected and high-risk areas ( OJ L 130, 19.5.2017, p. 1 ). ( 24 ) OJ L 282, 19.10.2016, p. 4 . ( 25 ) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives ( OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3 ). ( 26 ) Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) ( OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38 ). ( 27 ) Directive 2011/83/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on consumer rights, amending Council Directive 93/13/EEC and Directive 1999/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 85/577/EEC and Directive 97/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 64 ). ( 28 ) Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 October 2022 on a Single Market For Digital Services and amending Directive 2000/31/EC (Digital Services Act) ( OJ L 277, 27.10.2022, p. 1 ). ( 29 ) Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May 2003 on the establishment of a common classification of territorial units for statistics (NUTS) ( OJ L 154, 21.6.2003, p. 1 ). ( 30 ) Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste ( OJ L 182, 16.7.1999, p. 1 ). ( 31 ) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) ( OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17 ). ( 32 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 493/2012 of 11 June 2012 laying down, pursuant to Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, detailed rules regarding the calculation of recycling efficiencies of the recycling processes of waste batteries and accumulators ( OJ L 151, 12.6.2012, p. 9 ). ( 33 ) Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC ( OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1 ). ( 34 ) Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste ( OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1 ). ( 35 ) Commission Regulation (EC) No 1418/2007 of 29 November 2007 concerning the export for recovery of certain waste listed in Annex III or IIIA to Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council to certain countries to which the OECD Decision on the control of transboundary movements of wastes does not apply ( OJ L 316, 4.12.2007, p. 6 ). ( 36 ) Commission Decision 2000/532/EC of 3 May 2000 replacing Decision 94/3/EC establishing a list of wastes pursuant to Article 1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on waste and Council Decision 94/904/EC establishing a list of hazardous waste pursuant to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous waste ( OJ L 226, 6.9.2000, p. 3 .). ( 37 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1267 of 20 July 2022 specifying the procedures for the designation of Union testing facilities for the purposes of market surveillance and verification of product compliance in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( OJ L 192, 21.7.2022, p. 21 ). ( 38 ) Directive 2014/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on public procurement and repealing Directive 2004/18/EC ( OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 65 ). ( 39 ) Directive 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors and repealing Directive 2004/17/EC ( OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 243 ). ( 40 ) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1 . ( 41 ) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers ( OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13 ). ( 42 ) Council Directive 2009/71/Euratom of 25 June 2009 establishing a Community framework for the nuclear safety of nuclear installations ( OJ L 172, 2.7.2009, p. 18 ). ( 43 ) Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two- or three-wheel vehicles and quadricycles ( OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 52 ). ( 44 ) Directive 2004/109/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 on the harmonisation of transparency requirements in relation to information about issuers whose securities are admitted to trading on a regulated market and amending Directive 2001/34/EC ( OJ L 390, 31.12.2004, p. 38 ). ( 45 ) Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the internal market for electricity ( OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 54 ). ( 46 ) Directive 2008/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on the inland transport of dangerous goods ( OJ L 260, 30.9.2008, p. 13 ). ANNEX I RESTRICTION ON SUBSTANCES ANNEX II CARBON FOOTPRINT 1. Scope This Annex provides essential elements on how to calculate the carbon footprint. The methodology for calculation and verification of the carbon footprint to be provided for by means of the delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 7 shall build on the essential elements included in this Annex, be in compliance with the latest version of the Commission Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) method and relevant Product Environmental Footprint Category Rules (PEFCRs) and reflect the international agreements and technical/scientific progress in the area of life cycle assessment. The calculation of the life cycle carbon footprint shall be based on the bill of materials, the energy and the auxiliary materials used in a specific manufacturing plant to produce a specific battery model. In particular, the electronic components, for example battery management units and safety units, and the cathode materials shall be accurately identified, as they can become the main contributor for the battery carbon footprint. 2. Definitions For the purposes of this Annex, the following definitions apply: Additionally, the harmonised rules for the calculation of the carbon footprint of batteries shall include any further definition necessary for their interpretation. 3. Functional unit and reference flow The functional unit is defined as one kWh (kilowatt-hour) of the total energy provided by the battery system over the battery’s service life, measured in kWh. The total energy is obtained from the number of cycles multiplied by the amount of delivered energy over each cycle. The reference flow is the weight of battery needed to fulfil a specific function and shall be measured in kg of battery per kWh of the total energy delivered by the battery over its service life. All quantitative input and output data collected by the manufacturer to quantify the carbon footprint shall be calculated in relation to the reference flow. By way of exception to the first paragraph, for back-up batteries that have as their primary function to ensure continuity of a power source, the functional unit is defined as the ability to provide one kWmin (kilowatt-minute) of backup power capability at any moment over the lifetime of the battery. Accordingly, the reference flow for back-up batteries is the weight of battery needed to fulfil the defined function and shall be measured in kg of battery per kWmin of backup power capability divided by the service life of the battery in years. All quantitative input and output data collected by manufacturers of back-up batteries to quantify the carbon footprint shall be calculated in relation to that reference flow. In exceptional cases, such as for batteries for hybrid non -plug-in vehicles, the methodology may define a different functional unit. 4. System boundary The following life cycle stages and the processes involved therein shall be included in the system boundary: The following processes involved in the life cycle stages shall be excluded from the system boundary: The use phase shall be excluded from the life cycle carbon footprint calculations, as it is not under the direct influence of manufacturers except where it is demonstrated that choices made by battery manufacturers at the design stage can make a non-negligible contribution to that impact. 5. Use of company-specific and secondary datasets Due to the high number of battery components and the complexity of manufacturing processes, the economic operator shall limit, where justified, the use of company specific data to process and component analysis of the battery-specific parts. In particular, all activity data related to the battery’s anode, cathode, electrolyte, separator and cell-casing shall refer to a specific battery model produced in a specific production plant. Accordingly, no default activity data shall be used. The battery-specific activity data shall be used in combination with the relevant PEF-compliant secondary datasets. As the carbon footprint declaration is specific to a battery model produced in a defined production site, sampling of data collected from different plants producing the same battery model shall not be allowed. Where there is a change in the bill of materials or energy mix used to produce a battery model, the carbon footprint for that battery model shall be recalculated. The harmonised rules to be provided for via a delegated act as referred to in Article 7(1) shall include detailed modelling of the following life cycle stages: 6. Carbon footprint impact assessment The carbon footprint of the battery shall be calculated using the ‘climate change’ life cycle impact assessment method recommended in the 2019 Joint Research Centre report entitled ‘Suggestions for updating the Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) method’. The results shall be provided as characterised results without normalisation and weighting. The list of characterization factors to be used is available at the European Platform on Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). 7. Offsets Offsets are calculated relative to a baseline that represents a hypothetical scenario for what emissions would have been in the absence of the mitigation project that generates the offsets. Offsets shall not be included in the carbon footprint declaration, but may be reported separately as additional environmental information and used for communication purposes. 8. Carbon footprint performance classes Depending on the distribution of the values in the carbon footprint declarations of batteries placed on the market, a meaningful number of classes of performance shall be identified, with category A being the best class with the lowest carbon footprint life cycle impact, to enable market differentiation of the battery categories referred to in Article 7(1). The setting of the threshold for each class of performance, as well as the width of that class, shall be based on the distribution of performances of the battery categories referred to in Article 7(1) placed on the market in the previous three years, the expected technological improvements, and other technical factors. 9. Maximum carbon thresholds Based on the information collected through the carbon footprint declarations and the relative distribution of the carbon footprint performance classes of battery models placed on the market, and taking into account the scientific and technical progress in the field, the Commission shall set maximum life cycle carbon footprint thresholds for the battery categories referred to in Article 7(1), after having carried out a dedicated impact assessment to determine the values for the thresholds. In setting maximum life cycle carbon footprint thresholds referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall take into account the relative distribution of the carbon footprint values for batteries on the market, the extent of progress in reducing the carbon footprint of batteries placed on the market and the actual and potential contribution of those life cycle carbon footprint thresholds to the Union’s objectives on sustainable mobility and climate neutrality by 2050. ANNEX III ELECTROCHEMICAL PERFORMANCE AND DURABILITY PARAMETERS FOR PORTABLE BATTERIES OF GENERAL USE Part A Parameters for non-rechargeable batteries Part B Parameters for rechargeable batteries ( 1 ) IEC mentions charge and capacity. Both represent the same physical quantity (charge); the only difference is that charge is expressed in C = A*s whereas capacity is expressed in A*h. In practice, capacity is used in most cases. ANNEX IV ELECTROCHEMICAL PERFORMANCE AND DURABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR LMT BATTERIES, INDUSTRIAL BATTERIES WITH A CAPACITY GREATER THAN 2 KWH AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE BATTERIES For the purposes of this Annex the following definitions apply: Part A Parameters related to electrochemical performance and durability Part B Elements to explain the measurements for parameters listed in Part A ANNEX V SAFETY PARAMETERS 1. Thermal shock and cycling This test shall be designed to evaluate changes in the integrity of the battery arising from expansion and contraction of cell components upon exposure to extreme and sudden changes in temperature, and potential consequences of such changes. During a thermal shock, the battery shall be exposed to two temperature limits and held at each temperature limit for a specified period. 2. External short circuit protection This test shall evaluate the safety performance of a battery when applying an external short circuit. The test can evaluate the activation of the overcurrent protection device or the ability of cells to withstand the current without reaching a hazardous situation (e.g. thermal runaway, explosion, fire). The main risk factors are heat generation at cell level and electrical arcing, which can damage circuitry or lead to reduced isolation resistance. 3. Overcharge protection This test shall evaluate the safety performance of a battery in overcharge situations. The main safety risks during overcharge are the decomposition of the electrolyte, cathode and anode breakdown, exothermic decomposition of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer, separator degradation, and lithium plating, which can lead to self-heating of the battery and thermal runaway. The factors affecting the outcome of the test shall, as a minimum, include, the charging rate and the finally reached state of charge. The protection can be ensured either by voltage control (interruption after reaching the limit charging voltage) or current control (interruption after exceeding maximum charging current). 4. Over-discharge protection This test shall evaluate the safety performance of a battery in over-discharge situations. Safety risks during over-discharge include polarity reversal leading to oxidation of the anode current collector (Copper) and to plating on the cathode side. Even minor over-discharge can cause dendrite formation and ultimately short-circuiting. 5. Over-temperature protection This test shall evaluate the effect of temperature control failure or failure of other features for protection against internal overheating during operation. 6. Thermal propagation protection This test shall evaluate the safety performance of a battery in thermal propagation situations. A thermal runaway in one cell can cause a cascading reaction throughout the entire battery which can be composed of numerous cells. It can lead to severe consequences including a significant gas release. The test shall take into account the tests that are under development for transport applications by ISO and the UN Global Technical Regulation. 7. Mechanical damage by external forces These tests shall simulate one or more situations in which a battery is accidentally exposed to mechanical stresses and remains operational for the purpose for which it was designed. The criteria to simulate these situations should reflect real life uses. 8. Internal short circuit This test shall evaluate the safety performance of a battery in internal short-circuit situations. The occurrence of internal short circuits, one of the main concerns for battery manufacturers, potentially leads to venting, thermal runaway, and sparking which can ignite the electrolyte vapours escaping from the cell. The generation of such internal short circuits can be triggered by manufacturing imperfections, the presence of impurities in the cells or dendritic growth of lithium, and is the cause of most in-field safety incidents. Multiple internal short circuit scenarios are possible (e.g. electrical contact of cathode/anode, aluminium current collector/copper current collector, aluminium current collector/anode) each with a different contact resistance. 9. Thermal abuse During this test, the battery shall be exposed to elevated temperatures (in IEC 62619 the temperature is 85 °C) which can trigger exothermal decomposition reactions and lead to a thermal runaway in the cell. 10. Fire test The risk of explosion shall be assessed by exposing the battery to fire. 11. Emission of gases Batteries can contain significant amounts of potentially hazardous materials, for example highly flammable electrolytes, corrosive and toxic components. If exposed to certain conditions, the integrity of the battery could be compromised, resulting in the release of hazardous gases. Therefore, it is important to identify emissions of gases from substances released from the battery during tests: the risk of toxic gases emitted from non-aqueous electrolytes shall be properly taken into account for all safety parameters listed in points 1 to 10. ANNEX VI LABELLING, MARKING AND INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS Part A: General information on batteries Information on the label of a battery shall comprise the following information regarding the battery: Part B: Symbol for separate collection of batteries Part C: QR code The QR code shall be in high contrast to the background colour and of a size that is easily readable by a commonly available QR reader, such as those integrated in hand-held communication devices. ANNEX VII PARAMETERS FOR DETERMINING THE STATE OF HEALTH AND EXPECTED LIFETIME OF BATTERIES Part A Parameters for determining the state of health of electric vehicle batteries, stationary battery energy storage systems and LMT batteries: For electric vehicle batteries: state of certified energy (SOCE). For stationary battery energy storage systems and LMT batteries: Part B Parameters for determining the expected lifetime of stationary battery energy storage systems and LMT batteries: ANNEX VIII CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES Part A MODULE A – INTERNAL PRODUCTION CONTROL 1. Description of the module Internal production control is the conformity assessment procedure whereby the manufacturer fulfils the obligations set out in points 2, 3 and 4, and ensures and declares on its sole responsibility that the batteries concerned meet the requirements laid down in Articles 6, 9, 10, 12, 13 and 14 that apply to them. 2. Technical documentation The manufacturer shall draw up the technical documentation. The documentation shall make it possible to assess the battery’s conformity with the relevant requirements referred to in point 1 and shall include an adequate analysis and assessment of the risks. The technical documentation shall specify the applicable requirements and cover, as far as relevant for the assessment, the design, manufacture and operation of the battery. The technical documentation shall, where applicable, contain at least the following elements: 3. Manufacturing The manufacturer shall take all measures necessary so that the manufacturing process and the monitoring thereof ensure the batteries comply with the technical documentation referred to in point 2 and with the applicable requirements referred to in point 1. 4. CE marking and EU declaration of conformity The manufacturer shall affix the CE marking to each individual battery that meets the applicable requirements referred to in point 1, or, where that is not possible or not warranted due to the nature of the battery, to the packaging and the documents accompanying the battery. The manufacturer shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity for each battery model in accordance with Article 18 and keep it together with the technical documentation at the disposal of the national authorities for 10 years after the last battery belonging to the respective battery model has been placed on the market. The EU declaration of conformity shall identify the battery model for which it has been drawn up. A copy of the EU declaration of conformity shall be made available to the national authorities upon request. 5. Manufacturer’s authorised representative The manufacturer’s obligations set out in point 4 may be fulfilled by the manufacturer’s authorised representative, on its behalf and under the manufacturer’s responsibility, provided that they are specified in the mandate. Part B MODULE D1 – QUALITY ASSURANCE OF THE PRODUCTION PROCESS 1. Description of the module Quality assurance of the production process is the conformity assessment procedure whereby the manufacturer fulfils the obligations set out in points 2, 4 and 7, and ensures and declares on its sole responsibility, without prejudice to the obligations of other economic operators in accordance with this Regulation, that the batteries concerned meet the applicable requirements laid down in Articles 7 and 8, or, at the choice of the manufacturer, all applicable requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14. 2. Technical documentation The manufacturer shall draw up the technical documentation. The technical documentation shall make it possible to assess the battery’s conformity with the relevant requirements referred to in point 1, and shall include an adequate analysis and assessment of the risks. The technical documentation shall specify the applicable requirements and cover, as far as relevant for the assessment, the design, manufacture and operation of the battery. The technical documentation shall, where applicable, contain at least the following elements: 3. Availability of technical documentation The manufacturer shall keep the technical documentation at the disposal of the national authorities for 10 years after the battery has been placed on the market. 4. Manufacturing The manufacturer shall operate an approved quality system for production, final product inspection and testing of the batteries concerned as specified in point 5, and shall be subject to surveillance as specified in point 6. 5. Quality system Part C MODULE G – CONFORMITY BASED ON UNIT VERIFICATION 1. Description of the module Conformity based on unit verification is the conformity assessment procedure whereby the manufacturer fulfils the obligations set out in points 2, 3 and 5, and ensures and declares on its sole responsibility, without prejudice to the obligations of other economic operators in accordance with this Regulation, that the battery concerned, which has been subject to the provisions of point 4, is in conformity with the applicable requirements laid down in Articles 7 and 8, or, at the choice of the manufacturer, all applicable requirements laid down in Articles 6 to 10 and Articles 12, 13 and 14. 2. Technical documentation ANNEX IX EU DECLARATION OF CONFORMITY No* … * (identification number of the declaration) ANNEX X LIST OF RAW MATERIALS AND RISK CATEGORIES ANNEX XI CALCULATION OF COLLECTION RATES FOR WASTE PORTABLE BATTERIES AND WASTE LMT BATTERIES ANNEX XII STORAGE AND TREATMENT, INCLUDING RECYCLING, REQUIREMENTS Part A: Storage and treatment requirements Part B: Targets for recycling efficiency Part C: Targets for recovery of materials ANNEX XIII INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN THE BATTERY PASSPORT 1. PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE INFORMATION RELATING TO THE BATTERY MODEL A battery passport shall include the following information relating to the battery model, which shall be accessible to the public: 2. INFORMATION RELATING TO THE BATTERY MODEL ACCESSIBLE ONLY TO PERSONS WITH A LEGITIMATE INTEREST AND THE COMMISSION A battery passport shall include the following information relating to the battery model, which shall be accessible only to persons with a legitimate interest and the Commission: 3. INFORMATION ACCESSIBLE ONLY TO NOTIFIED BODIES, MARKET SURVEILLANCE AUTHORITIES AND THE COMMISSION A battery passport shall include the following information relating to the battery model, which shall be accessible only to notified bodies, market surveillance authorities and the Commission: 4. INFORMATION AND DATA RELATING TO AN INDIVIDUAL BATTERY ACCESSIBLE ONLY TO PERSONS WITH A LEGITIMATE INTEREST A battery passport shall include the following specific information and data relating to an individual battery, which shall be accessible only to persons with a legitimate interest: ANNEX XIV MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SHIPMENTS OF USED BATTERIES ANNEX XV CORRELATION TABLE