COMMISSION DECISION of 28 May 2014 establishing the criteria for the award of the EU Ecolabel for water-based heaters (notified under document C(2014) 3452) (Text with EEA relevance) (2014/314/EU) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the EU Ecolabel ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 8(2) thereof, After consulting the European Union Ecolabelling Board, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 1. The product group ‘water-based heaters’ shall comprise products that are used to generate heat as part of a water-based central heating system, where the heated water is distributed by means of circulators and heat emitters in order to reach and maintain the indoor temperature of an enclosed space such as a building, a dwelling, or a room, at a desired level. The heat generator generates heat by means of one or more of the following processes and technologies: 2. The maximum output power of the water-based heaters shall be 400 kW. 3. Combination heaters are included in the scope of this product group, provided that their primary function is to provide space heat. 4. The following products are excluded from the scope of this product group: Article 2 For the purpose of this Decision, the following definitions shall apply: Article 3 The criteria for awarding the EU Ecolabel for a product falling within the product group ‘water-based heaters’ defined in Article 1 of this Decision, as well as the related assessment and verification requirements, are set out in the Annex to this Decision. Article 4 The criteria for the product group ‘water-based heaters’ and the related assessment and verification requirements set out in the Annex shall be valid for four years from the date of adoption of this Decision. Article 5 For administrative purposes the code number assigned to the product group ‘water-based heaters’ shall be ‘045’. Article 6 1. Applications for the EU Ecolabel for heat pumps which provide heat to a water based central heating system falling within the product group ‘electrically driven, gas driven or gas absorption heat pumps’ submitted within two months from the date of adoption of this Decision may be based either on the criteria set out in Commission Decision 2007/742/EC ( 4 ) , or on the criteria set out in this Decision. Applications shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria on which they are based. 2. EU Ecolabel licences awarded to heat pumps which provide heat to water based central heating system in accordance with the criteria set out in Decision 2007/742/EC may be used for 12 months from the date of adoption of this Decision. Article 7 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 28 May 2014. For the Commission Janez POTOČNIK Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ L 27, 30.1.2010, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 813/2013 of 2 August 2013 implementing Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ecodesign requirements for space heaters and combination heaters ( OJ L 239, 6.9.2013, p. 136 ). ( 3 ) Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on certain fluorinated greenhouse gases ( OJ L 161, 14.6.2006, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Commission Decision 2007/742/EC of 9 November 2007 establishing the ecological criteria for the award of the Community eco-label to electrically driven, gas driven or gas absorption heat pumps ( OJ L 301, 20.11.2007, p. 14 ). EU ECOLABEL CRITERIA AND ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS Criteria for awarding the EU Ecolabel to water-based heaters are set for each of the following aspects: Table 1 presents the applicability of the different criteria to each heat generator technology. In the case of a package of space heater, it shall comply with all the criteria applicable to each of the heat generator technologies it is made of. Those criteria, for which there is a specific methodology aimed at the packages of space heaters, shall be applicable to the package of space heaters as a whole. The specific assessment and verification requirements are indicated within each criterion. Where the applicant is required to provide declarations, documentation, analyses test reports, or other evidence to show compliance with the criteria, these may originate from the applicant or his supplier or both. Where possible, the testing shall be performed by laboratories that meet the general requirements of European Standard EN ISO 17025 or equivalent. Test methods for each criterion, unless specified otherwise, shall be those described in the relevant Standards as indicated in Table 2 and Table 3 (where applicable). Where appropriate, test methods other than those indicated for each criterion may be used if the competent body assessing the application accepts their equivalence. The methodology to calculate the seasonal space heating emissions is indicated in Table 4 . Where appropriate, competent bodies may require supporting documentation and may carry out independent verifications. Table 1 Applicability of the different criteria to each of the heat generator technologies Table 2 Relevant standards for test methods Table 3 Additional relevant standards for test methods of air emissions Table 4 Methodology to calculate the seasonal space heating emissions Criterion 1 — Minimum energy efficiency (a) — Minimum seasonal space heating energy efficiency The seasonal space heating energy efficiency η s of the water-based heater shall not fall below the limit values set out in Table 5 . Table 5 Minimum requirements for seasonal space heating energy efficiency by heat generator technology Assessment and verification: The applicant shall declare that the product complies with this criterion and provide test results conducted in accordance with the testing procedure indicated in the EN standards (including transitional methods where applicable) applicable to the given type of product (see Table 2 ). Measurements and calculations of the seasonal space heating energy efficiency shall be made using the methodology of seasonal space heating energy efficiency of packages and in accordance with the procedures referred to in point (i). For solid fuel boiler heaters, the seasonal space heating energy efficiency shall be calculated in accordance with point (ii). (b) — Minimum water heating energy efficiency Assessment and verification: The applicant shall declare that the product complies with this criterion and provide test results conducted in accordance with the testing procedure indicated in the EN standards (including transitional methods where applicable) applicable to the given type of product (see Table 2 ). Measurements and calculations shall be made using the methodology of water heating energy efficiency of packages in accordance with the procedures referred to in point (ii). Criterion 2 — Greenhouse gas (GHG) emission limits The greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of the water-based heater, expressed in grams of CO 2 -equivalent per kWh of heating output calculated using the Total Equivalent Warming Impact (TEWI) formulas set out in Table 7, shall not exceed the values set out in Table 6 . Table 6 GHG emission limits by heat generator technology The GHG emissions shall be calculated following the TEWI formulae as set out in Table 7 (the formula depends on the heat generator technology). Each TEWI formula may consist of two parts, one depending solely on the heater efficiency (expressed in terms of the seasonal space heating energy efficiency, η s ) and the fuel carbon intensity (represented by the β parameter), and the second part (only applicable to heat pump heaters) depending on the greenhouse gas emissions due to refrigerant leakage. The GHG emissions from the refrigerant leakage depend on the global warming potential (GWP 100 ) of the refrigerant and the refrigerant leakage during the use phase (expressed as an annual leakage rate, ER, in percentage of the total mass of the refrigerant per year) and at end-of-life (expressed as a percentage of the total mass of the refrigerant, α). Table 7 TEWI formulae by heat generator technology The main parameters in the TEWI formulae set out in Table 7 are described in Table 8 . Table 8 Main parameters for computing the TEWI formulae Table 9 describes how to evaluate parameter β fuel in the TEWI formulae depending on the fuel used by the heater. In case the boiler is designed for a fuel not listed in the table, the closest match of fuel shall be selected, based on the origin (fossil or biomass) and form (gaseous, liquid or solid) of the fuel used. Table 9 Parameter β fuel (GHG emission intensity) to compute the TEWI formulae Table 10 describes how to evaluate parameters η thermal and η el in the TEWI formula for cogeneration space heaters. Table 10 Parameters η thermal and η el to compute the TEWI formula for cogeneration space heaters Assessment and verification: A certificate signed by the manufacturer declaring compliance with this criterion shall be submitted to the awarding competent body, together with the relevant documentation. The applicant shall provide the calculated GHG emissions following the proposed TEWI formulae and detail all the parameters used to calculate the GHG emissions. Criterion 3 — Refrigerant and secondary refrigerant Refrigerant The global warming potential over a 100 year period (GWP 100 ) of the refrigerant shall not exceed a value of 2000. GWP 100 values shall be those set out in Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 842/2006. Sources of Secondary refrigerant In the case of space heaters using a secondary refrigerant, the design of these heaters shall not be based on secondary refrigerant, brine or additives classified as environmentally hazardous or constituting a health hazard within the meaning of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 5 ) and Council Directive 67/548/EEC ( 6 ) , and installation instructions shall clearly indicate that substances classified as environmentally hazardous or constituting a health hazard shall not be used as a secondary refrigerant. Assessment and verification: Refrigerant The names of refrigerant(s) used in the product shall be submitted with the application, along with their GWP 100 values as defined in Regulation (EC) No 842/2006. The GWP 100 values of refrigerants shall be calculated in terms of the 100-year warming potential of one kilogram of a gas relative to one kilogram of CO 2 . Sources of For the secondary refrigerant(s) only The name(s) of the secondary refrigerant(s) used shall be submitted with the application. Criterion 4 — Nitrogen oxide (NO x ) emission limits The nitrogen oxide (NO x ) content of the exhaust gas shall not exceed the limit values indicated in Table 11 (not applicable to electrical heaters). NO x emissions shall be measured as the sum of nitrogen monoxide and nitrogen dioxide and at the following operating conditions: The unit of measurement shall be given in mg/kWh GCV energy input or in mg/Nm 3 , as appropriate. Table 11 NO x emission limits by heat generator technology Assessment and verification: A certificate signed by the manufacturer declaring compliance with this criterion shall be submitted to the awarding competent body, together with the relevant documentation. The NO x emissions in the exhaust gas shall be determined as standard emission factors according to the relevant standards included in Table 2 and Table 3 (where applicable). Criterion 5 — Carbon monoxide (CO) emission limits The carbon monoxide (CO) content of the exhaust gas shall not exceed the limit values indicated in Table 12 (not applicable to electrical heaters). CO emissions shall be measured at the following operating conditions: The unit of measurement shall be given in mg/kWh GCV energy input or in mg/Nm 3 , as appropriate. Table 12 CO emission limits by heat generator technology Assessment and verification: A certificate signed by the manufacturer declaring compliance with this criterion shall be submitted to the awarding competent body, together with the relevant documentation. The CO emissions in the exhaust gas shall be determined as standard emission factors according to the relevant standards included in Table 2 and Table 3 (where applicable). Criterion 6 — Organic gaseous carbon (OGC) emission limits The organic gaseous carbon (OGC) of the exhaust gas also understood as organically bound carbon content shall not exceed the limit values indicated in Table 13 (only applicable to solid fuel boiler heaters). OGC emissions shall be measured as seasonal space heating emissions according Table 4 . The unit of measurement shall be given in mg/Nm 3 . Table 13 OGC emission limits by heat generator technology Assessment and verification: A certificate signed by the manufacturer declaring compliance with this criterion shall be submitted to the awarding competent body, together with the relevant documentation. The OGC emissions in the exhaust gas shall be determined as standard emission factors according to the relevant standards included in Table 2 and Table 3 (where applicable). Criterion 7 — Particulate matter (PM) emission limits The particle matter (PM) content of the exhaust gas shall not exceed the limit values indicated in Table 14 . PM emissions shall be measured at the following operating conditions: The unit of measurement shall be given in mg/Nm 3 . Table 14 PM emission limits by heat generator technology Assessment and verification: A certificate signed by the manufacturer declaring compliance with this criterion shall be submitted to the awarding competent body, together with the relevant documentation. The PM emissions in the exhaust gas shall be determined as standard emission factors according to the relevant standards included in Table 2 and Table 3 (where applicable). Criterion 8 — Noise emission limits The noise emissions shall not exceed the limit values indicated in Table 15 . Noise emissions shall be measured at standard rating conditions and rated heat output. The unit of measurement shall be given in dB(A) or dB(C), as appropriate. Table 15 Noise emission limits by heat generator technology Note: P N means the nominal (full load) or declared heat output; P E means the electricity output. Assessment and verification: A certificate signed by the manufacturer declaring compliance with this criterion shall be submitted to the awarding competent body, together with the relevant documentation. Testing shall be performed in accordance with EN 12102 for heat pump heaters equipped with external combustion and electrically-driven heat pumps, and EN ISO 3744 or EN ISO 3746 for heat pump and cogeneration space heaters equipped with internal combustion engines. The test report shall be submitted with the application. Criterion 9 — Hazardous substances and mixtures In accordance with Article 6(6) of Regulation (EC) No 66/2010, the product or any article of it shall not contain substances referred to in Article 57 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 nor substances or mixtures meeting the criteria for classification in the hazard classes or categories listed in Table 16 in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 or with Directive 67/548/EEC. Table 16 List of hazard statements and risk phrases The use of substances or mixtures in the final product which upon processing change their properties in a way that the identified hazard no longer applies is exempted from the above requirement. Concentration limits for substances or mixtures meeting the criterion for classification in the hazard classes or categories listed in table 16, and for substances meeting the criteria of Article 57(a), (b) or (c) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, shall not exceed the generic or specific concentration limits determined in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008. Where specific concentration limits are determined, they shall prevail against the generic ones. Concentration limits for substances meeting the criteria of Article 57(d), (e) or (f) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 shall not exceed 0,1 % weight by weight. The substances or mixtures listed in Table 17 are specifically exempted from the prohibition set out in Article 6(6) of Regulation (EC) No 66/2010. Table 17 Derogations from the prohibition set out in Article 6(6) of Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 Assessment and verification: For each article and/or homogeneous part of complex articles with weight over 25 g, the applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance with this criterion, together with the related documentation, such as declarations of compliance signed by the suppliers of substances and copies of relevant Safety Data Sheets in accordance with Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 for substances or mixtures. Concentration limits for substances and mixtures shall be specified in the Safety Data Sheets in accordance with Article 31 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. Criterion 10 — Substances listed in accordance with Article 59(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 No derogation from the prohibition set out in Article 6(6) of Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 may be granted concerning substances identified as substances of very high concern and included in the list referred to in Article 59 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, present in mixtures, in an article or in any homogenous part of a complex article in concentrations higher than 0,1 % w/w. Specific concentration limits determined in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 shall apply where the concentration is lower than 0,1 % w/w. Assessment and verification: The list of substances identified as substances of very high concern and included in the candidate list in accordance with Article 59 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 can be found here: Reference to the list shall be made on the date of application. The applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance with this criterion, together with the related documentation, such as declarations of compliance signed by the suppliers of substances and copies of relevant Safety Data Sheets in accordance with Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 for substances or mixtures. Concentration limits for substances and mixtures shall be specified in the Safety Data Sheets in accordance with Article 31 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. Criterion 11 — Plastic parts If any plasticiser substance in the manufacturing process is applied, it shall comply with the requirements on hazardous substances set out in Criteria 9 and 10. Plastic parts of articles or homogeneous parts of complex articles with weight 25 g or more shall not have chlorine content greater than 50 % by weight. Plastic parts with weight 50 g or more shall be marked according to the requirements of European Standard EN ISO 11469 to ensure that they are recycled, recovered, or disposed of in the correct manner during the end-of-life phase. Assessment and verification: The applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance with this criterion, together with the related documentation, such as declarations of compliance signed by the suppliers of substances and copies of relevant Safety Data Sheets. The applicant shall provide information on the plasticisers used in the product. The applicant shall provide information on the maximum chlorine content of the plastic parts. A declaration of compliance signed by the plastic suppliers and copies of relevant Safety Data Sheets about materials and substances shall also be provided to the awarding competent body. The applicant shall provide information on the intentionally added substances used as flame retardants. Criterion 12 — Product design for sustainability The product shall be designed in such a way that its exchangeable components can be replaced easily by service personnel. Information about which elements can be replaced shall be clearly indicated in the information sheet attached to the product. The applicant shall further ensure that genuine or equivalent spare parts are available for at least 10 years from the date of purchase. Repair or replacement of the product shall be covered by the warranty terms for at least five years. The applicant shall undertake to take the product back free of charge at end-of-life and shall ensure proper recycling or material recovery of the product, while non-recyclable product parts shall be disposed of in an environmentally acceptable manner. The product information shall provide the details of the take-back scheme in place. Assessment and verification: The applicant shall provide a declaration of compliance with this criterion, together with the relevant documentation, including a sample or samples of the product information sheet and warranty terms. Criterion 13 — Installation instructions and user information The product shall be accompanied by relevant installation instructions and user information, which shall give all the technical details needed for a proper installation and shall provide advice on the product's proper and environmentally friendly use as well as its maintenance. It shall bear the following information in print (on the packaging or on the documentation accompanying the product) or in electronic format: Assessment and verification: The applicant shall declare that the product complies with this criterion and provide the competent body with a sample or samples of the user information or a link to a manufacturer's website containing this information as part of the application. Criterion 14 — Information appearing on the EU Ecolabel The optional label with text box shall contain the following text: The guidelines for the use of the optional label with the text box can be found in the ‘Guidelines for the use of the EU Ecolabel logo’ on the website: %20guidelines.pdf Assessment and verification: The applicant shall provide a sample of the printed paper product showing the label, together with a declaration of compliance with this criterion. ( 1 ) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC ( OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1 ). ( 2 ) An updated version of the standard is expected to cover cogeneration space heaters as well (see Draft prEN 50465:2011 Gas appliances — Combined Heat and Power appliance of nominal heat input inferior or equal to 70 kW). ( 3 ) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 811/2013 of 18 February 2013 supplementing Directive 2010/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the energy labelling of space heaters, combination heaters, packages of space heater, temperature control and solar device and packages of combination heater, temperature control and solar device ( OJ L 239, 6.9.2013, p. 1 ). ( 4 ) Commission Regulation (EU) No 206/2012 of 6 March 2012 implementing Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ecodesign requirements for air conditioners and comfort fans ( OJ L 72, 10.3.2012, p. 7 ). ( 5 ) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 ( OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1 ). ( 6 ) Council Directive 67/548/EEC of 27 June 1967 on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances ( OJ 196, 16.8.1967, p. 1 ). ( 7 ) As provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008. ( 8 ) As provided for in Directive 67/548/EEC.