COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2023/2747 of 8 December 2023 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1391 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Lactic acid based products – CID Lines NV’ in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 48(1), point (a), thereof, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Annex II to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1391 is replaced by the text in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union . This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 8 December 2023. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN ( 1 ) OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1 . ( 2 ) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1391 of 26 July 2022 granting a Union authorisation for the biocidal product family ‘Lactic acid based products – CID Lines NV’ ( OJ L 211, 12.8.2022, p. 1 ). ( 3 ) Opinion of the evaluation of post authorisation conditions for the Union authorisation of Lactic acid based products – CID Lines NV’. ECHA/BPC/384/2023 of 7 June 2023. ‘ANNEX II Summary of product characteristics for a biocidal product family Lactic acid based products – CID LINES NV Product type 1 – Human hygiene (Disinfectants) Product type 2 – Disinfectants and algaecides not intended for direct application to humans or animals (Disinfectants) Product type 3 – Veterinary hygiene (Disinfectants) Product type 4 – Food and feed area (Disinfectants) Authorisation number: EU-0027740-0000 R4BP asset number: EU-0027740-0000 PART I FIRST INFORMATION LEVEL 1. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Family name 1.2. Product type(s) 1.3. Authorisation holder 1.4. Manufacturer(s) of the biocidal products 1.5. Manufacturer(s) of the active substance(s) 2. PRODUCT FAMILY COMPOSITION AND FORMULATION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the family 2.2. Type(s) of formulation PART II SECOND INFORMATION LEVEL – META SPC(S) META SPC 1 1. META SPC 1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 1 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 1 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 1 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 1 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 1 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 1 4.1. Use description Table 1 Use # 1 – Hygienic handwash for professional use 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 1 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for Meta SPC 1 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for Meta SPC 1 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for Meta SPC 1 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 1 ) OF THE META SPC 1 5.1. Instructions for use Wet your hands with clean, running water at room temperature Turn off the tap Apply 10 mL of undiluted product and rub your hands for at least one minute according to the recommended hand washing procedure, before rinse and dry. For professional use only 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 1 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 2 1. META SPC 2 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 2 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 2 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 2 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 2 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 2 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 2 4.1. Use description Table 2 Use # 1 – Ready to use algaecide for professional use 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 4.2. Use description Table 3 Use # 2 – Ready to use algaecide for non-professional use 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 2 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 2 ) OF THE META SPC 2 5.1. Instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use The surfaces to be disinfected must be wet enough in order to be kept wet during the approved contact time for optimal disinfection. The following precautionary sentence shall be added on the product label: “Make sure to wet surfaces completely”. The required contact time has to be respected until further treatments (for example brushing the surfaces). Use 100 mL solution/m 2 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for five minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 2 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 3 1. META SPC 3 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 3 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 3 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 3 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 3 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 3 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 3 4.1. Use description Table 4 Use # 1 – concentrated algaecide 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.2. Use description Table 5 Use # 2 – Disinfection of hard/non-porous surfaces in the food industry (for example processing machines) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 3 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 3 ) OF THE META SPC 3 5.1. Instructions for use Disinfection cycle: The surfaces to be disinfected must be wet enough in order to be kept wet during the approved contact time for optimal disinfection. The following precautionary sentence shall be added on the product label: “Make sure to wet surfaces completely”. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Gloves and goggles are needed during mixing and loading of the concentrated products. Wear protective coverall (to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 3 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 4 1. META SPC 4 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 4 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 4 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 4 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 4 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 4 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 4 4.1. Use description Table 6 Use # 1 – Hard surface disinfection for sanitary hygiene, other than in healthcare, for professional use (PT2) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Gloves and goggles are needed during handling of the products 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.2. Use description Table 7 Use # 2 – Hard surface disinfection for hygiene in kitchens, for professional use (PT4) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Gloves and goggles are needed during handling of the products. 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.3. Use description Table 8 Use # 3 – Disinfection of toilet bowls, for professional use (PT2) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Gloves and goggles are needed during handling of the products. 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.4. Use description Table 9 Use # 4 – Disinfection of toilet bowls, for non-professional use (PT2) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures Avoid contact with eyes A child proof closure is required The product must be fitted with a pouring spout, the product must be poured gently on the wall of the toilet bowl to avoid the formation of splashes. Wash hands after application 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 4 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 4 ) OF THE META SPC 4 5.1. Instructions for use The surfaces to be disinfected must be wet enough in order to be kept wet during the preconised contact time for optimal disinfection. The following precautionary sentence shall be added on the product label: “Make sure to wet surfaces completely”. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 4 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 5 1. META SPC 5 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 5 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 5 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 5 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 5 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 5 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 5 4.1. Use description Table 10 Use # 1 – Teat disinfection, before milking 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Application rates : Dilution: 40 % (with 3,2 % LA) – The product must be diluted with RT potable water. Use one towel per cow. 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.2. Use description Table 11 Use # 2 – Intact skin wash/disinfection (of the udder of dairy and beef cattle before calving and of the udder of sows before farrowing) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 5 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 5 ) OF THE META SPC 5 5.1. Instructions for use See use specific instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Chemical goggles need to be worn. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 5 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 6 1. META SPC 6 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 6 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 6 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 6 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 6 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 6 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 6 4.1. Use description Table 12 Use # 1 – Teat disinfection, before milking 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Application rates : 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 6 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 6 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 6 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 6 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 6 ) OF THE META SPC 6 5.1. Instructions for use 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Chemical goggles need to be worn. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 6 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 7 1. META SPC 7 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 7 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 7 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 7 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 7 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 7 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 7 4.1. Use description Table 13 Use # 1 – Hard surface disinfection in Food and Feed industry, for professional use (PT4) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.2. Use description Table 14 Use # 2 – Hard surface disinfection in food and feed area, for non-professional use (PT4) 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets. 4.3. Use description Table 15 Use # 3 – Hard surface disinfection, use in healthcare, for professional use (PT2) 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.4. Use description Table 16 Use # 4 – Hard surface disinfection, use in healthcare, for non-professional use (PT2) 4.4.1. Use-specific instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use 4.4.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.4.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand 4.4.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.4.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets. 4.5. Use description Table 17 Use # 5 – Hard surface disinfection, use other than in healthcare, for professional use (PT2) 4.5.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.5.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.5.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.5.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.5.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.6. Use description Table 18 Use # 6 – Hard surface disinfection, use other than in healthcare, for non-professional use (PT2) 4.6.1. Use-specific instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use 4.6.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.6.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand. 4.6.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 7 4.6.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets. 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 7 ) OF THE META SPC 7 5.1. Instructions for use Comply with the instructions for use First clean thoroughly the surfaces and materials to be disinfected and dry the surface or materials. Disinfect the dry surface with a wipe. Make sure the surface remains completely wetted during the required contact time. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Wash skin with water. If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Rinse with water. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for five minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If medical advice is needed, have product container or label at hand 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the fullresponsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. Store at ambient temperature. Do not store below 0 °C and above 40 °C. The shelf-life of the products is two years. Keep out of reach of children and non-target animals/pets 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 7 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 8 1. META SPC 8 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 8 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 8 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 8 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 8 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 8 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 8 4.1. Use description Table 19 Use # 1 – Teat disinfection after milking by dipping 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 8 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 8 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 8 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 8 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 8 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 8 ) OF THE META SPC 8 5.1. Instructions for use Apply the product immediately after each milking, two or three times per day. Ensure that the teat is completely covered to three quarter of its length. Fill the dipping cup with the desired amount of product, but do not use more fluid than necessary. Assume 5 mL per cow per treatment. Respect a contact time of five minutes. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. In order to ensure optimal teat disinfection, the animals should be kept standing for at least five minutes. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Chemical goggles need to be worn. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 8 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 9 1. META SPC 9 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 9 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 9 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 9 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 9 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 9 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 9 4.1. Use description Table 20 Use # 1 – Teat disinfection after milking by spraying or dipping 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 9 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 9 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 9 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 9 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 9 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 9 ) OF THE META SPC 9 5.1. Instructions for use Apply the product immediately after each milking, two or three times per day. Ensure that the teat is completely covered to three quarter of its length. Fill the dipping cup or spraying flacon with the desired amount of the product, but do not use more fluid that necessary. Assume 5 mL per cow per treatment. Respect a contact time of five minutes. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. In order to ensure optimal teat disinfection, the animals should be kept standing for at least five minutes. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Chemical goggles need to be worn. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 9 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.3. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 10 1. META SPC 10 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 10 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 10 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 10 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 10 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 10 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 10 4.1. Use description Table 21 Use # 1 – Teat disinfection after milking by spraying or dipping 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use Application rates: 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 10 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 10 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 10 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 10 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 10 ) OF THE META SPC 10 5.1. Instructions for use Apply the product immediately after each milking, two or three times per day. Ensure that the teat is completely covered to three quarter of its length. Fill the dipping cup or spraying flacon with the desired amount of product, but do not use more fluid that necessary. The product must be brought to a temperature above 20 °C before use. In order to ensure optimal teat disinfection, the animals should be kept standing for at least five minutes. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Chemical goggles need to be worn. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 10 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 11 1. META SPC 11 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 11 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 11 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 11 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 11 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 11 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 11 4.1. Use description Table 22 Use # 1 – Hard surface disinfection in food and feed industry 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.2. Use description Table 23 Use # 2 – Equipment disinfection by soaking in food and feed industry 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.3. Use description Table 24 Use # 3 – Hard surface disinfection for veterinary hygiene 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use Animal houses must be empty of animals during disinfection. The product is used to disinfect animal housings of pigs, cows, poultry. Clean the surfaces thoroughly with a detergent before disinfection. Rinse with clean water and remove surplus water. Mixing and loading: container is opened manually and emptied into the reservoir or connected to a pump, which pumps the product into the reservoir of the spraying device which is then filled up with water in order to achieve the correct concentration of use. Apply the product by spraying or immersion. Use as much solution as needed to keep the surfaces wet during the complete contact time. It is not necessary to spray during the complete contact time. 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 11 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 11 ) OF THE META SPC 11 5.1. Instructions for use Disinfection procedures by spraying: The surfaces to be disinfected must be wet enough in order to be kept wet during the preconised contact time for optimal disinfection. The following precautionary sentence shall be added on the product label: “Make sure to wet surfaces completely”. Products must be diluted in potable water before use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Gloves and goggles are needed during mixing and loading. 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. If skin irritation occurs: Get medical advice. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 11 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 12 1. META SPC 12 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 12 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 12 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 12 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 12 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 12 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 12 4.1. Use description Table 25 Use # 1 – Inner surface disinfection by CIP with circulation 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.2. Use description Table 26 Use # 2 – Inner surface disinfection by CIP without circulation 4.2.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.2.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.2.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.2.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.2.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.3. Use description Table 27 Use # 3 – Crate wash 4.3.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.3.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.3.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.3.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 4.3.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 12 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 12 ) OF THE META SPC 12 5.1. Instructions for use Products must be diluted in potable water before use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Gloves and goggles are needed during mixing and loading. Wear protective coverall (to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call a Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the whole responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is 2 years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 12 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product 7.2. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 13 1. META SPC 13 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 13 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 13 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 13 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 13 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 13 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 13 4.1. Use description Table 28 Use # 1 – Hard surface disinfection (PT4) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 13 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures see general directions for use for Meta SPC 13 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 13 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 13 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 13 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 13 ) OF THE META SPC 13 5.1. Instructions for use The surfaces to be disinfected must be wet enough in order to be kept wet during the preconised contact time for optimal disinfection. The following precautionary sentence shall be added on the product label: “Make sure to wet surfaces completely”. Products must be diluted in potable water before use. 5.2. Risk mitigation measures Gloves and goggles are needed during mixing and loading. Wear protective coverall (to be specified by the authorisation holder within the product information). 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF INHALED: Move to fresh air and keep at rest in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms: Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. If no symptoms: Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 13 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product META SPC 14 1. META SPC 14 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 1.1. Meta SPC 14 identifier 1.2. Suffix to the authorisation number 1.3. Product type(s) 2. META SPC 14 COMPOSITION 2.1. Qualitative and quantitative information on the composition of the meta SPC 14 2.2. Type(s) of formulation of the meta SPC 14 3. HAZARD AND PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS OF THE META SPC 14 4. AUTHORISED USE(S) OF THE META SPC 14 4.1. Use description Table 29 Use # 1 – Hygienic handrub, for professional use (PT1) 4.1.1. Use-specific instructions for use see general directions for use for Meta SPC 14 4.1.2. Use-specific risk mitigation measures 4.1.3. Where specific to the use, the particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment see general directions for use for Meta SPC 14 4.1.4. Where specific to the use, the instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging see general directions for use for Meta SPC 14 4.1.5. Where specific to the use, the conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage see general directions for use for Meta SPC 14 5. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR USE ( 14 ) OF THE META SPC 14 5.1. Instructions for use Apply 6 ml of the product undiluted. Respect a contact time of 1 minute. Rinse thoroughly after disinfection. For professional use only 5.2. Risk mitigation measures 5.3. Particulars of likely direct or indirect effects, first aid instructions and emergency measures to protect the environment IF ON SKIN: Immediately wash skin with plenty of water. Thereafter take off all contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. Continue to wash the skin with water for 15 minutes. Call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF INHALED: If symptoms occur call a POISON CENTRE or a doctor. IF IN EYES: Immediately rinse with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do. Continue rinsing for at least 15 minutes. Immediately call 112/ambulance for medical assistance. IF SWALLOWED: Immediately rinse mouth. Give something to drink, if exposed person is able to swallow. Do NOT induce vomiting. Call 112/ambulance for medical assistance 5.4. Instructions for safe disposal of the product and its packaging The packing and content must be eliminated as dangerous waste product under the full responsibility of the possessor of this waste product. Do not throw wastes into sewers and watercourses. Dispose in a safe manner in accordance with local/national regulations. 5.5. Conditions of storage and shelf-life of the product under normal conditions of storage Keep only in the original container in a cool, well ventilated place. Keep container closed when not in use. The shelf-life of the products is two years. 6. OTHER INFORMATION 7. THIRD INFORMATION LEVEL: INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS IN THE META SPC 14 7.1. Trade name(s), authorisation number and specific composition of each individual product ( 1 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 1. ( 2 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 2. ( 3 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 3. ( 4 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 4. ( 5 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 5. ( 6 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 6. ( 7 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 7. ( 8 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 8. ( 9 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 9. ( 10 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 10. ( 11 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 11. ( 12 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 12. ( 13 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 13. ( 14 ) Instructions for use, risk mitigation measures and other directions for use under this section are valid for any authorised uses within the meta SPC 14. ELI: ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)