COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION of 11 October 2010 on the application of Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (2010/635/Euratom) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, and in particular Article 37 thereof in conjunction with Article 106a referring to Article 292 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having consulted the group of persons appointed in accordance with Article 31 of the Euratom Treaty by the Scientific and Technical Committee, Whereas: HAS ADOPTED THIS RECOMMENDATION: This Recommendation is addressed to the Member States. It replaces Recommendation 1999/829/Euratom. Done at Brussels, 11 October 2010. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Member of the Commission ( 1 ) OJ 81, 21.12.1960, p. 1893/60 . ( 2 ) OJ L 83, 29.3.1982, p. 15 . ( 3 ) OJ L 6, 9.1.1991, p. 16 . ( 4 ) OJ L 324, 16.12.1999, p. 23 . ( 5 ) [1988] ECR 5013. ( 6 ) Provided that the operation is not incorporated in a plan submitted under another heading. ( 7 ) The term ‘predisposal management’ includes storage of radioactive waste. ( 8 ) Decommissioning comprises all technical and administrative procedures, activities and measures taken after the final shut-down of a facility and up to the release of the site for unrestricted or other licensed use. Within these activities ‘dismantling’ comprises disassembling, cutting and demolition of contaminated or activated components, systems and structures including their packaging and transfer off-site. ( 9 ) Oxides of uranium and plutonium. ( 10 ) Modifications of a plan might also include preparatory work in view of the operations referred to in point 1(9). ANNEX I General data applicable to the operations referred to in point 1(1) to (7) Introduction 1. THE SITE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS 1.1. Geographical, topographical and geological features of the site and the region with 1.2. Seismology 1.3. Hydrology For an installation situated near to a waterbody providing a potential contamination pathway to another Member State, a brief description of appropriate hydrological features, extending to the other Member State(s), for example: 1.4. Meteorology Local climatology with frequency distributions of: 1.5. Natural resources and foodstuffs Brief description of: 1.6. Other activities in the vicinity of the site 2. THE INSTALLATION 2.1. Main features of the installation 2.2. Ventilation systems and the treatment of gaseous and airborne wastes Description of ventilation, decay, filtration and discharge systems, in normal conditions and in the case of an accident, including flow diagrams 2.3. Liquid waste treatment Description of liquid waste treatment facilities, storage capacities and discharge systems, including flow diagrams 2.4. Solid waste treatment Description of solid waste treatment facilities and storage capacities 2.5. Containment Description of systems and provisions to confine radioactive substances 2.6. Decommissioning and dismantling 3. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF AIRBORNE RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS 3.1. Authorisation procedure in force 3.2. Technical aspects 3.3. Monitoring of discharges 3.4. Evaluation of transfer to man Except for operations listed under (1) and (2), if the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected ( 2 ) Member States are required if doses to the reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided . 3.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the plant and for other affected Member States: 3.4.2. Evaluation of concentration and exposure levels associated with the envisaged discharge limits cited in 3.1 above: 3.5. Radioactive discharges to atmosphere from other installations Procedures for coordination with radioactive discharges from other installations referred to in 1.1, third indent 4. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF LIQUID RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS 4.1. Authorisation procedure in force 4.2. Technical aspects 4.3. Monitoring of discharges 4.4. Evaluation of transfer to man Except for operations listed under (1) and (2), if the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected Member States are required if doses to reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 4.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the plant and for other affected Member States: 4.4.2. Evaluation of concentration and exposure levels associated with the discharge limits cited in 4.1 above: 4.5. Radioactive discharges into the same receiving waters from other installations Procedures for coordination with discharges from other installations referred to in 1.1, third indent 5. DISPOSAL OF SOLID RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM THE INSTALLATION 5.1. Solid radioactive waste 5.2. Radiological risks to the environment 5.3. Off-site arrangements for the transfer of waste 5.4. Release of materials from the requirements of the basic safety standards 6. UNPLANNED RELEASES OF RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS 6.1. Review of accidents of internal and external origin which could result in unplanned releases of radioactive substances List of the accidents studied in the safety report 6.2. Reference accident(s) taken into consideration by the competent national authorities for evaluating possible radiological consequences in the case of unplanned releases In addition, for operations (1) and (2) accidents taken into consideration by the competent authorities for the establishment of the site related national emergency plan. Outline of the accident(s) considered and reasons for its (their) choice 6.3. Evaluation of the radiological consequences of the reference accident(s) and for operations (1) and (2), the accident(s) taken into consideration by the competent authorities for the establishment of the site related national emergency plan 6.3.1. Accidents entailing releases to atmosphere Except for operations listed under (1) and (2), if the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 6.3.2. Accidents entailing releases into an aquatic environment Except for operations listed under (1) and (2), if the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants close to the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 7. EMERGENCY PLANS, AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER MEMBER STATES In relation to possible radiological emergencies which may affect other Member States in order to facilitate the organisation of radiological protection in these States: Brief description of: 8. ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING With reference to 3.1 and 4.1 above, monitoring programs as approved by the competent national authorities, organisation, sample forms and frequency, type of monitoring instruments used in normal and accident circumstances; where appropriate, any collaboration arrangements in this respect with neighbouring Member States. ( 1 ) Commission Recommendation of 18 December 2003 on standardised information on radioactive airborne and liquid discharges into the environment from nuclear power reactors and reprocessing plants in normal operation ( OJ L 2, 6.1.2004, p. 36 ). ( 2 ) Affected Member States are to be selected by taking into account distance from the installation, wind direction for gaseous effluent releases and the route of water courses for liquid effluent releases. ANNEX II General data applicable to the operation referred to in point 1(8) The predisposal management of radioactive waste arising from the operations referred to in point 1(1) to (7) and (9) Introduction 1. THE SITE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS 1.1. Geographical, topographical and geological features of the site and the region with 1.2. Seismology 1.3. Hydrology For an installation situated near to a waterbody providing a potential contamination pathway to another Member State, a brief description of appropriate hydrological features, extending to the other Member State(s), for example: 1.4. Meteorology Local climatology with frequency distributions of: 1.5. Natural resources and foodstuffs Brief description of: 1.6. Other activities in the vicinity of the site 2. THE INSTALLATION 2.1. Main features of the installation 2.2. Ventilation systems and the treatment of gaseous and airborne wastes Description of ventilation, decay, filtration and discharge systems, in normal conditions and in the case of an accident, including flow diagrams 2.3. Liquid waste treatment Description of secondary liquid waste treatment facilities, storage capacities and discharge systems, including flow diagrams 2.4. Solid waste treatment Description of secondary solid waste treatment facilities and storage capacities 2.5. Containment Description of systems and provisions to confine radioactive substances 2.6. Decommissioning and dismantling 3. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF AIRBORNE RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS 3.1. Authorisation procedure in force 3.2. Technical aspects 3.3. Monitoring of discharges 3.4. Evaluation of transfer to man If the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected ( 1 ) Member States are required if doses to the reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided . 3.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the plant and for other affected Member States: 3.4.2. Evaluation of the concentration and exposure levels associated with the envisaged discharge limits cited in 3.1 above: 3.5. Radioactive discharges to atmosphere from other installations Procedures for coordination with radioactive discharges from other installations referred to in 1.1, third indent 4. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF LIQUID RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS 4.1. Authorisation procedure in force 4.2. Technical aspects 4.3. Monitoring of discharges 4.4. Evaluation of transfer to man If the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected Member States are required if doses to reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 4.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the plant and for other affected Member States: 4.4.2. Evaluation of concentration and exposure levels associated with the discharge limits cited in 4.1 above: 4.5. Radioactive discharges into the same receiving waters from other installations Procedures for coordination with discharges from other installations referred to in 1.1, third indent 5. DISPOSAL OF SOLID RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM THE INSTALLATION 5.1. Solid radioactive waste 5.2. Radiological risks to the environment 5.3. Off-site arrangements for the transfer of waste 5.4. Release of materials from the requirements of the basic safety standards 6. UNPLANNED RELEASES OF RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS 6.1. Review of accidents of internal and external origin which could result in unplanned releases of radioactive substances List of the accidents studied in the safety report 6.2. Reference accident(s) taken into consideration by the competent national authorities for evaluating possible radiological consequences in the case of unplanned releases Outline of the accident(s) considered and reasons for its (their) choice 6.3. Evaluation of the radiological consequences of the reference accident(s) 6.3.1. Accidents entailing releases to atmosphere If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 6.3.2. Accidents entailing releases into an aquatic environment If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants close to the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided . 7. EMERGENCY PLANS, AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER MEMBER STATES In relation to possible radiological emergencies which may affect other Member States in order to facilitate the organisation of radiological protection in these States: Brief description of: 8. ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING With reference to 3.1 and 4.1 above, monitoring programs as approved by the competent national authorities, organisation, sample forms and frequency, type of monitoring instruments used in normal and accident circumstances; where appropriate, any collaboration arrangements in this respect with neighbouring Member States. ( 1 ) Affected Member States are to be selected by taking into account distance from the installation, wind direction for gaseous effluent releases and the route of water courses for liquid effluent releases. ANNEX III General data applicable to the operations referred to in point 1(9) The dismantling of nuclear reactors, mixed-oxide fuel fabrication plants and reprocessing plants (except research reactors whose maximum power does not exceed 50 MW continuous thermal load) Introduction 1. THE SITE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS 1.1. Geographical, topographical and geological features of the site and region with 1.2. Hydrology For an installation situated near to a waterbody providing a potential contamination pathway to another Member State, a brief description of appropriate hydrological features, extending to the other Member State(s), for example: 1.3. Meteorology Local climatology with frequency distributions of: 1.4. Natural resources and foodstuffs Brief description of: 2. THE INSTALLATION 2.1. Brief description and history of the installation to be dismantled 2.2. Ventilation systems and the treatment of gaseous and airborne wastes Description of ventilation, decay, filtration and discharge systems during dismantling, in normal conditions and in the case of an accident, including flow diagrams 2.3. Liquid waste treatment Description of liquid waste treatment facilities during dismantling, storage capacities and discharge systems, including flow diagrams 2.4. Solid waste treatment Description of solid waste treatment facilities and storage capacities at the site during dismantling 2.5. Containment Description of systems and provisions to confine radioactive substances 3. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF AIRBORNE RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS 3.1. Authorisation procedure in force 3.2. Technical aspects 3.3. Monitoring of discharges 3.4. Evaluation of transfer to man If the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected ( 1 ) Member States are required if doses to the reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided . 3.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the plant and for other affected Member States: 3.4.2. Evaluation of the concentration and exposure levels associated with the envisaged discharge limits for the dismantling operations cited in 3.1 above: 4. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF LIQUID RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS 4.1. Authorisation procedure in force 4.2. Technical aspects 4.3. Monitoring of discharges 4.4. Evaluation of transfer to man If the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected Member States are required if doses to reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 4.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the plant and for other affected Member States: 4.4.2. Evaluation of the concentration and exposure levels associated with the envisaged discharge limits for the dismantling operations cited in 4.1 above: 5. DISPOSAL OF SOLID RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM THE INSTALLATION 5.1. Solid radioactive wastes 5.2. Radiological risks to the environment 5.3. Off-site arrangements for the transfer of waste 5.4. Release of materials from the requirements of the basic safety standards 6. UNPLANNED RELEASES OF RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS 6.1. Review of accidents of internal and external origin which could result in unplanned releases of radioactive substances List of the accidents studied in the safety report 6.2. Reference accident(s) taken into consideration by the competent national authorities for evaluating possible radiological consequences in the case of unplanned releases Outline of the accident(s) considered and reasons for its (their) choice 6.3. Evaluation of the radiological consequences of the reference accident(s) 6.3.1. Accidents entailing releases to atmosphere If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 6.3.2. Accidents entailing releases into an aquatic environment If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants close to the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 7. EMERGENCY PLANS, AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER MEMBER STATES In relation to possible radiological emergencies which may affect other Member States in order to facilitate the organisation of radiological protection in these States: Brief description of: In the case of reactors no data are required if all nuclear fuel has been transferred off-site to a licensed facility or to an on-site storage facility, on which an opinion has already been given under the terms of Article 37. 8. ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING With reference to 3.1 and 4.1 above, monitoring programs as approved by the competent national authorities, organisation, sample forms and frequency, type of monitoring instruments used in normal and accident circumstances; where appropriate, any collaboration arrangements in this respect with neighbouring Member States. ( 1 ) Affected Member States are to be selected by taking into account distance from the installation, wind direction for gaseous effluent releases and the route of water courses for liquid effluent releases. ANNEX IV General data applicable to the operations referred to in point 1(10) The emplacement of radioactive waste above or under the ground without intention of retrieval Introduction 1. THE SITE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS 1.1. Geographical, topographical and geological features of the site and the region with 1.2. Geology and seismology 1.3. Hydrology and hydrogeology A brief description of hydrological features providing a potential contamination pathway to another Member State: 1.4. Meteorology and climate A brief description of climate and meteorological features: 1.5. Natural resources and foodstuffs A brief description of: 1.6. Other activities in the vicinity of the site 2. THE REPOSITORY 2.1. Conceptual approach and design 2.2. Wastes to be disposed of in the repository 2.3. Ventilation systems and the treatment of gaseous and airborne wastes Description of ventilation, filtration and discharge systems, in normal conditions and in the case of an accident (as appropriate) 2.4. Drainage system and the treatment of liquid effluents Description of potentially contaminated water collection, drainage and discharge systems, in normal conditions and in the case of an accident (as appropriate) 2.5. Management of secondary solid and liquid waste in normal conditions and in the case of an accident 3. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF AIRBORNE RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS During normal operation of waste disposal facilities only very minor releases of radioactive substances, if any, are expected and significant exposure of members of the public is not anticipated. Therefore this section is not applicable if there is no authorisation for radioactive discharges granted. However, if radionuclide discharge limits are prescribed and discharge monitoring is in place, the general data must be submitted according requirements specified in Section 3 of Annex II. 4. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF LIQUID RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS During normal operation of waste disposal facilities only very minor releases of radioactive substances, if any, are expected and significant exposure of members of the public is not anticipated. Therefore this section is not applicable if there is no authorisation for radioactive discharges granted. However, if radionuclide discharge limits are prescribed and discharge monitoring is in place, the general data must be submitted according requirements specified in Section 4 of Annex II. 5. DISPOSAL OF SOLID RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM THE INSTALLATION This section is normally not applicable. 6. UNPLANNED RELEASES OF RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS 6.1. Review of accidents of internal and external origin which could result in unplanned releases of radioactive substances. Accidents studied in the safety assessment report and evaluated radiological consequences in the case of unplanned releases. 6.2. Evaluation of the radiological consequences of releases to atmosphere If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected ( 1 ) Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided . 6.3. Evaluation of the radiological consequences of releases into an aquatic environment If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults, children and infants close to the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 7. EMERGENCY PLANS; AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER MEMBER STATES In relation to possible radiological emergencies which may affect other Member States in order to facilitate the organisation of radiological protection in these States: Brief description of: 8. POST-CLOSURE PERIOD The different post-closure phases (e.g. active and passive institutional control phases) should be taken into account where appropriate. 8.1. Regulatory and administrative provisions 8.2. Radiological impact during post-closure period If the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases resulting from normal evolution and from early degradation of barriers to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the installation are below 1 mSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected Member States are required if doses to reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 9. ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING Notes: ( 1 ) Relevant for new surface repositories only. ( 2 ) Relevant for geological repositories only. ( 1 ) Affected Member States are to be selected by taking into account distance from the installation, wind direction for gaseous effluent releases and the route of water courses for liquid effluent releases. ANNEX V General data applicable to modifications of a plan on which an opinion has already been given STANDARD FORM ANNEX VI General data applicable to modifications of a plan on which no opinion has been given yet Introduction 1. THE SITE AND ITS SURROUNDINGS 1.1. Geographical, topographical and geological features of the site and the region with 1.2. Hydrology Data mentioned in this section 1.2 are required only if the modification of the discharges from the plant of liquid radioactive effluents in normal conditions envisages less restrictive authorised limits or associated requirements than in the existing plan or if the potential consequences of the reference accident(s) entailing releases into an aquatic environment are increased. For an installation situated near to a waterbody providing a potential contamination pathway to another Member State, a brief description of appropriate hydrological features, extending to the other Member State(s), for example: 1.3. Meteorology Data mentioned in this section 1.3 are required only if the modification of the discharges from the plant of gaseous radioactive effluents in normal conditions envisages less restrictive authorised limits or associated requirements than in the existing plan or if the potential consequences of the reference accident(s) entailing releases to atmosphere are increased. Local climatology with frequency distributions of: 1.4. Natural resources and foodstuffs Brief description of: 2. THE INSTALLATION 3. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF AIRBORNE RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS Data mentioned in this section 3 are required only if the modification of the discharges from the plant of gaseous radioactive effluents in normal conditions envisages less restrictive authorised limits or associated requirements than in the existing plan. 3.1. Authorisation procedure in force 3.2. Technical aspects 3.3. Monitoring of discharges 3.4. Evaluation of transfer to man If the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected Member States are required if doses to the reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 3.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the installation and for other affected ( 1 ) Member States: 3.4.2. Evaluation of the concentration and exposure levels associated with the envisaged discharge limits cited in 3.1 above: 3.5. Radioactive discharges to atmosphere from other installations Procedures for coordination with radioactive discharges from other installations referred to in 1.1, third indent 4. RELEASE FROM THE INSTALLATION OF LIQUID RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS IN NORMAL CONDITIONS Data mentioned in this section 4 are required only if the modification of the discharges from the plant of liquid radioactive effluents in normal conditions envisages less restrictive authorised limits or associated requirements than in the existing plan. 4.1. Authorisation procedure in force 4.2. Technical aspects 4.3. Monitoring of discharges 4.4. Evaluation of transfer to man If the assessed maximum exposure levels from releases in normal conditions to adults, children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 10 μSv per annum and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on effective doses in other affected Member States are required if doses to reference groups in the vicinity of the plant are provided. 4.4.1. Models, including where appropriate generic models, and parameter values used to calculate the consequences of the releases in the vicinity of the plant and for other affected Member States: 4.4.2. Evaluation of concentration and exposure levels associated with the discharge limits cited in 4.1 above: 4.5. Radioactive discharges into the same receiving waters from other installations Procedures for coordination with discharges from other installations referred to in 1.1, third indent 5. DISPOSAL OF SOLID RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM THE INSTALLATION Data mentioned in this section 5 are required only if the modification of the disposal from the plant of solid radioactive waste in normal conditions envisages less restrictive authorised limits or associated requirements than in the existing plan. 5.1. Solid radioactive waste 5.2. Radiological risks to the environment 5.3. Off-site arrangements for the transfer of waste 5.4. Release of materials from the requirements of the basic safety standards 6. UNPLANNED RELEASES OF RADIOACTIVE EFFLUENTS Data mentioned in this section 6 are required only if the potential consequences of the reference accident(s) are increased. 6.1. Review of accidents of internal and external origin which could result in unplanned releases of radioactive substances List of the accidents studied in the safety report 6.2. Reference accident(s) taken into consideration by the competent national authorities for evaluating possible radiological consequences in the case of unplanned releases Outline of the accident(s) considered and reasons for its (their) choice Impact of the modification on the reference accident(s) 6.3. Evaluation of the radiological consequences of the reference accident(s) 6.3.1. Accidents entailing releases to atmosphere Data mentioned in this section 6.3.1 are required only if the potential consequences of the reference accident(s) entailing releases to atmosphere are increased. If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults children and infants in the vicinity of the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. If not already submitted under heading 3.3: 6.3.2. Accidents entailing releases into an aquatic environment Data mentioned in this section 6.3.2 are required only if the potential consequences of the reference accident(s) entailing releases into an aquatic environment are increased. If the assessed maximum exposure levels from the reference accident to adults children and infants close to the plant are below 1 mSv and there are no exceptional pathways of exposure, e.g. involving the export of foodstuffs, no data on exposure levels in other affected Member States are required if exposure levels in the vicinity of the plant are provided. If not already submitted under heading 4.3: 7. EMERGENCY PLANS; AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER MEMBER STATES In relation to possible radiological emergencies which may affect other Member States in order to facilitate the organisation of radiological protection in these States Brief description of: 8. ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING Relevant information in relation with the modification ( 1 ) Affected Member States are to be selected by taking into account distance from the installation, wind direction for gaseous effluent releases and the route of water courses for liquid effluent releases.