All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32013A0223(01) Commission Opinion of 22 February 2013 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Studsvik R2 and R2-0 research reactors, located at Nyköping, Sweden Commission Opinion of 22 February 2013 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Studsvik R2 and R2-0 research reactors, located at Nyköping, Sweden Commission Opinion of 22 February 2013 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Studsvik R2 and R2-0 research reactors, located at Nyköping, Sweden OJ C 54, 23.2.2013, pp. 1–2 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) 23.2.2013 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 54/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 22 February 2013 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Studsvik R2 and R2-0 research reactors, located at Nyköping, Sweden (Only the Swedish text is authentic) 2013/C 54/01 The assessment below is carried out under the provisions of the Euratom Treaty, without prejudice to any additional assessments to be carried out under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the obligations stemming from it and from secondary legislation (1). On 19 September 2012, the European Commission received from the Swedish Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Studsvik R2 and R2-0 research reactors. On the basis of these data and additional information requested by the Commission on 9 October 2012 and provided by the Swedish authorities on 16 November 2012, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the Studsvik site and the nearest border with another Member State, in this case Finland, is 200 km. Estonia and Latvia are the next nearest Member States, their borders being located at some 265 km. The border of Norway, as neighbouring country, is at a distance of some 320 km. 2. During normal decommissioning operations the discharges of liquid and gaseous radioactive effluents are not liable to cause an exposure of the population in another Member State or in a neighbouring third country that would be significant from the point of view of health. 3. Solid radioactive waste will be stored on-site awaiting a government decision regarding the choice of a long-term repository solution. Non-radioactive solid waste or residual materials in compliance with clearance levels will be released from regulatory control for disposal as conventional waste or for reuse or recycling. This will be done in compliance with the criteria laid down in the Basic Safety Standards (Directive 96/29/Euratom). 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents that may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses likely to be received by the population in another Member State or in a neighbouring third country would not be significant from the point of view of health. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form arising from the decommissioning of the Studsvik R2 and R2-0 research reactors, located at Nyköping, Sweden, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in a radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State or a neighbouring third country. Done at Brussels, 22 February 2013. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Member of the Commission (1) For instance, under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, environmental aspects should be further assessed. Indicatively, the Commission would like to draw attention to the provisions of Directive 2011/92/EU on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment, Directive 2001/42/EC on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment, as well as of Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora and Directive 2000/60/EC establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy.