All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32007A1026(01) Commission opinion of 24 October 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Garagliano nuclear power plant, located in Italy, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission opinion of 24 October 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Garagliano nuclear power plant, located in Italy, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission opinion of 24 October 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Garagliano nuclear power plant, located in Italy, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 251, 26.10.2007, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 26.10.2007 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 251/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 24 October 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Garagliano nuclear power plant, located in Italy, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the Italian text is authentic) (2007/C 251/01) On 15 January 2007, the European Commission received from the Government of Italy, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Garigliano nuclear power plant. On the basis of these data, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the plant and the nearest point of another Member State, in this case France (Corsica), is approximately 340 km. 2. During normal decommissioning operation, discharges of liquid and gaseous effluents will not cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in other Member States. 3. Solid radioactive waste produced during decommissioning will be stored in a facility on site before final disposal in a planned national repository. Non-radioactive solid waste and materials in compliance with clearance levels will be released from regulatory control for disposal as conventional waste or for recycling or reuse. This will be done in compliance with the criteria laid down in the Basic Safety Standards (Council Directive 96/29/Euratom). 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive waste, which may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in other Member States would not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form arising from the decommissioning of the Garigliano nuclear power plant, located in Italy, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in the radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.