All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32012A0623(01) Commission Opinion of 20 June 2012 relating to the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Bradwell site, located in Essex, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 20 June 2012 relating to the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Bradwell site, located in Essex, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 20 June 2012 relating to the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Bradwell site, located in Essex, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 183, 23.6.2012, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 23.6.2012 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 183/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 20 June 2012 relating to the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Bradwell site, located in Essex, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) 2012/C 183/01 The assessment below is carried out under the provisions of the Euratom Treaty, without prejudice to any additional assessments to be carried out under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the obligations stemming from it and from secondary legislation. On 12 March 2012, the European Commission received from the Government of the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Bradwell site, located in Essex, United Kingdom. On the basis of these data, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance from the site to the nearest border of another Member State, in this case France is approximately 110 km. 2. The planned modification will involve an increase in the authorised discharge limits for airborne carbon-14 and tritium. 3. During normal decommissioning operations the planned modification will not cause an exposure of the population in another Member State that is significant from the point of view of health. 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents which may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the initial General Data, the planned modification will not give rise to doses to the population in another Member State that would be significant from the point of view of health. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form from the Bradwell site in Essex, United Kingdom, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State that would be significant from the point of view of health. Done at Brussels, 20 June 2012. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Member of the Commission