All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32010A0414(01) Commission Opinion of 13 April 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from Quotient Bioresearch (Radiochemicals) Ltd at Trident Park in Cardiff in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 13 April 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from Quotient Bioresearch (Radiochemicals) Ltd at Trident Park in Cardiff in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 13 April 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from Quotient Bioresearch (Radiochemicals) Ltd at Trident Park in Cardiff in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 94, 14.4.2010, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 14.4.2010 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 94/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 13 April 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from Quotient Bioresearch (Radiochemicals) Ltd at Trident Park in Cardiff in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) 2010/C 94/01 On 13 November 2009, the European Commission received from the British Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from Quotient Bioresearch (Radiochemicals) Ltd. On the basis of these data and additional information requested by the Commission on 30 November 2009 and provided by the British authorities on 4 January 2010, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distances between the facility and the nearest point of another Member State are 210 km for France and 230 km for Ireland. 2. Under normal operating conditions, the discharges of gaseous and liquid radioactive effluents will not cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in another Member State. 3. Solid radioactive waste will be temporarily stored on site before being transferred to authorised treatment or storage facilities within the United Kingdom. 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents which may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in another Member State will not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form from Quotient Bioresearch (Radiochemicals) Ltd, located at Trident Park in Cardiff, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. Done at Brussels, 13 April 2010. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Member of the Commission