All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32008A0724(01) Commission Opinion of 18 July 2008 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the dismantling of the FRJ-2 reactor in Jülich, Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 18 July 2008 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the dismantling of the FRJ-2 reactor in Jülich, Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 18 July 2008 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the dismantling of the FRJ-2 reactor in Jülich, Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 187, 24.7.2008, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) 24.7.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 187/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 18 July 2008 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the dismantling of the FRJ-2 reactor in Jülich, Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the German text is authentic) (2008/C 187/01) On 15 January 2008, the European Commission received from the Government of Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the dismantling of the FRJ-2 reactor. On the basis of these data, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the plant and the nearest point of another Member State (the Netherlands) is about 23 km. 2. During normal dismantling operations, the discharges of liquid and gaseous effluents will not cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in other Member States. 3. Radioactive solid waste arising from the dismantling will be stored on the site until a national repository becomes available. 4. Non-radioactive solid waste or residual materials in compliance with clearance levels will be released from regulatory control for disposal as conventional waste or for reuse or recycling. This will be done in accordance with the criteria laid down in the Basic Safety Standards (Council Directive 96/29/Euratom). 5. In the event of an unplanned release of radioactive effluents, which may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in other Member States will not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste resulting from the dismantling of the FRJ-2 reactor in Jülich, North Rhine-Westphalia, Federal Republic of Germany, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in the radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.