All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32010A0318(01) Commission Opinion of 14 January 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Conditioning and Storage Facility for Activated Waste ICEDA, located on the Bugey site in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 14 January 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Conditioning and Storage Facility for Activated Waste ICEDA, located on the Bugey site in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 14 January 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Conditioning and Storage Facility for Activated Waste ICEDA, located on the Bugey site in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 67, 18.3.2010, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 18.3.2010 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 67/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 14 January 2010 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Conditioning and Storage Facility for Activated Waste ICEDA, located on the Bugey site in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the French text is authentic) 2010/C 67/01 On 13 July 2009, the European Commission received from the French Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Conditioning and Storage Facility for Activated Waste ICEDA, located on the Bugey site in France. On the basis of these data and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the ICEDA facility and the nearest border with another Member State, in this case Italy, is 117 km. Germany is the next nearest Member State at a distance of 266 km. 2. Under normal operating conditions, the discharges of gaseous effluents will not cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in another Member State. 3. Solid radioactive waste will temporarily be stored on site before being transferred to a treatment or storage facility authorised by the French Government. 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluent which may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in another Member State will not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form, arising from the Conditioning and Storage Facility for Activated Waste ICEDA, located on the Bugey site in France, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. Done at Brussels, 14 January 2010. For the Commission Andris PIEBALGS Member of the Commission