All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32021D0958 Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/958 of 31 May 2021 laying down the format for reporting data and information on fishing gear placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected in Member States and the format for the quality check report in accordance with Articles 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/958 of 31 May 2021 laying down the format for reporting data and information on fishing gear placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected in Member States and the format for the quality check report in accordance with Articles 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/958 of 31 May 2021 laying down the format for reporting data and information on fishing gear placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected in Member States and the format for the quality check report in accordance with Articles 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council C/2021/3765 OJ L 211, 15.6.2021, pp. 51–64 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force: This act has been changed. Current consolidated version: 15/06/2021 15.6.2021 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 211/51 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/958 of 31 May 2021 laying down the format for reporting data and information on fishing gear placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected in Member States and the format for the quality check report in accordance with Articles 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the reduction of the impact of certain plastic products on the environment (1), and in particular Article 13(4) thereof, Whereas: (1) In accordance with Article 13(1)(d) of Directive (EU) 2019/904, Member States are to report data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and on waste fishing gear collected in the Member State in the format established by the Commission. (2) Article 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 stipulates that the data and information reported by Member States should be accompanied by a quality check report. The format of the quality check report should ensure that the information and data reported provides a sufficient basis for verifying the accuracy, reliability and comparability of this information and data between the Member States. (3) In accordance with Article 13(1) of Directive (EU) 2019/904, Member States should report to the Commission data and information electronically within 18 months of the end of the reporting year for which they were collected. (4) In order to allow the Member States to fulfil their reporting obligations under Directive (EU) 2019/904 and to ensure the accuracy and comparability of the data reported, the format for reporting data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and on waste fishing gear collected in the Member State is to be established in accordance with Article 13(4) of Directive (EU) 2019/904. (5) The format established in the Annex to this Decision requires that the amounts of fishing gear placed on the market and waste fishing gear are reported by weight. Member States should therefore take the necessary measures to ensure reporting can be effected in accordance with the format. (6) The measures provided for in this Decision are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee for the Adaptation to Scientific and Technical Progress and the implementation of the Directives on waste established under Article 39 of Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (2), HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Member States shall report the data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and on waste fishing gear collected referred to in Article 13(1)(d) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 in the format for reporting data laid out in Annex 1 to this Decision. Article 2 Member States shall draw up the quality check report referred to in Article 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 in the format laid out in Annex 2 to this Decision. Article 3 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 31 May 2021. For the Commission Virginijus SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission (1) OJ L 155, 12.6.2019, p. 1. (2) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives (OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3). ANNEX 1 Format for the reporting of data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected, in accordance with Article 13(1)(d) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council A. Format for the reporting of data on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market (1) Net panels made of thick twine (2) (Ø >1mm) Net panels made of thin twine (Ø≤1mm) Other plastic-based gear or parts thereof Non-plastic parts of gear (3) Buoys, floats, ropes Total (*1) = (tonnes) A+B+C+D+E A B C D = I+K E = F+J+L Plastics total= A+B+C+F A B C F Metals total G = I+J I J Rubber total H = K+L K L B. Format for the reporting of data on waste fishing gear collected (4) Total Net panels made of thick twine (5) (Ø >1mm) Net panels made of thin twine (Ø≤1mm) Other plastic-based gear or parts thereof Non-plastic parts of gear (6) Buoys, floats, ropes Total (*2) = (tonnes) A+B+C+D+E A B C D = I+K E = F+J+L Plastics total = A+B+C+F A B C F Metals total G = I+J I J Rubber total H = K+L K L (1) Data is to be reported in weight (tonnes) – the quality check report must specify whether conversion factors have been used (e.g. from volume to mass). (*1) Only the total amounts (in white cell) of fishing gear and its components are mandatory for reporting. Black shaded cells are not relevant. (2) ‘Twine’ covers all twines, strings, lightweight ropes, etc. whether they consist of one filament (monofilament) or multiple filaments that are twisted or braided together to form a single multi-stranded twine. (3) This may include metal weights, rubber rollers, escape devices/grids, etc. (4) Data is to be reported in weight (tonnes) – the quality check report must specify whether conversion factors have been used (e.g. from volume to mass). (*2) Only the total amounts (in white cell) of fishing gear and its components are mandatory for reporting. This includes any fishing gear containing plastics, as well as any separate components, substances or materials that were part of or attached to such fishing gear when it was discarded, including when it was abandoned or lost. Black shaded cells are not relevant. (5) ‘Twine’ covers all twines, strings, lightweight ropes, etc. whether they consist of one filament (monofilament) or multiple filaments that are twisted or braided together to form a single multi-stranded twine. (6) This may include metal weights, rubber rollers, escape devices/grids, etc. ANNEX 2 Format for the quality check report accompanying the data referred to in Annex 1, in accordance with Article 13(2) of Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council I. Objective of the report The quality check report aims to gather information on the data compilation methods and the quality of the data submitted. The report is to allow a better understanding of the approaches taken by Member States on data collection as well as to enable data to be compared across Member States. It accompanies Member State reporting on fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market and waste fishing gear collected. The quality check report is to evaluate the quality of data collection processes, including the scope and validation of administrative data sources and the statistical validity of survey-based approaches. Moreover, the quality check report is to consider reasons for significant changes in reported data and ensure confidence in the accuracy of that data. II. Format for the quality check report: Fishing gear containing plastic placed on the market 1. GENERAL INFORMATION Member State: Organisation responsible for data submission: Contact email: Phone number: Reference year: Delivery date/version: Link to data publication by the Member State (if any): 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE DATA COLLECTION Name of institution Key responsibilities Add rows if needed 3. DESCRIPTION OF METHODS USED 3.1. Specification of methods and sources Data collection methods/data source Mandatory data (method/source: yes/no) Voluntary data (optional) (method/source: yes/no) Administrative reporting (census) Surveys (census or sampling) Trade statistics (e.g. using Prodcom or Comext data) Extended producer responsibility (EPR) scheme Gear producers/traders Other (specify) Indicate the number of the source of reference between brackets in cells answered ‘yes’, e.g. yes (1). Add specific explanations in the table below for cells that were answered ‘yes’, using the reference numbers. Indicate the frequency of data collection (e.g. monthly, quarterly, annually, continuous) if available. Ref. No Further explanation/description Add rows if needed 3.2. Specification of conversion factors If conversion factors (1) have been used to estimate voluntary data, specify them in the table below. Total fishing gear containing plastic (tonnes) Net panels made of thick twine (Ø >1mm) Net panels and lines made of thin twine (Ø≤1mm) Other plastic-based gear or parts thereof Non-plastic parts of gear Buoys, floats, ropes Total per type of material Total (*1) (tonnes) Mandatory value Plastics total Metals total Rubber total Total per gear component 4. ACCURACY OF THE DATA 4.1. Statistical surveys on the quantity of fishing gear placed on the market Scope of the survey Year Statistical units Percentage of population surveyed Data (t) Confidence level Error margin Adjustments from the survey year to the current year Other details Add rows for each survey made. Add specific explanations in the table below by numbering/referencing the above cells. No Further explanation/description Add rows if needed 4.2. Main accuracy issues Description of main issues affecting the accuracy of data, including errors related to sampling, coverage, measurement, processing and non-response. Description of estimates used. No Accuracy issue Further explanation/description 1 Sampling 2 Coverage 3 Measurement 4 Processing 5 Non-response 6 Estimates 7 Other (specify) Add rows if needed 4.3. Differences from previous year’s data Significant methodological changes in the calculation method for the current reference year, if any (please include in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break-flag is required for a certain year). No Further explanation/description Add rows if needed 4.4. Data verification Cross-check (yes/no) Time-series check (yes/no) Audit (yes/no) Verification process (yes/no) Mandatory data Voluntary data Additional information about the methods, including the combination of methods used. Detailed description of methods for verification Mandatory data Voluntary data (optional) 5. CONFIDENTIALITY 5.1. Specify by numbered item how confidentiality has been ensured (example: measures or procedures preventing unauthorised disclosure of data etc.) No Description Add rows if needed 5.2. Confidentiality issues related to data publication No Description Add rows if needed 6. DISSEMINATION: MAIN NATIONAL WEBSITES AND PUBLICATIONS Topics to be listed below are related to data dissemination. No List of websites, documents, publications 7. METADATA List of documents related to data collection methodology, data processing and quality control. Topic Document exists (yes/no) Reference to the document (title, year, web link if applicable) Data collection Data processing Quality control III. Format for the quality check report: Waste fishing gear collected 1. GENERAL INFORMATION Member State: Organisation responsible for data submission: Contact email: Phone number: Reference year: Delivery date/version: Link to data publication by the Member State (if any): 2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE DATA COLLECTION Name of institution Key responsibilities Add rows if needed 3. DESCRIPTION OF METHODS USED 3.1. Specification of methods and sources Data collection methods/data source Mandatory data (method/source: yes/no) Voluntary data (optional) (method/source: yes/no) Administrative reporting (census) Surveys (census or sampling) Ports Extended producer responsibility (EPR) scheme Gear producers/traders Waste management operators Other (specify) Indicate the number of the source of reference between brackets in cells answered ‘yes’, e.g. yes (1). Add specific explanations in the table below for cells that were answered ‘yes’, using the reference numbers. Indicate the frequency of data collection (e.g. monthly, quarterly, annually, continuous) if available. Ref. No Further explanation/description Add rows if needed 3.2. Specification of conversion factors If conversion factors (2) have been used to estimate voluntary data, specify them in the table below. Total fishing gear containing plastic (tonnes) Net panels made of thick twine (Ø >1mm) Net panels and lines made of thin twine (Ø≤1mm) Other plastic-based gear or parts thereof Non-plastic parts of gear Buoys, floats, ropes Total per type of material Total (*2) (tonnes) Mandatory value Plastics total Metals total Rubber total Total per gear component 4. ACCURACY OF THE DATA 4.1. Statistical surveys on the quantity of waste fishing gear collected Scope of the survey Year Statistical units Percentage of population surveyed Data (t) Confidence level Error margin Adjustments from the survey year to the current year Other details Add rows for each survey made. Add specific explanations in the table below by numbering/referencing the above cells. No Further explanation/description Add rows if needed 4.2. Main accuracy issues Description of main issues affecting the accuracy of data, including errors related to sampling, coverage, measurement, processing and non-response. Description of estimates used. No Accuracy issue Further explanation/description 1 Sampling 2 Coverage 3 Measurement 4 Processing 5 Non-response 6 Estimates 7 Other (specify) Add rows if needed 4.3. Differences from previous year’s data Significant methodological changes in the calculation method for the current reference year, if any (include in particular retrospective revisions, their nature and whether a break flag is required for a certain year). No Further explanation/description Add rows if needed 4.4. Data verification Cross-check (yes/no) Time-series check (yes/no) Audit (yes/no) Verification process (yes/no) Mandatory data Voluntary data Additional information about the methods, including the combination of methods used. Detailed description of methods for verification Mandatory data Voluntary data (optional) 5. CONFIDENTIALITY 5.1. Specify by numbered item how confidentiality has been ensured (example: measures or procedures preventing unauthorised disclosure of data etc.) No Description Add rows if needed 5.2. Confidentiality issues related to data publication No Description Add rows if needed 6. DISSEMINATION: MAIN NATIONAL WEBSITES AND PUBLICATIONS Topics to be listed below are related to data dissemination. No List of websites, documents, publications 7. METADATA List of documents related to data collection methodology, data processing and quality control. Topic Document exists (yes/no) Reference to the document (title, year, web link if applicable) Data collection Data processing Quality control (1) A conversion factor is an arithmetical multiplier for converting a quantity expressed in one set of units into an equivalent expressed in another (*1) Black shaded cells are not relevant. (2) A conversion factor is an arithmetical multiplier for converting a quantity expressed in one set of units into an equivalent expressed in another. (*2) Black shaded cells are not relevant.