All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32023D2749 Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2023/2749 of 11 December 2023 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries (notified under document C(2023) 8434) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2023/2749 of 11 December 2023 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries (notified under document C(2023) 8434) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2023/2749 of 11 December 2023 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries (notified under document C(2023) 8434) C/2023/8434 OJ L, 2023/2749, 18.12.2023, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dec_impl/2023/2749/oj (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force: This act has been changed. Current consolidated version: 18/12/2023 Official Journal EN Series L 2023/2749 18.12.2023 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2023/2749 of 11 December 2023 establishing the best available techniques (BAT) conclusions, under Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions, for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries (notified under document C(2023) 8434) (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) (1), and in particular Article 13(5) thereof, Whereas: (1) Best available techniques (BAT) conclusions are the reference for setting permit conditions for installations covered by Chapter II of Directive 2010/75/EU. Competent authorities should set emission limit values that ensure that, under normal operating conditions, emissions do not exceed the emission levels associated with the best available techniques as laid down in the BAT conclusions. (2) In accordance with Article 13(4) of Directive 2010/75/EU, the forum composed of Member States’ representatives, the industries concerned and non-governmental organisations promoting environmental protection, established by Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 (2), provided the Commission on 22 May 2023 with its opinion on the proposed content of the BAT reference document for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries. That opinion is publicly available (3). (3) The BAT conclusions set out in the Annex to this Decision take into account the forum’s opinion on the proposed content of the BAT reference document. They contain the key elements of the BAT reference document. (4) The measures provided for in this Decision are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee established by Article 75(1) of Directive 2010/75/EU, HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The best available techniques (BAT) conclusions for slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries, as set out in the Annex, are adopted. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 December 2023. For the Commission Virginius SINKEVIČIUS Member of the Commission (1) OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17. (2) Commission Decision of 16 May 2011 establishing a forum for the exchange of information pursuant to Article 13 of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (OJ C 146, 17.5.2011, p. 3). (3) https://circabc.europa.eu/ui/group/06f33a94-9829-4eee-b187-21bb783a0fbf/library/e07eada3-2935-4ef4-b6d7-b7150f75e520?p=1&n=10&sort=modified_DESC ANNEX BEST AVAILABLE TECHNIQUES (BAT) CONCLUSIONS FOR SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ANIMAL BY-PRODUCTS AND/OR EDIBLE CO-PRODUCTS INDUSTRIES SCOPE These BAT conclusions concern the following activities specified in Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU: 6.4. (a) Operating slaughterhouses with a carcass production capacity greater than 50 tonnes per day. 6.5. Disposal or recycling of animal carcases or animal waste with a treatment capacity exceeding 10 tonnes per day. 6.11. Independently operated treatment of waste water not covered by Directive 91/271/EEC (1), provided that the main pollutant load originates from the activities covered by these BAT conclusions. These BAT conclusions also cover the following: — the processing of animal by-products and/or edible co-products (such as rendering, fat melting, feather processing, fishmeal and fish oil production, blood processing and gelatine manufacturing) covered by the activity description in points 6.4 (b) (i) and/or 6.5 of Annex I to Directive 2010/75/EU; — the combustion of meat-and-bone meal and/or animal fat; — the combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases (originating from the activities covered by these BAT conclusions), including non-condensable gases; — the incineration of carcasses if directly associated with the activities covered by these BAT conclusions; — the preservation of hides and skins if directly associated with the activities covered by these BAT conclusions; — the handling of casings and offal (viscera); — composting and anaerobic digestion if directly associated with the activities covered by these BAT conclusions; — the combined treatment of waste water from different origins, provided that the main pollutant load originates from the activities covered by these BAT conclusions and that the waste water treatment is not covered by Directive 91/271/EEC1. These BAT conclusions do not cover the following: — On-site combustion plants, not covered by the above bullet points, generating hot gases that are not used for direct contact heating, drying or any other treatment of objects or materials. These may be covered by the BAT conclusions for Large Combustion Plants (LCP) or by Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the Council (2). — The production of food after the making of standard cuts for large animals or of cuts for poultry. This may be covered by the BAT conclusions for the Food, Drink and Milk Industries (FDM). — Landfill of waste. This is covered by Council Directive 1999/31/EC (3). In particular, underground permanent and long-term storage (≥ 1 year before disposal, ≥ 3 years before recovery) are covered by Directive 1999/31/EC. Other BAT conclusions and reference documents which could be relevant for the activities covered by these BAT conclusions include the following: — Large Combustion Plants (LCP); — Food, Drink and Milk Industries (FDM); — Common Waste Water and Waste Gas Treatment/Management Systems in the Chemical Sector (CWW); — Waste Treatment (WT); — Waste Incineration (WI); — Tanning of Hides and Skins (TAN); — Monitoring of Emissions to Air and Water from IED Installations (ROM); — Economics and Cross-Media Effects (ECM); — Emissions from Storage (EFS); — Energy Efficiency (ENE); — Industrial Cooling Systems (ICS). These BAT conclusions apply without prejudice to other relevant legislation, e.g. on hygiene, food/feed safety, animal welfare, biosecurity, energy efficiency (energy efficiency first principle). DEFINITIONS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following definitions apply: General terms Term used Definition Animal by-products As defined in Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (Animal by-products Regulation) (4). Channelled emissions Emissions of pollutants to air through any kind of duct, pipe, stack, etc. This includes emissions from open-top biofilters. Direct discharge Discharge to a receiving water body without further downstream waste water treatment. Edible co-products Food-grade products intended for human consumption. Existing plant A plant that is not a new plant. FDM activities Activities covered by the BAT conclusions for the Food, Drink and Milk Industries. FDM products Products associated with activities covered by the BAT conclusions for the Food, Drink and Milk Industries. Hazardous substance Hazardous substance as defined in point 18 of Article 3 of Directive 2010/75/EU. Indirect discharge Discharge which is not a direct discharge. New plant A plant first permitted at the site of the installation following the publication of these BAT conclusions or a complete replacement of a plant following the publication of these BAT conclusions. Sensitive receptor Areas which need special protection, such as: Substances of very high concern Substances meeting the criteria mentioned in Article 57 and included in the Candidate List of Substances of Very High Concern, according to the REACH Regulation ((EC) No 1907/2006 (5)). Pollutants and parameters Term used Definition AOX Adsorbable organically bound halogens, expressed as Cl, include adsorbable organically bound chlorine, bromine and iodine. As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sb, Tl, V Arsenic, cadmium, cobalt, chromium, copper, manganese, nickel, lead, antimony, thallium and vanadium. Biochemical oxygen demand (BODn) Amount of oxygen needed for the biochemical oxidation of the organic matter to carbon dioxide in n days (n is typically 5 or 7). BOD is an indicator for the mass concentration of biodegradable organic compounds. Chemical oxygen demand (COD) Amount of oxygen needed for the total chemical oxidation of the organic matter to carbon dioxide using dichromate. COD is an indicator for the mass concentration of organic compounds. CO Carbon monoxide. Copper (Cu) Copper, expressed as Cu, includes all inorganic and organic copper compounds, dissolved or bound to particles. Dust Total particulate matter (in air). HCl All inorganic gaseous chlorine compounds, expressed as HCl. HF All inorganic gaseous fluorine compounds, expressed as HF. Hg The sum of mercury and its compounds, expressed as Hg. H2S Hydrogen sulphide. Odour concentration Number of European Odour Units (ouE) in a cubic metre of gas at standard conditions for olfactometry according to EN 13725. NOX The sum of nitrogen monoxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), expressed as NO2. PCDD/F Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and -furans. SOX The sum of sulphur dioxide (SO2), sulphur trioxide (SO3), and sulphuric acid aerosols, expressed as SO2. Total nitrogen (Total N) Total nitrogen, expressed as N, includes free ammonia and ammonium nitrogen (NH4-N), nitrite nitrogen (NO2-N), nitrate nitrogen (NO3-N) and organically bound nitrogen. Total organic carbon (TOC) Total organic carbon (in water), expressed as C, includes all organic compounds. Total phosphorus (Total P) Total phosphorus, expressed as P, includes all inorganic and organic phosphorus compounds, dissolved or bound to particles. Total suspended solids (TSS) Mass concentration of all suspended solids (in water), measured via filtration through glass fibre filters and gravimetry. Total volatile organic carbon (TVOC) Total volatile organic carbon (in air), expressed as C. Zinc (Zn) Zinc, expressed as Zn, includes all inorganic and organic zinc compounds, dissolved or bound to particles. ACRONYMS For the purposes of these BAT conclusions, the following acronyms apply: Acronym Definition CIP Cleaning-in-place CMS Chemicals management system EMS Environmental management system FDM Food, drink and milk IED Industrial Emissions Directive (2010/75/EU) OTNOC Other than normal operating conditions SA Slaughterhouses, animal by-products and/or edible co-products industries GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Best Available Techniques The techniques listed and described in these BAT conclusions are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. Other techniques may be used that ensure at least an equivalent level of environmental protection. Unless otherwise stated, the BAT conclusions are generally applicable. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) for emissions to water The BAT-AELs for emissions to water given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of water), expressed in mg/l. Averaging periods associated with the BAT-AELs refer to either of the following two cases: — In the case of continuous discharge, daily average values, i.e. 24-hour flow-proportional composite samples. — In the case of batch discharge, average values over the release duration taken as flow-proportional composite samples, or, provided that the effluent is appropriately mixed and homogeneous, a spot sample taken before discharge. Time-proportional composite samples can be used provided that sufficient flow stability is demonstrated. Alternatively, spot samples may be taken, provided that the effluent is appropriately mixed and homogeneous. In the case of total organic carbon (TOC), total nitrogen (TN) and chemical oxygen demand (COD), the calculation of the average abatement efficiency referred to in these BAT conclusions (see Table 1.1) is based on the influent and effluent load of the waste water treatment plant. The BAT-AELs apply at the point where the emission leaves the installation. Emission levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AELs) and indicative emission level for channelled emissions to air The BAT-AELs and the indicative emission level for channelled emissions to air given in these BAT conclusions refer to concentrations (mass of emitted substances per volume of waste gas) under the following standard conditions: dry gas at a temperature of 273,15 K (or wet gas at a temperature of 293 K in the case of odour concentration) and a pressure of 101,3 kPa, without correction to a reference oxygen level, and expressed in the unit mg/Nm3 or ouE/m3. For averaging periods of BAT-AELs and the indicative emission level for channelled emissions to air, the following definition applies. Type of measurement Averaging period Definition Periodic Average over the sampling period Average value of three consecutive samplings/measurements of at least 30 minutes each (6). When the waste gases of two or more sources (e.g. dryers) are discharged through a common stack, the BAT-AEL and the indicative emission level apply to the combined discharge from the stack. Indicative emission levels for refrigerant losses The indicative emission levels for refrigerant losses refer to a rolling average over 3 years of yearly losses. Yearly losses are expressed as a percentage (%) of the total amount of refrigerant contained in the cooling system(s). The losses for a specific refrigerant in 1 year are equal to the amount of that refrigerant used to refill the cooling system(s). Other environmental performance levels associated with the best available techniques (BAT-AEPLs) BAT-AEPLs for specific waste water discharge The environmental performance levels related to specific waste water discharge refer to yearly averages and are calculated using the following equation: where: waste water discharge : total amount of waste water discharged (direct discharge, indirect discharge and/or landspreading) by the specific processes concerned, expressed in m3/year, excluding any cooling water and run-off water that is discharged separately; activity rate : total amount of products or raw materials processed, expressed in: The carcass weight depends on the animal species under consideration: — Pigs: the weight of the slaughtered animal’s cold body, either whole or divided in half along the midline, after being bled and eviscerated and after removal of the tongue, bristles, hooves, genitalia, flare fat, kidneys and diaphragm. — Cattle: the weight of the slaughtered animal’s cold body after being skinned, bled and eviscerated, and after removal of the external genitalia, limbs, head, tail, kidneys and kidney fats, and the udder. — Chickens: the weight of the slaughtered animal’s cold body after being bled, plucked and eviscerated. The weight includes offal (viscera). BAT-AEPLs for specific net energy consumption The environmental performance levels related to specific net energy consumption refer to yearly averages and are calculated using the following equation: where: final net energy consumption : total amount of energy consumed (excluding the recovered energy) by the installation (in the form of heat and electricity), expressed in kWh/year; activity rate : total amount of products or raw materials processed, expressed in: The carcass weight depends on the animal species under consideration (see General consideration for BAT-AEPLs for specific waste water discharge). Unless otherwise stated, the calculation of the energy consumption of slaughterhouses may include the energy consumed by FDM activities. 1.1 General BAT conclusions 1.1.1 Overall environmental performance BAT 1. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to elaborate and implement an environmental management system (EMS) that incorporates all of the following features: Note Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 establishes the European Union eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), which is an example of an EMS consistent with this BAT. Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the EMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. BAT 2. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to establish, maintain and regularly review (including when a significant change occurs) an inventory of inputs and outputs, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1) that incorporates all of the following features: Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the inventory will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the installation, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. BAT 3. In order to improve the overall environmental performance, BAT is to elaborate and implement a chemicals management system (CMS) as part of the EMS (see BAT 1) that incorporates all of the following features: Applicability The level of detail and the degree of formalisation of the CMS will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the plant. BAT 4. In order to reduce the frequency of the occurrence of OTNOC and to reduce emissions during OTNOC, BAT is to set up and implement a risk-based OTNOC management plan as part of the EMS (see BAT 1) that includes all of the following elements: Applicability The level of detail and degree of formalisation of the OTNOC management plan will generally be related to the nature, scale and complexity of the plant, and the range of environmental impacts it may have. 1.1.2 Monitoring BAT 5. For waste water streams identified by the inventory of inputs and outputs (see BAT 2), BAT is to monitor key process parameters (e.g. continuous monitoring of waste water flow, pH and temperature) at key locations (e.g. at the inlet and/or outlet of the waste water pretreatment, at the inlet to the final waste water treatment, at the point where the emission leaves the installation). BAT 6. BAT is to monitor at least once per year: Description Monitoring preferentially includes direct measurements. Calculations or recording, e.g. using suitable meters or invoices, can also be used. The monitoring is performed at installation level (and can be broken down to the most appropriate process level) and considers any significant changes in the processes. BAT 7. BAT is to monitor emissions to water with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. BAT 8. BAT is to monitor channelled emissions to air with at least the frequency given below and in accordance with EN standards. If EN standards are not available, BAT is to use ISO, national or other international standards that ensure the provision of data of an equivalent scientific quality. 1.1.3 Energy efficiency BAT 9. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use both of the techniques given below. Further sector-specific techniques to increase energy efficiency are given in Section 1.2.1 and Section 1.3.1 of these BAT conclusions. 1.1.4 Water consumption and waste water generation BAT 10. In order to reduce water consumption and the amount of waste water generated, BAT is to use both techniques (a) and (b), and an appropriate combination of the techniques (c) to (k) given below. Further sector-specific techniques to reduce water consumption and the volume of waste water generated are given in Section 1.2.2 and Section 1.3.2 of these BAT conclusions. 1.1.5 Harmful substances BAT 11. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce the use of harmful substances in cleaning and disinfection, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.6 Resource efficiency BAT 12. In order to increase resource efficiency, BAT is to use both techniques (a) and (b), if appropriate in combination with one or both of the techniques (c) and (d) given below. 1.1.7 Emissions to water BAT 13. In order to prevent uncontrolled emissions to water, BAT is to provide an appropriate buffer storage capacity for generated waste water. Description The appropriate buffer storage capacity is determined by a risk assessment (taking into account the nature of the pollutant(s), the effects of these pollutants on further waste water treatment, the receiving environment, the amount of waste water generated, etc.). A buffer tank is typically designed to store the amounts of waste water generated during several peak hours of operation. The waste water from this buffer storage is discharged after appropriate measures are taken (e.g. monitoring, treatment, reuse). Applicability For existing plants, the technique may not be applicable due to lack of space and/or due to the layout of the waste water collection system. BAT 14. In order to reduce emissions to water, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.1 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for direct discharges The associated monitoring is given in BAT 7. Table 1.2 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for indirect discharges The associated monitoring is given in BAT 7. 1.1.8 Emissions to air BAT 15. In order to reduce emissions to air of CO, dust, NOX and SOX from the combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases, including non-condensable gases, BAT is to use technique (a) and one or an appropriate combination of the techniques (b) to (d) given below. Table 1.3 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of dust, NOX and SOX from the combustion in thermal oxidisers of malodorous gases, including non-condensable gases The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. Table 1.4 Indicative emission level for channelled CO emissions to air from the combustion in thermal oxidisers of malodorous gases, including non-condensable gases The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 1.1.9 Noise BAT 16. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce noise emissions, BAT is to set up, implement and regularly review a noise management plan, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following elements: Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where a noise nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. BAT 17. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce noise emissions, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. 1.1.10 Odour BAT 18. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce odour emissions, BAT is to set up, implement and regularly review an odour management plan, as part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1), that includes all of the following elements: Applicability The applicability is restricted to cases where an odour nuisance at sensitive receptors is expected and/or has been substantiated. BAT 19. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce odour emissions, BAT is to use an appropriate combination of the techniques given below. BAT-AELs for channelled emissions to air of odour: see Table 1.10 and Table 1.11. 1.1.11 Use of refrigerants BAT 20. In order to prevent emissions of ozone-depleting substances and of substances with a high global warming potential from cooling and freezing, BAT is to use refrigerants without ozone depletion potential and with a low global warming potential. Description Suitable refrigerants include for example water, carbon dioxide, propane and ammonia. 1.2 BAT conclusions for slaughterhouses The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. 1.2.1 Energy efficiency BAT 21. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use both of the techniques given in BAT 9 in combination with both of the techniques given below. Table 1.5 BAT-associated environmental performance levels (BAT-AEPLs) for specific net energy consumption in slaughterhouses The associated monitoring is given in BAT 6. 1.2.2 Water consumption and waste water generation BAT 22. In order to reduce water consumption and the amount of waste water generated, BAT is to use both techniques (a) and (b) given in BAT 10, together with an appropriate combination of the techniques (c) to (k) given in BAT 10 and of the techniques given below. Table 1.6 BAT-associated environmental performance levels (BAT-AEPLs) for specific waste water discharge The associated monitoring is given in BAT 6. 1.2.3 Use of refrigerants BAT 23. In order to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce refrigerant losses, BAT is to use technique (a) and one or both of the techniques (b) and (c) given below. Table 1.7 Indicative emission level for refrigerant losses The associated monitoring is given in BAT 6. 1.3 BAT conclusions for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products The BAT conclusions in this section apply in addition to the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1. 1.3.1 Energy efficiency BAT 24. In order to increase energy efficiency, BAT is to use both of the techniques given in BAT 9, if appropriate in combination with multiple-effect evaporators. Description Multiple-effect evaporators are used to remove water from liquid mixtures generated for example in fat melting, rendering, and fishmeal and fish oil production. Steam is introduced in a series of successive vessels, each one exhibiting a lower temperature and pressure than the previous one. Table 1.8 BAT-associated environmental performance levels (BAT-AEPLs) for specific net energy consumption in installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products The associated monitoring is given in BAT 6. 1.3.2 Water consumption and waste water generation The environmental performance levels for specific waste water discharge given below are associated with the general BAT conclusions given in Section 1.1.4. Table 1.9 BAT-associated environmental performance levels (BAT-AEPLs) for specific waste water discharge Type of installation/process(es) Unit Specific waste water discharge (yearly average) Rendering, fat melting, blood and/or feather processing m3/tonne of raw material 0,2 –1,55 Fishmeal and fish oil production 0,20 –1,25 (41) Gelatine manufacturing 16,5 –27 (42) The associated monitoring is given in BAT 6. 1.3.3 Emissions to air BAT 25. In order to reduce emissions to air of organic compounds and malodorous compounds, including H2S and NH3, BAT is to use one or a combination of the techniques given below. Table 1.10 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of odour, organic compounds, NH3 and H2S from rendering, fat melting, blood and/or feather processing The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. Table 1.11 BAT-associated emission levels (BAT-AELs) for channelled emissions to air of odour, organic compounds and NH3 from fishmeal and fish oil production The associated monitoring is given in BAT 8. 1.4 Description of techniques 1.4.1 Emissions to water Technique Description Activated sludge process A biological process in which the microorganisms are maintained in suspension in the waste water and the whole mixture is mechanically aerated. The activated sludge mixture is sent to a separation facility from where the sludge is recycled to the aeration tank. Aerobic lagoon Shallow earthen basin for the biological treatment of waste water, the content of which is periodically mixed to allow oxygen to enter the liquid through atmospheric diffusion. Anaerobic contact process An anaerobic process in which waste water is mixed with recycled sludge and then digested in a sealed reactor. The water/sludge mixture is separated externally. Chemical oxidation (e.g. with ozone) Chemical oxidation is the conversion of pollutants by chemical-oxidising agents other than oxygen/air or bacteria into similar but less harmful or hazardous compounds and/or to short-chained and more easily degradable or biodegradable organic components. Ozone is one example of a chemical-oxidising agent applied. Coagulation and flocculation Coagulation and flocculation are used to separate suspended solids from waste water and are often carried out in successive steps. Coagulation is carried out by adding coagulants with charges opposite to those of the suspended solids. Flocculation is carried out by adding polymers, so that collisions of microfloc particles cause them to bond to produce larger flocs. Equalisation Balancing of flows and pollutant loads by using tanks or other management techniques. Enhanced biological phosphorus removal A combination of aerobic and anaerobic treatment to selectively enrich polyphosphate-accumulating microorganisms in the bacterial community within the activated sludge. These microorganisms take up more phosphorus than is required for normal growth. Filtration The separation of solids from waste water by passing it through a porous medium, e.g. sand filtration, microfiltration and ultrafiltration. Flotation The separation of solid or liquid particles from waste water by attaching them to fine gas bubbles, usually air. The buoyant particles accumulate at the water surface and are collected with skimmers. Membrane bioreactor A combination of activated sludge treatment and membrane filtration. Two variants are used: a) an external recirculation loop between the activated sludge tank and the membrane module; and b) immersion of the membrane module in the aerated activated sludge tank, where the effluent is filtered through a hollow fibre membrane, with the biomass remaining in the tank. Neutralisation The adjustment of the pH of waste water to a neutral level (approximately 7) by the addition of chemicals. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) is generally used to increase the pH, whereas sulphuric acid (H2SO4), hydrochloric acid (HCl) or carbon dioxide (CO2) is generally used to decrease the pH. The precipitation of some substances may occur during neutralisation. Nitrification and/or denitrification A two-step process that is typically incorporated into biological waste water treatment plants. The first step is the aerobic nitrification where microorganisms oxidise ammonium (NH4 +) to the intermediate nitrite (NO2 -), which is then further oxidised to nitrate (NO3 -). In the subsequent anoxic denitrification step, microorganisms chemically reduce nitrate to nitrogen gas. Phosphorus recovery as struvite Phosphorus contained in waste water streams is recovered by precipitation in the form of struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate). Precipitation The conversion of dissolved pollutants into insoluble compounds by adding chemical precipitants. The solid precipitates formed are subsequently separated by sedimentation, air flotation, or filtration. Multivalent metal ions (e.g. calcium, aluminium, iron) are used for phosphorus precipitation. Sedimentation The separation of suspended particles by gravitational settling. 1.4.2 Emissions to air Technique Description Adsorption Organic compounds are removed from a waste gas stream by retention on a solid surface (typically activated carbon). Bag filter Bag filters, often referred to as fabric filters, are constructed from porous woven or felted fabric through which gases are passed to remove particles. The use of a bag filter requires the selection of a fabric suitable for the characteristics of the waste gas and the maximum operating temperature. Biofilter The waste gas stream is passed through a bed of organic material (such as peat, heather, compost, root, tree bark, softwood and different combinations) or some inert material (such as clay, activated carbon, and polyurethane), where it is biologically oxidised by naturally occurring microorganisms into carbon dioxide, water, inorganic salts and biomass. A biofilter is designed considering the type(s) of waste input. An appropriate bed material, e.g. in terms of water retention capacity, bulk density, porosity, structural integrity, is selected. Also important are an appropriate height and surface area of the filter bed. The biofilter is connected to a suitable ventilation and air circulation system in order to ensure a uniform air distribution through the bed and a sufficient residence time of the waste gas inside the bed. Biofilters can be divided into open-top biofilters and enclosed biofilters. Bioscrubber A packed tower filter with inert packing material which is normally continuously moistened by sprinkling water. Air pollutants are absorbed in the liquid phase and subsequently degraded by microorganisms settling on the filter elements. Combustion in a steam boiler of malodorous gases, including non-condensable gases Malodorous gases, including non-condensable gases, are burned in a steam boiler in the installation. Condensation The removal of vapours of organic and inorganic compounds from a process off-gas or waste gas stream by reducing its temperature below its dew point so that the vapours liquefy. Thermal oxidation The oxidation of combustible gases and odorants in a waste gas stream by heating the mixture of contaminants with air or oxygen to above its auto-ignition point in a combustion chamber and maintaining it at a high temperature long enough to complete its combustion to carbon dioxide and water. Wet scrubber The removal of gaseous or particulate pollutants from a gas stream via mass transfer to a liquid solvent, often water or an aqueous solution. It may involve a chemical reaction (e.g. in an acid or alkaline scrubber). In some cases, the compounds may be recovered from the solvent. 1.4.3 Use of refrigerants Refrigeration management plan A refrigeration management plan is part of the environmental management system (see BAT 1) and entails: (1) Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment (OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40). (2) Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from medium combustion plants (OJ L 313, 28.11.2015, p. 1). (3) Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste (OJ L 182, 16.7.1999, p. 1). (4) OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1. (5) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC (OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1). (6) For any parameter where, due to sampling or analytical limitations, a 30-minute sampling/measurement is inappropriate, a more representative sampling/measurement procedure may be employed (e.g. for the odour concentration). (001) In the case of batch discharge less frequent than the minimum monitoring frequency, monitoring is carried out once per batch. (002) In the case of an indirect discharge, the monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every year for Cu and Zn and once every 6 months for AOX and Cl- if the downstream waste water treatment plant is designed and equipped appropriately to abate the pollutants concerned. (003) The monitoring only applies when the substance/parameter concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. (004) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every 6 months if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. (005) The monitoring only applies in the case of a direct discharge. (006) Either COD or TOC is monitored. TOC monitoring is the preferred option because it does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. (007) The minimum monitoring frequency may be reduced to once every month if the emission levels are proven to be sufficiently stable. (7) To the extent possible, the measurements are carried out at the highest expected emission state under normal operating conditions. (8) The monitoring only applies when H2S is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. (9) This includes combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases, including non-condensable gases. (10) The monitoring only applies when odour is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. (11) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L327, 22.12.2000, p. 1) (12) The descriptions of the techniques are given in Section 1.4.1. (13) The averaging periods are defined in the general considerations. (14) No BAT-AEL applies for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). As an indication, the yearly average BOD5 level in the effluent from a biological waste water treatment plant will generally be ≤ 20 mg/l. (15) Either the BAT-AEL for COD or the BAT-AEL for TOC applies. The BAT-AEL for TOC is the preferred option because TOC monitoring does not rely on the use of very toxic compounds. (16) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 120 mg/l for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products, only if the COD abatement efficiency is ≥ 95 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. (17) The BAT-AEL range may not apply for discharges of seawater from fishmeal and fish oil production. (18) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 40 mg/l for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products, only if the TOC abatement efficiency is ≥ 95 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. (19) The lower end of the BAT-AEL range is typically achieved when using filtration (e.g. sand filtration, microfiltration, ultrafiltration). (20) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 40 mg/l for gelatine manufacturing. (21) The BAT-AEL may not apply when the temperature of the waste water is low (e.g. below 12 °C) for prolonged periods. (22) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 40 mg/l for installations processing animal by-products and/or edible co-products only if the Total N abatement efficiency is ≥ 90 % as a yearly average or as an average over the production period. (23) The BAT-AEL only applies when the substance/parameter concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. (24) The BAT-AEL only applies to slaughterhouses. (25) The averaging periods are defined in the general considerations. (26) The BAT-AELs may not apply if the downstream waste water treatment plant is designed and equipped appropriately to abate the pollutants concerned, provided this does not lead to a higher level of pollution in the environment. (27) The BAT-AEL only applies when the substance/parameter concerned is identified as relevant in the waste water stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. (28) The BAT-AEL only applies to slaughterhouses. (29) The BAT-AEL range only applies when using exclusively natural gas as a fuel. (30) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 350 mg/Nm3 for recuperative thermal oxidisers. (31) Either the BAT-AEPL expressed in kWh/tonne of carcasses or the BAT-AEPL expressed in kWh/animal applies. (32) The BAT-AEPLs refer to the exclusive slaughtering of the animals in question. (33) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 415 kWh/tonne of carcasses if the specific net energy consumption includes energy consumed by FDM activities. (34) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 150 kWh/animal if the specific net energy consumption includes energy consumed by FDM activities. (35) The BAT-AEPL range may not be applicable to installations producing more than 50 % convenience products (i.e. meat products processed further than simple meat cuts, e.g. marinated products, sausages) as a proportion of the total weight of the FDM products. (36) Either the BAT-AEPL expressed in m3/tonne of carcasses or the BAT-AEPL expressed in m3/animal applies. (37) The BAT-AEPLs refer to the exclusive slaughtering of the animals in question. (38) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 5,25 m3/tonne of carcasses in case the specific waste water discharge includes water used by FDM activities. (39) The upper end of the BAT-AEPL range may be higher and up to 2,45 m3/animal in case the specific waste water discharge includes water used by FDM activities. (40) The BAT-AEPL applies to installations using exclusively pig skin as raw material. (41) The BAT-AEPL range may not apply for discharges of seawater from fishmeal and fish oil production. (42) The BAT-AEPL applies to installations using exclusively pig skin as raw material. (43) The BAT-AEL range may not apply in the case of combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases when both of the following conditions are fulfilled: — the combustion temperature is sufficiently high (typically in the range 750– 850 °C) with a sufficient residence time (typically between 1 and 2 seconds); and — the odour abatement efficiency is ≥ 99 %, or as an alternative, process odour is not perceptible in the treated waste gases. (44) In the case of abatement technique(s) other than combustion of malodorous gases, the upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 3 000 ouE/m3 if the abatement efficiency is ≥ 92 % or, as an alternative, process odour is not perceptible in the treated waste gases. (45) The upper end of the BAT-AEL range may be higher and up to 7 mg/Nm3 in the case of combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases. (46) The BAT-AEL range only applies when H2S is identified as relevant in the waste gas stream based on the inventory of inputs and outputs mentioned in BAT 2. (47) The BAT-AEL range may not apply in the case of combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodorous gases when both of the following conditions are fulfilled: — the combustion temperature is sufficiently high (typically in the range 750– 850 °C) with a sufficient residence time (typically between 1 and 2 seconds) and; — the odour abatement efficiency is ≥ 99 % or, as an alternative, process odour is not perceptible in the treated waste gases. (48) The BAT-AEL only applies to the combustion (e.g. in thermal oxidisers or steam boilers) of malodourous gases, including non-condensable gases. ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dec_impl/2023/2749/oj ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)