All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32024R2031 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2031 of 26 July 2024 on the template for monitoring plans pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2031 of 26 July 2024 on the template for monitoring plans pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2031 of 26 July 2024 on the template for monitoring plans pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC C/2024/5221 OJ L, 2024/2031, 29.7.2024, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2024/2031/oj (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force Official Journal EN L series 2024/2031 29.7.2024 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2024/2031 of 26 July 2024 on the template for monitoring plans pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2023 on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC (1), and in particular Article 8(4) thereof, Whereas: (1) Article 8(1) and (3) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 require companies to submit to the verifier a monitoring plan consisting of a complete and transparent documentation of the monitoring and reporting method to be applied for each ship falling under the scope of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. (2) In order to ensure that those monitoring plans are submitted and recorded electronically and that they contain complete and standardised information enabling uniform implementation of the companies’ monitoring and reporting obligations, specifications for electronic templates should be laid down, including technical rules for their uniform application. (3) The template for the monitoring plan should contain, at least, the elements laid down in Article 8(3) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. (4) When providing information on elements and procedures as part of the monitoring plan, companies should be able to also refer to procedures or systems effectively implemented as part of their existing management systems, such as the International Safety Management Code (the ‘ISM Code’) (2), the Ship Energy Efficiency Management Plan (‘SEEMP’) (3), or to systems and controls covered by uniform quality, environmental or energy-management standards, such as EN ISO 9001:2015, EN ISO 14001:2015 or EN ISO 50001:2011. In such cases or when the relevant procedures are already described in established written procedures, monitoring plans should be allowed to include a brief description or a summary of such procedures. (5) Pursuant to Article 11(3) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, once the monitoring plan and the modified monitoring plan have been satisfactorily assessed, the verifier is to record them in the FuelEU database, a dedicated Union information system developed and operated by the European Maritime Safety Agency, that registers the performance of each ship. The monitoring plan and the modified monitoring plan must be accessible to the administering State as required by Article 11(3) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. (6) The Commission has consulted affected parties on best practice in matters addressed by this Regulation. The consultation was carried out through the Sub-Group on Sustainable Alternative Power for Shipping set up under the umbrella of the European Sustainable Shipping Forum. (7) The measures provided for in this Regulation are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee on Safe Seas and the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Template of the monitoring plan 1. For the purposes of submitting the monitoring plan pursuant to Articles 8 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, companies shall use an electronic version of the template in the Annex to this Regulation that will be accessible in the FuelEU database. 2. For the purposes of recording the assessed monitoring plan in the FuelEU database pursuant to Article 11(3) of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, verifiers shall use an electronic version of the template of the monitoring plan set out in the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 26 July 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN (1) OJ L 234, 22.9.2023, p. 48, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/1805/oj. (2) Adopted by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) by Assembly Resolution A.741(18). (3) Regulation 22 of MARPOL Annex VI. ANNEX TEMPLATE FOR MONITORING PLANS PART A REVISION RECORD SHEET Version No Reference date Status at reference date (1) Reference to Chapters where revisions or modifications have been made, including a brief explanation of changes PART B BASIC DATA Table B.1. Identification of the ship and shipowner details Name of the ship IMO Ship identification number Port of registry Home port (if not identical with port of registry) Name of the shipowner (2) Shipowner’s tax number (voluntary) Contact person for the shipowner (voluntary) Address (voluntary) City (voluntary) State/Province/Region (voluntary) Telephone number (voluntary) Email address (voluntary) IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner identification number of the registered owner (3) Country of registration of the registered owner (2) Type of the ship (4) Deadweight (in metric tonnes) Gross Tonnage Classification Society (voluntary) Ice class (voluntary) (5) Flag State (voluntary) Technical Efficiency (voluntary) (6) Voluntary open description field for additional information about the characteristics of the ship (7) Table B.2. Company information Name of the company Nature of the company (8) IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner identification number of the company (9) Country of Registration of the company (10) Company tax number (voluntary) Contact person Address City State/Province/Region Postcode/ZIP Country Telephone number Email address Table B.3. Fuel Consumers description N° Fuel consumer unit Name of fuel consumer unit Fuel consumer type (11) Fuel consumer unit class (12) Technical description of fuel consumer unit (performance/power, specific fuel oil consumption (SFOC), year of installation, identification number in case of multiple identical emission sources, etc. (13) (Potential) Fuel types used (14) Table B.4. Equipment to allow connection to on-shore power supply (15) OPS equipment reference no. OPS equipment (name, type) Technical description of OPS equipment specified voltage and frequency, including the gear specified in IEC/IEEE 80005-1 (High Voltage) and IEC/IEEE 80005-3 (Low Voltage) and position onboard Standards (16) Table B.5. Zero-emission technology (ZET) (17) Zero-emission technology reference no. Zero-emission technology (name, type) (18) Technical description of zero-emission technology (19) Table B.6. Established total electrical power demand of the ship at berth (20) (21) Established total electrical power demand of the ship at berth (kW) Data Source Table B.7. Description of Wind Assisted Propulsion systems (WAPS) (when applicable) WAPS reference no. WAPS (name, type) (22) WAPS installation date Technical description of WAPS Pwind (23) Pprop (23) Table B.8. Procedures, systems and responsibilities used to update the completeness of the list of fuel consumers, OPS equipment, zero-emission technology and WAPS Title of procedure Managing the completeness of the list of fuel consumers, OPS equipment, zero-emission technology and WAPS Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table B.9. Procedures for monitoring and reporting the well-to-tank and tank-to-wake emission factors of energy to be used on-board, in accordance with the methods specified in Article 10 and Annexes I and II Title of procedure Monitoring and reporting the well-to tank and tank-to-wake emission factors of energy to be used on-board Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) PART C ACTIVITY DATA C.1. Monitoring of energy consumption Table C.1.1. Methods used to determine fuel consumption of each fuel consumer N° fuel consumer unit (24) Name of fuel consumer unit fuel consumer type (25) Monitoring method (26) Table C.1.2. Procedures for determining fuel bunkered and fuel in tanks Title of procedure Determining fuel bunkered and fuel in tanks Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table C.1.3. Regular cross-checks between bunkering quantity as provided by BDN and bunkering quantity indicated by on-board measurement Title of procedure Regular cross-checks between bunkering quantity as provided by BDNs and bunkering quantity indicated by on-board measurement Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Table C.1.4. Method for determination of fuel density Fuel type/tank Method to determine actual density values of fuel bunkered (27) Method to determine actual density values of fuel in tanks (28) Table C.1.5. Level of uncertainty associated with fuel monitoring Monitoring method (29) Approach used (30) Value of uncertainty Table C.1.6. Procedures for monitoring energy provided by on-shore power supply (OPS) (where applicable) Title of procedure Monitoring energy provided by on-shore power supply (OPS) Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table C.1.7. Procedures for monitoring energy provided by a zero-emission technology (where applicable) Title of procedure Monitoring energy provided by a zero-emission technology Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table C.1.8. Procedures for monitoring fuel consumption of each Fuel consumer when sailing in ice conditions (31) Title of procedure Monitoring fuel consumption of each fuel consumer when sailing in ice conditions Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) C.2. General procedures for measurements Table C.2.1. Description of the measurement instruments involved Measurement equipment (name) Elements applied to (e.g. fuel consumer units, tanks, substitute sources of energy or a zero-emission technology) Technical description (specification, calibration methods and intervals, maintenance intervals) Table C.2.2. Procedures for recording, retrieving, transmitting, and storing information regarding measurements Title of procedure Recording, retrieving, transmitting and storing information regarding measurements Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table C.2.3. Procedures for ensuring quality assurance of measuring equipment Title of procedure Ensuring quality assurance of measuring equipment Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) C.3. Navigation Table C.3.1. Procedures for determining and recording the list of voyages Title of procedure Recording and safeguarding completeness of voyages Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (including recording voyages, monitoring voyages etc.) (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table C.3.2. Procedures for determining and recording the Distance travelled (32) Title of procedure Recording and determining the distance per voyage made Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (including recording and managing distance information) (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table C.3.3. Procedures for determining and recording the date, time and position when entering and leaving the ice conditions, the distance travelled when sailing in ice conditions (33) Title of procedure Determining and recording the distance travelled when sailing in ice conditions Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (including recording and managing distance and winter conditions information) (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Formulae and data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table C.3.4. Procedures for determining and recording the time spent at sea and at berth (34) Title of procedure Determining and recording the time spent at sea from berth of port of departure to berth of the port of arrival, and time spent at berth (quayside and anchorage) Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (including recording and managing port departure and arrival information) (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Formulae and data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) PART D DATA GAPS Table D.1. Methods to be used to estimate fuel consumption Title of method Method to be used to estimate fuel consumption Back-up monitoring method (35) Formulae used Description of method to estimate fuel consumption Name of person or position responsible for this method Data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table D.2. Methods to be used to estimate energy consumption from OPS and ZET (where applicable) Title of method Method to be used to estimate energy consumption Back-up monitoring method Formulae used Description of method to estimate energy consumption Name of person or position responsible for this method Data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table D.3. Methods to be used to treat data gaps regarding distance travelled Title of method Method to treat data gaps regarding distance travelled Formulae used Description of method to treat data gaps Name of person or position responsible for this method Data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table D.4. Methods to be used to treat data gaps regarding the date, time and position when entering and leaving the ice conditions, the distance travelled when sailing in ice conditions Title of method Method to treat data gaps regarding the date, time and position when entering and leaving the ice conditions, the distance travelled when sailing in ice conditions Formulae used Description of method to treat data gaps Name of person or position responsible for this method Data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table D.5. Methods to be used to treat data gaps regarding time spent at sea and time spent at berth (quayside and anchorage) (where applicable) Title of method Method to treat data gaps regarding time spent at sea and time spent at berth (quayside and anchorage) Formulae used Description of method to treat data gaps Name of person or position responsible for this method Data sources Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) PART E MANAGEMENT Table E.1. Regular check of the adequacy of the monitoring plan Title of procedure Regular check of the adequacy of the monitoring plan Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table E.2. Procedures for data flow activities Title of procedure Procedures for data flow activities Reference for procedure Description of procedures (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table E.3. Procedures for risk assessment Title of procedure Procedures for risk assessment Reference for procedure Description of procedures (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table E.4. Control activities: Quality assurance and reliability of information technology Title of procedure Information Technology Management (e.g. access controls, back up, recovery and security) Reference for procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for data maintenance Location where records are kept Name of system used (where applicable) List of relevant existing management systems Table E.5. Control activities: Internal reviews and validation of relevant data Title of procedure Internal reviews and validation of FuelEU relevant data Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedure (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table E.6. Control activities: Corrections and corrective actions Title of procedure Corrections and corrective actions Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table E.7. Control activities: Outsourced activities (if applicable) Title of procedure Outsourced activities Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) Table E.8. Control activities: Documentation Title of procedure Documentation Reference to existing procedure Version of existing procedure Description of procedures (a brief description of the procedure can be provided if already existing outside the monitoring plan) Name of person or position responsible for this procedure Location where records are kept Name of IT system used (where applicable) PART F FURTHER INFORMATION Table F.1. List of definitions and abbreviations Abbreviation, acronym, definition Explanation (1) Select one of the following categories: ‘Working draft’, ‘Under revision’, ‘Final draft submitted to the verifier’, ‘Assessed by verifier’. (2) As recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. (3) The Registered Owner is the owner specified on a ship’s certificate of registry. (4) Select one of the following categories: ‘Passenger ship’, ‘Ro-ro ship’, ‘Container ship’, ‘Oil tanker’, ‘Chemical tanker’, ‘LNG carrier’, ‘Gas carrier’, ‘Bulk carrier’, ‘General cargo ship’, ‘Refrigerated cargo ship’, ‘Vehicle carrier’, ‘Combination carrier’, ‘Ro-pax ship’, ‘Container/ro-ro cargo ship’, ‘Other ship types’. Under the category ‘Passenger ship’, the sub-type ‘Cruise Passenger Ship’ should be included. (5) Mandatory if the company requests to exclude the additional energy due to the ship’s ice class and/or due to sailing in ice conditions from the calculation of the compliance balance set out in Annex IV of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. Select one of the Polar Classes PC1 – PC7 or one of the Finnish-Swedish Ice Classes (IC, IB, IA or IA Super). To establish the correspondence between ice classes, HELCOM Recommendation 25/7 shall be used. (6) Ships should report the Technical Efficiency index EEDI or EEXI, and if this do not exist, EIV can be reported. (7) An additional contact person may be entered here. (8) Companies can select one of the following: ‘Shipowner and ISM Company’, ‘ISM Company distinct from Shipowner’. (9) Identification number as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and/or Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. (10) The country of registration shall be identical to the country of registration as recorded under the IMO Unique Company and Registered Owner Identification Number Scheme. (11) Select one of the categories: ‘Main engines’, ‘Auxiliary engines’, ‘Gas turbines’, ‘Boilers’, ‘Inert gas generators’, ‘Fuel cells’, ‘Waste incinerators’, ‘Other’. (12) ICE (other), LNG Otto (dual fuel medium speed), LNG Otto (dual fuel slow speed), LNG Diesel (dual fuel slow speed), LBSI, Gas turbine, Boilers, Fuel Cells, Waste Incinerators, Inert Gas generators. (13) May include the identification number in case of multiple identical emission source. The performance/power value of MCR specified on the EIAPP certificate should be used. If the fuel consumer is not required to have an EIAPP certificate, the MCR on the nameplate should be used. (14) Select at least one of the following categories: ‘Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO)’, ‘Light Fuel Oil (LFO)’, ‘Diesel/Gas Oil (MDO/MGO)’, ‘Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Propane, LPG)’, ‘Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Butane, LPG)’,‘Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)’, H2 (Fossil)’, ‘NH3 (Fossil)’, ‘Methanol (Fossil’)’, ‘Ethanol’, ‘Bio-diesel’, ‘Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil’, ‘Liquified bio-methane as transport fuel (Bio-LNG)’, ‘Bio-methanol’, ‘Other Biofuel’, ‘Bio-H2’, ‘e-diesel’, ‘e-methanol’, ‘e-LNG’, ‘e-H2’, ‘e-NH3’, ‘e-LPG’, ‘E-DME’, ‘Non-fossil other fuel’. (15) Only mandatory for container ships and passenger ships. (16) IEC/IEEE 80005-1 (High Voltage) and IEC/IEEE 80005-3 (Low Voltage). (17) Only mandatory for container ships and passenger ships which do not use on-shore power supply. (18) Fuel cells, on-board electrical energy storage from power generation at sea, on-board electrical energy storage from OPS, on-board electrical energy storage from battery swapping, on-board power generation from wind or on-board power generation from solar energy. (19) Technical description must include the rated power. (20) Only mandatory for container ships and passenger ships. (21) As provided in its Electrical load balance or Electrical load study used to demonstrate compliance with Regulations 40 and 41 of Chapter II-1 of the SOLAS Convention. In case the ship is not able to provide this reference, the value considered is 25 % of the total of the maximum continuous ratings of the main engines of the ship as specified in their EIAPP certificate delivered in application of the MARPOL Convention or, if the engines are not required to have an EIAPP certificate, on the nameplate of the engines. (22) Choose one of the following categories: rotor sails, kites, hard or rigid sails, soft sails, suction wings, turbines, other WAPS. (23) As defined in Annex I of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805, if applicable. (24) As reported in table B.3. (25) Select one of the categories: ‘Main engines’, ‘Auxiliary engines’, ‘Gas turbines’, ‘Boilers’, ‘Inert gas generators’, ‘Fuel cells’, ‘Waste incinerators’, ‘Other’. (26) Select one or more of the following categories ‘Method A: BDN and periodic stocktakes of fuel tank’s’, ‘Method B: Bunker fuel tank monitoring on-board’, ‘Method C: Flow meters for applicable combustion processes’ or ‘Method D: Direct CO2 greenhouse gas emissions measurement’. When using Method D, the fuel consumption shall be calculated using the measured CO2 emissions. Correction will have to be provided in all cases where unburnt gaseous fuel slip emissions are to be taken into account. This is the case where Cslip values are defined in the table of Annex II of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. (27) Select one of the following categories: ‘On-board measurement equipment’, ‘Fuel supplier test’ or ‘Laboratory test’. (28) Select one of the following categories: ‘Measurement equipment’, ‘Fuel Supplier test’ or ‘Laboratory test’. (29) Select one or more of the following categories: ‘Method A: BDN and periodic stocktakes of fuel tanks’, ‘Method B: Bunker fuel tank monitoring on-board’, ‘Method C: Flow meters for applicable combustion processes’ or ‘Method D: Direct GHG emissions measurement’. (30) Select one of the following categories: ‘Default value’ or ‘Ship specific estimate’. (31) Mandatory if the company requests to exclude the additional energy used due to sailing in ice conditions from the calculation of the compliance balance set out in Annex IV of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. (32) Mandatory if the company requests to exclude the additional energy used due to sailing in ice conditions from the calculation of the compliance balance set out in Annex IV of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. (33) Mandatory if the company requests to exclude the additional energy used due to sailing in ice conditions from the calculation of the compliance balance set out in Annex IV of Regulation (EU) 2023/1805. (34) ‘Ship at berth’ means a ship which is securely moored or anchored in a port falling under the jurisdiction of a Member State while it is loading, unloading or hotelling, including the time spent when not engaged in cargo operations; ‘ship at anchorage’ means a ship at berth which is not moored at the quayside; ‘voyage’ means any movement of a ship that originates from or terminates in a port of call and that serves the purpose of transporting passengers or cargo for commercial purposes. (35) Select one of the following categories: ‘Method A: BDN and periodic stocktakes of fuel tanks’, ‘Method B: Bunker fuel tank monitoring on-board’, ‘Method C: Flow meters for applicable combustion processes’, ‘Method D: Direct GHG emissions measurement’ or ‘Not applicable’. The selected category must be different from the category selected under ‘Chosen methods for fuel consumption’ in table C.1.1. (Monitoring of energy consumption – Methods used to determine fuel consumption of each Fuel Consumer). ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2024/2031/oj ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)