All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32024R0589 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/589 of 20 February 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 as regards the list of demarcated areas for containment of Aleurocanthus spiniferus (Quaintance) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/589 of 20 February 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 as regards the list of demarcated areas for containment of Aleurocanthus spiniferus (Quaintance) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/589 of 20 February 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 as regards the list of demarcated areas for containment of Aleurocanthus spiniferus (Quaintance) C/2024/948 OJ L, 2024/589, 21.2.2024, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2024/589/oj (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force Official Journal EN Series L 2024/589 21.2.2024 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2024/589 of 20 February 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 as regards the list of demarcated areas for containment of Aleurocanthus spiniferus (Quaintance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC (1), and in particular Article 28(2) thereof, Whereas: (1) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 (2) established measures for the containment of Aleurocanthus spiniferus (Quaintance) (‘the specified pest’) within certain demarcated areas, as well as the list of areas in the Union subject to those measures. (2) Since the adoption of that Regulation, Greece, France, Croatia and Italy carried out surveys pursuant to Article 19(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 in certain demarcated areas of their territories, established for the eradication of the specified pest. However, those surveys have shown that the eradication of the specified pest in those demarcated areas is no longer possible. (3) Consequently, Greece, France, Croatia and Italy should be allowed to apply measures for the containment of that pest in those demarcated areas. (4) Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 should therefore be amended accordingly. (5) The measures provided for in this Regulation are in accordance with the opinion of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food and Feed, HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 is amended in accordance with the Annex to this Regulation. Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 20 February 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN (1) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/2031/oj (2) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 of 11 October 2022 establishing measures for the containment of Aleurocanthus spiniferus (Quaintance) within certain demarcated areas (OJ L 265, 12.10.2022, p. 72, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2022/1927/oj). ANNEX Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1927 is replaced by the following: ‘ANNEX I 1. Greece Number of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations 1. Infested zone Regional Unit of Thesprotia Igoumenitsas, Souliou, Filiaton Buffer zone Regional Unit of Ioannina Zitsas, Dodonis, Pogoniou 2. Infested zone Regional Unit of Preveza Zirou, Pargas, Prevezas Buffer zone Regional Unit of Ioannina Dodonis, 3. Infested zone Regional Unit of Arta Artaion, Nikolaou Skoufa Buffer zone Regional Unit of Arta Georgiou Karaiskaki, Kentrikon Tzoumerkon 4. Infested zone Regional Unit of Aitoloakarnania Navpaktias, Thermou, Xiromerou, Aktiou – Vonitsas, Amfilohias, Mesologgiou, Agriniou Buffer zone Regional Unit of Fokida Doridos Regional Unit of Evritania Karpenisiou, Agrafon 5. Infested zone Ionian Islands Corfu (1) 2. France Number of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations 1. Infested zone Occitanie Aigues-Vives, Aimargues, Aubais, Aubord, Beauvoisin, Bernis, Boissières, Bouillargues, Caissargues, Calvisson, Caveirac, Codognan, Congénies, Gallargues-le-Montueux, Générac, Junas, La Calmette, Langlade, Lansargues, Le Cailar, Lunel, Lunel-Viel, Marsillargues, Milhaud, Mus, Nages-et-Solorgues, Nîmes, Rodilhan, Saint-Dionisy, Saint-Gilles, Saint-Hilaire-de-Beauvoir, Saint-Just, Saint-Laurent-d’Aigouze, Saint-Nazaire-de-Pézan, Saint-Sériès, Saturargues, Sommières, Uchaud, Valergues, Vauvert, Vergèze, Vestric-et-Candiac, Villetelle Buffer zone Occitanie Aigues-Mortes, Aspères, Aujargues, Baillargues, Bellegarde, Boisseron, Cabrières, Campagne, Candillargues, Castries, Clarensac, Dions, Entre-Vignes, Fontanès, Fourques, Gajan, Galargues, Garons, La Grande-Motte, La Rouvière, Le Grau-du-Roi, Manduel, Marguerittes, Mauguio, Montignargues, Montpezat, Moussac, Mudaison, Parignargues, Poulx, Saint-Brès, Saint-Chaptes, Saint-Côme-et-Maruéjols, Sainte-Anastasie, Saint-Geniès-de-Malgoirès, Saint-Geniès-des-Mourgues, Salinelles, Sanilhac-Sagriès, Saussines, Sauzet, Souvignargues, Villevieille Provence Alpes Côte d’Azur Arles, Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer 3. Croatia Number of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations Municipality Cadastral municipality 1. Infested zone Dubrovnik Neretva County Konavle Vitaljina, Gruda, Đurinići, Palje Brdo, Ljuta, Lovorno, Zastolje Dubrovačko Primorje Slano Grad Dubrovnik Zaton Opuzen Opuzen I., Opuzen II. Ploče Komin Buffer zone Dubrovnik Neretva County Konavle Pločice, Poljice, Vodovađa, Dubravka, Dunave, Popovići, Komaji, Pridvorje, Radovčići, Kuna Konavoska Grad Dubrovnik Grad Dubrovnik, Obuljeno, Sustjepan, Petrovo Selo, Osojnik, Orašac, Gromača, Ljubač Dubrovačko Primorje Majkovi Donji, Majkovi Gornji, Banići, Trnova, Mravinjica Ploče Baćina, Plina, Ploče, Rogotin Kula Norinska Desne, Metković, Krvavac II. Zažablje Vidonje Opuzen Opuzen Slivno Slivno, Komarna-Duboka, Klek, Pižinovac-Lovorje, Vlaka-Tuštevac, Mihalj-Otok-Lučina, Blace-Trn 2. Infested zone Split Dalmatia County Jelsa Jelsa, Vrisnik, Pitve, Svirče, Vrboska Milna Milna Sutivan Sutivan Bobovišća Bobovišća Supetar Mirca, Supetar Sućuraj Bogomolje Starigrad Stari Grad Postira Dol Hvar Hvar Podgora Podgora Tučepi Tučepi Baška Voda Baška Voda Brela Brela Makarska Makarska Buffer zone Split Dalmatia County Marina Marina, Blizna, Mitlo Vinovac, Račice, Sevid Šolta Gornje Selo Nerežišća Dračevica, Donji Humac, Nerežišća Supetar Splitska, Škrip Hvar Brusje, Grablje Vrbanj Vrbanj Jelsa Zastražišće, Gdinj Sućuraj Sućuraj Omiš Rogoznica, Slime Šestanovac Žeževica, Grabovac Zagvozd Zagvozd, Župa Makarska Veliko Brdo, Kotišina Vrgorac Rašćane, Kozica Podgora Igrane, Drašnice 3. Infested zone Šibenik Knin County Rogoznica Rogoznica Buffer zone Šibenik Knin County Primošten Primošten Marina Račice, Sevid 4. Infested zone Primorje Gorski Kotar County Punat Punat Buffer zone Primorje Gorski Kotar County Punat Stara Baška Baška Batomalj, Draga Bašćanska Vrbnik Vrbnik Krk Kornić, Krk 4. Italy Number of Demarcated Area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations Infested zone Marche Whole territory of the municipalities of San Benedetto del Tronto and Grottammare, and the part of the territory of the municipality of Cupra Marittima south of the channel in Boccabianca district. Buffer zone Marche 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Massignano, Cupra Marittima, Ripatransone, Acquaviva Picena, Monteprandone. Abruzzo 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Colonnella, Martinsicuro. Infested zone Lazio Part of the municipality of Roma between the following streets/river: Tiber river from “Tor di Quinto” brigde to "Industria" bridge,Via del porto fluviale, Via Pellegrino Matteucci, Piazzale 12 ottobre 1492, Via Martin Alonzo Pinzon till crossing with Viale C. Colombo. Viale C. Colombo till “Mura Latine”. “Mura Latine” from Viale C. Colombo to Piazzale Metronio. Via dell’Amba Aradam till Piazza S. Giovanni in Laterano. Porta s. Giovanni, Viale Castrense till Tangenziale est. Tangenziale est till “Tor di Quinto” brigde. Buffer zone Lazio 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Roma Infested zone Campania Whole municipalities of Afragola, Agropoli, Aversa, Caivano, Capua, Cardito, Casagiove, Casalvelino, Casoria, Castellabate, Cava dei Tirreni, Crispano, Ercolano, Falciano del Massico, Forchia, Forio, Francolise, Frattamaggiore, Frattaminore, Giugliano in Campania, Maddaloni, Marcianise, Massa Lubrense, Napoli, Nocera Inferiore, Nocera Superiore, Nola, Ottaviano, Palma Campania, Piana di Monte Verna, Pontecagnano Faiano, Portici, Quarto, Salerno, San Gennaro Vesuviano, San Giuseppe Vesuviano, San Paolo Belsito, San Salvatore Telesino and Saviano. Buffer zone Campania Whole provinces of Benevento, Caserta, Napoli e Salerno. Infested zone Sicilia The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Sicilia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Catania. Infested zone Sicilia The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Sicilia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Caltagirone and Grammichele. Infested zone Sicilia The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Sicilia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Siracusa. Infested zone Sicilia The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Sicilia 2 km around the infested zone of the municipality of Grammichele, falling in part of the municipalities of Grammichele, Mineo, Caltagirone and Licodia Eubea. Infested zone Sicilia The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Sicilia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Palermo. Infested zone Emilia-Romagna Whole territory of the municipalities of Calderara di Reno, Sala Bolognese, San Giovanni in Persiceto, Sant’Agata Bolognese, Bastiglia, Bomporto, Cavezzo, Camposanto, Medolla, Nonantola, Ravarino, San Possidonio, San Prospero and Soliera. And the area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Emilia-Romagna 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Anzola dell’Emilia, Argelato, Bentivoglio, Bologna, Calderara di Reno, Castel Maggiore, Castello d’Argile, Crevalcore, Granarolo dell’Emilia, Pieve di Cento, San Giorgio di Piano, San Pietro in Casale, Valsamoggia, Zola Predosa, Campogalliano, Carpi, Castelfranco Emilia, Castelnuovo Rangone, Castelvetro di Modena, Concordia sulla Secchia, Finale Emilia, Fiorano Modenese, Formigine, Maranello, Mirandola, Modena, Novi di Modena, San Cesario sul Panaro, San Felice sul Panaro, Sassuolo, Savignano sul Panaro, Spilamberto, Cento, Correggio, Rio Saliceto. Infested zone Emilia-Romagna Whole territory of the municipalities of Castel Bolognese and Solarolo. And the area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Emilia-Romagna 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Dozza, Imola, Mordano, Bagnacavallo, Bagnara di Romagna, Brisighella, Cotignola, Faenza, Lugo, Riolo Terme, Sant’Agata sul Santerno, Forlì. Infested zone Emilia-Romagna 3 m around the GPS point: 44.086027-12.391683 Buffer zone Emilia-Romagna 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Gatteo, Longiano, San Mauro Pascoli, Savignano sul Rubicone, Santarcangelo di Romagna. Infested zone Lombardia Whole territory of the municipality of Carpenedolo. Buffer zone Lombardia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Calvisano, Montichiari, Acquafredda. Infested zone Lombardia Whole territory of the municipality of Castel Goffredo Buffer zone Lombardia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Casaloldo, Castiglione delle Stiviere, Ceresara, Guidizzolo, Medole, Casalmoro, Asola. Infested zone Lombardia Whole territory of the municipalities of Schivenoglia, San Giacomo delle Segnate, Quistello, Borgocarbonara, Sermide and Felonica. Buffer zone Lombardia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: San Benedetto Po, San Giovanni del Dosso, Quingentole, Sustinente, Moglia, Borgo Mantovano, Magnacavallo, Ostiglia, Poggio Rusco. Infested zone Lombardia Whole territory of the municipalities of Bergamo, Azzano San Paolo, Orio al Serio and Zanica. Buffer zone Lombardia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Gorle, Grassobbio, Torre Boldone, Ponteranica, Sorisole, Seriate, Lallio, Mozzo, Curno, Valbrembo, Treviolo, Stezzano, Paladina, Stezzano, Cavernago, Comun Nuovo, Urgnano. Infested zone Lombardia Whole territory of the municipality of San Colombano al Lambro. Buffer zone Lombardia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Borghetto Lodigiano, Livraga, Graffignana, Orio Litta, Chignolo Po, Miradolo Terme. Infested zone Lombardia Whole territory of the municipality of Pantigliate. Buffer zone Lombardia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the following municipalities: Mediglia, Peschiera Borromeo, Tribiano, Settala, Rodano. Infested zone Liguria The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Liguria 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Arenzano and Cogoleto. Infested zone Liguria The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Liguria 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Ameglia, Castelnuovo Magra, Luni and Sarzana. Toscana 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Carrara and Fosdinovo. Infested zone Liguria The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Liguria 2 Km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Levanto, Bonassola and Monterosso al mare. Infested zone Abruzzo The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Abruzzo 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Martinsicuro. Infested zone Abruzzo The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Abruzzo 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Cepagatti. Infested zone Abruzzo The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Abruzzo 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Tortoreto. Infested zone Abruzzo The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Abruzzo 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Chieti. Infested zone Basilicata The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Basilicata 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Tursi, Stigliano, Montalbano jonico, Pisticci, Montescaglioso, Bernalda, Scanzano Jonico, Policoro and Rotondella. Puglia 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Ginosa. Infested zone Toscana The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Toscana 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Prato, Calenzano and Campi Bisenzio. Infested zone Toscana The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Toscana 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Castagneto Carducci. Infested zone Toscana The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Toscana 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Firenze. Infested zone Toscana The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Toscana 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipalities of Monte Argentario and Orbetello. Infested zone Toscana The area included by the following coordinates GPS: Buffer zone Toscana 2 km around the infested zone falling in part of the municipality of Carrara. (1) No buffer zone since the entire island is infested zone. ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2024/589/oj ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)