All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 31992A0537 92/537/Euratom: Commission Opinion of 9 November 1992 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Sizewell B Nuclear Power Station (United Kingdom) in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) 92/537/Euratom: Commission Opinion of 9 November 1992 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Sizewell B Nuclear Power Station (United Kingdom) in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) 92/537/Euratom: Commission Opinion of 9 November 1992 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Sizewell B Nuclear Power Station (United Kingdom) in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) OJ L 344, 26.11.1992, p. 40–40 (ES, DA, DE, EL, EN, FR, IT, NL, PT) In force 92/537/Euratom: Commission Opinion of 9 November 1992 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Sizewell B Nuclear Power Station (United Kingdom) in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) Official Journal L 344 , 26/11/1992 P. 0040 - 0040 COMMISSION OPINION of 9 November 1992 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Sizewell B Nuclear Power Station (United Kingdom) in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) (92/537/Euratom) The general data concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Sizewell B Nuclear Power Station were provided by the United Kingdom Government to the Commission, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, by letter received on 13 May 1992. On the occasion of the meeting of the group of experts set up pursuant to the Treaty, which took place on 15 and 16 September 1992 in Luxembourg, the representatives of the United Kingdom Government provided further complementary information and details. On the basis of the data thus obtained and having consulted the group of experts, the Commission drew up the following opinion: 1. The distance from the installation to the closest point on the territory of another Member State is approximately 140 km; in this case to France, Belgium and the Netherlands. 2. In normal operation of the power station its liquid and gaseous effluent discharges are not liable to give rise to significant exposure of the population of another Member State. 3. Solid radioactive wastes will be stored on the power station site prior to transport to a final storage site under State supervision. Irradiated fuel elements will be stored at the plant site prior to transfer for treatment or storage elsewhere. 4. In the case of an unplanned release of radioactive effluents which could be occasioned by an accident of the type and magnitude of the source terms considered in the general data, doses liable to be received in another Member State will not be significant from the health point of view. The United Kingdom has signed bilateral agreements with France and the Netherlands concerning the exchange of information in case of nuclear incidents or accidents. In addition to these, Community-wide arrangements have been set up for the early exchange of information in the event of a radiological emergency pursuant to a Council Decision of December 1987. These Community arrangements and bilateral agreements allow for hypothetical accidents, having greater radiological consequences than those presented in the general data, to be taken into account. The Commission recommends that the United Kingdom and Belgian authorities examine the possible advantages of establishing a bilateral agreement similar to those with France and the Netherlands. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Sizewell B nuclear power station is not liable, either in normal operation or in the case of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the general data to result in radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. This opinion is addressed to the United Kingdom. For the Commission Karel VAN MIERT Member of the Commission