All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32020C1229(01) Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2021 2020/C 451 I/01 Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2021 2020/C 451 I/01 Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2021 2020/C 451 I/01 OJ C 451I, 29.12.2020, pp. 1–3 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) 29.12.2020 EN Official Journal of the European Union CI 451/1 Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2021 (2020/C 451 I/01) In the wake of an unprecedented pandemic, the Union and its citizens have proven themselves resilient. However, the recent resurgence of the coronavirus across Europe shows the overwhelming need for the Member States and the EU institutions to continue acting with care, solidarity, caution and coordination in managing and overcoming the crisis. Where urgent legislative changes were needed to protect lives and livelihoods, Europe showed the resolution and competence to quickly act in the spirit of real European solidarity. The EU has also taken massive action to counter the socio-economic effects of the pandemic, with the adoption of a Multiannual Financial Framework amounting for EUR 1,074 trillion and a recovery fund ‘NextGenerationEU’ of EUR 750 billion. The Commission will pursue its efforts to ensure widespread availability of COVID-19 vaccines to all in need. The strategic priorities that were set out by the EU institutions at the beginning of this mandate – a healthier, greener, more digital, fairer and social Europe, which does not leave anyone behind – will continue to guide our decisions and actions and make our societies and economies even more resilient. We remain committed to implementing these priorities, strengthening the European identity and using the full potential that the Treaties offer. This Joint Declaration for 2021, which draws on the Commission work programme for the year ahead, demonstrates our common determination to deliver the practical changes desired by European citizens. It is now time to move from strategy to implementation. The Joint Declaration draws political attention to key legislative proposals (1) that either have already been presented by the European Commission or will be by the autumn of 2021. The three Institutions will use their best endeavours to ensure as much progress can be made by the end of the year. They recall the positive contribution of impact assessments in improving the quality of Union legislation and that initiatives with significant economic, environmental and social impacts included in the Joint Declaration will, as a general rule, be accompanied by an impact assessment. The three Institutions agree to give the utmost priority to the following initiatives, in order to achieve as much as possible by the end of 2021 and to set the building blocks for Europe’s transformation, recovery and future resilience: 1. To implement the European Green Deal, ensuring the climate transition is just and that nobody is left behind, enabling the EU to achieve climate neutrality by 2050 and ensure ambitious progress towards that goal by 2030, preserve bio-diversity, reversing deforestation, making mobility smarter and more sustainable and securing our natural resources; 2. To shape Europe’s Digital Decade, we will work to create a truly functioning single market for digital services within safe and ethical boundaries, devising a framework for trustworthy artificial intelligence, developing European leadership with digital targets for 2030 and a vibrant data economy, developing an EU-wide framework for secure public electronic identification, strengthen privacy in electronic communications and develop the EU’s cybersecurity competences and resilience, notably in finance, while pursuing fair digital taxation; we will continue to push forward digitisation notably with regard to education, training and health as well as to Europe’s digital sovereignty and innovative capacity; 3. To deliver an Economy that works for people, ensuring that the recovery reaches the whole society, by deepening the single market and strengthening our industries, striving for more social fairness and prosperity, mitigate the negative consequences of the crisis for vulnerable social groups, renew our commitment to a vibrant and economically strong cultural sector. At the same time, deepen the Economic and Monetary Union, strengthen the resilience and sustainability of Europe’s banks and capital markets, ensure more transparency on the taxation of multinational businesses; and ensure fair competition within the EU and on the global stage; 4. To make Europe stronger in the world, we will strengthen Europe’s brand of responsible leadership globally and strong partnership; we also stand ready to give a strong renewed impetus to our transatlantic relations. We promote international trade rules that are properly enforced and provide for a level playing field; 5. To promote a free and safe Europe, we will work to agree on a new pact on asylum and migration, to ensure migration is addressed in a comprehensive way, and the effective control of our external borders; protect free movement through strengthening the Schengen framework; enhance Europe’s response to health crises. We will act decisively to prevent the spread of terrorist content and child sexual abuse online; 6. To protect and strengthen our democracy and defend our common European values, we will continue strengthening the EU’s capacity to uphold and protect the rule of law and fundamental rights and freedoms and protecting citizens against emerging threats and crimes. We will improve the rules on European political parties and foundations, as well as on political advertising. We will ensure greater cooperation in gathering evidence in criminal proceedings and take new steps to pursue equality for men and women in the workplace. Further, we recall our commitment: — To the implementation of the roadmap towards the introduction of new own resources; — To work for a Europe free from discrimination, with equal rights and opportunities for all; — To pursue reinvigorated enlargement and neighbourhood policies and a comprehensive strategy with Africa; — To tackle money laundering and the financing of terrorism, tax fraud, evasion and avoidance as well as ensuring a sound and fair tax system; — To engage with citizens so they have a greater say on the future of Europe including via the upcoming Conference on the Future of Europe. The three Institutions will work together on all pending proposals, guided by the principles of European added-value, subsidiarity and proportionality. We will continue moving forward with resolution and competence so that Europe can deliver for its citizens when and where it matters most. We are committed to the proper implementation and enforcement of existing legislation. We, as Presidents of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission, will regularly monitor the timely and efficient implementation of this Joint Declaration. Done at Brussels on the tenth day of December in the year two thousand and twenty. For the European Parliament The President David SASSOLI For the Council of the European Union The President Angela MERKEL For the European Commission The President Ursula von der LEYEN (1) Under the Ordinary Legislative Procedure