All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32014A1018(01) Commission Opinion of 15 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first and second dismantling stages of the Saint-Laurent A Nuclear Power Station, located in France Commission Opinion of 15 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first and second dismantling stages of the Saint-Laurent A Nuclear Power Station, located in France Commission Opinion of 15 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first and second dismantling stages of the Saint-Laurent A Nuclear Power Station, located in France OJ C 371, 18.10.2014, pp. 1–2 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 18.10.2014 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 371/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 15 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first and second dismantling stages of the Saint-Laurent A Nuclear Power Station, located in France (only the French text is authentic) (2014/C 371/01) The assessment below is carried out under the provisions of the Euratom Treaty, without prejudice to any additional assessments to be carried out under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the obligations stemming from it and from secondary legislation (1). On 5 March 2014, the European Commission received from the French Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first and second dismantling stages of the Saint-Laurent A Nuclear Power Station. On the basis of these data and additional information requested by the Commission on 10 April 2014 and provided by the French authorities on 26 May 2014, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the power station and the nearest border with another Member State, in this case Belgium is 320 km. The United Kingdom is at a distance of 360 km, whilst Luxembourg is situated at 375 km. The distance from the site to the nearest border of a neighbouring country, in this case the Channel Islands (British Crown Dependencies) is 300 km. 2. During normal dismantling operations the discharges of liquid and gaseous effluents are not liable to cause an exposure of the population in another Member State, or in a neighbouring country, that would be significant from the point of view of health. 3. Solid radioactive waste is temporarily stored on site before being transferred to licensed treatment or disposal facilities located in France. There are no plans to export radioactive waste out of France. 4. The Commission recommends that the residual activity concentration checks, carried out to confirm the conventional nature of the solid waste after decontamination, be such that compliance with the clearance criteria laid down in the basic safety standards directive (Directive 96/29/Euratom) is ensured. 5. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents that may follow the accidents of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses likely to be received by the population in another Member State, or in a neighbouring country, would not be significant from the point of view of health. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form, arising from the first and second stages of the dismantling of the Saint-Laurent A Nuclear Power Station in France, both in normal operation and in the event of the accidents of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in a radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. Done at Brussels, 15 October 2014. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Vice-President of the Commission (1) For instance, under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, environmental aspects should be further assessed. Indicatively, the Commission would like to draw attention to the provisions of Directive 2011/92/EU on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment, Directive 2001/42/EC on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment, as well as to the Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora and Directive 2000/60/EC establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy.