All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32021D1967 Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1967 of 11 November 2021 setting up a mandatory data repository and a mandatory digital information exchange mechanism in accordance with Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1967 of 11 November 2021 setting up a mandatory data repository and a mandatory digital information exchange mechanism in accordance with Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1967 of 11 November 2021 setting up a mandatory data repository and a mandatory digital information exchange mechanism in accordance with Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) C/2021/7948 OJ L 400, 12.11.2021, pp. 160–195 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 12.11.2021 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 400/160 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/1967 of 11 November 2021 setting up a mandatory data repository and a mandatory digital information exchange mechanism in accordance with Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating the assessment and management of environmental noise (1), and in particular Article 10(2) and point (3) of Annex VI thereof, Whereas: (1) After the modifications introduced into Directive 2002/49/EC by the Regulation 2019/1010 of the European Parliament and of the Council (2) a mandatory data repository and a mandatory digital information exchange mechanism needs to be developed by the Commission for Member States to be able to share information on strategic noise maps and summaries of noise action plans. (2) An electronic noise data reporting mechanism was developed in 2007 to fulfil the reporting requirements of the Directive 2002/49/EC, namely the European Environment Agency’s infrastructure for supporting and improving data and information flows (‘Reportnet’). Reportnet has been updated and refined by the Commission, assisted by the European Environment Agency, in cooperation with the Member States. It should be part of the European Spatial Data Infrastructure that will enable the sharing of environmental spatial information among public sector organisations, facilitate public access to spatial information across Europe and assist in policy-making across boundaries. It applies to all spatial data under the scope of Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (3), that sets requirements for reporting and data-sharing between public authorities by means of an appropriate infrastructure. Reportnet has therefore been further developed to fulfil such requirements as well. (3) A digital information exchange mechanism needs a common language so that data can be managed and interpreted by the data repository. Accordingly, the data that is transferred to or linked with the data repository should fulfil very specific requirements regarding its format. Therefore, as an integral part of the development of the digital information exchange mechanism, the annex to this Decision specifies the format for the data to be communicated to the Commission through the mandatory data repository as referred to in Article 10(2) of Directive 2002/49/EC. (4) The introduction of the new mandatory digital information exchange mechanism requires the competent authorities of the Member States to align their data and infrastructure to the new technical requirements. It is therefore necessary to allow Member States some time for such technical alignment. Consequently, the application of this Decision should be deferred to 1 January 2022. (5) The measures provided for in this Decision are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee, established by Article 13(2) of Directive 2002/49/EC, HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 Member States shall use the European Environment Agency’s e-Reporting platform for reporting environmental and climate data (‘Reportnet’) as mandatory data repository for the submission of the information referred to in Directive 2002/49/EC and according to the Annex to this Decision. Article 2 The Reportnet shall be used as the mandatory digital information exchange mechanism referred to in Directive 2002/49/EC. Article 3 This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. It shall apply from 1 January 2022. Done at Brussels, 11 November 2021. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN (1) OJ L 189, 18.7.2002, p. 12. (2) Regulation (EU) 2019/1010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the alignment of reporting obligations in the field of legislation related to the environment, and amending Regulations (EC) No 166/2006 and (EU) No 995/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directives 2002/49/EC, 2004/35/EC, 2007/2/EC, 2009/147/EC and 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Regulations (EC) No 338/97 and (EC) No 2173/2005, and Council Directive 86/278/EEC (OJ L 170, 25.6.2019, p. 115). (3) Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2007 establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Community (INSPIRE) (OJ L 108, 25.4.2007, p. 1). ANNEX Section 1 Reporting of agglomerations, major airports, major railways and major roads 1.1. Agglomerations Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each agglomeration. Mandatory. Name of agglomeration. Mandatory. Area of coverage of the agglomeration. Mandatory. Number of inhabitants living inside the boundary of the agglomeration. Mandatory. Name of the existing type of noise sources inside the agglomeration. Mandatory. External object identifier of the spatial object (agglomeration). Mandatory. Spatial extent of the agglomeration. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as Zone type, Specialized zone type, Environmental domain, Legal basis, Designation period, Competent authority, Life cycle information. Mandatory. 1.2. Major airports Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Official name of the major airport. Mandatory. Unique international code of airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization. Mandatory. Number of take offs and landings per year at the major airport, excluding those purely for training purposes on light aircraft. Mandatory. Geometry representing the location of the major airport. Point geometry. Mandatory. Information about the dataset of the airport that follows the requirements of Directive 2007/2/EC to which the major airport could be linked. Optional. Reference to the airport (spatial object) in the reference dataset of the airport that is provided in the link to the reference dataset. Optional. 1.3. Major railways Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each major railway segment. Mandatory. Railway code (railway identification number) used within the Member State. Optional. Railway name used within the Member State. Optional. Number of train passages per year. Mandatory. Length of the major railway segment, in metres. Mandatory. Information about the dataset of the railway network that follows the requirements of Directive 2007/2/EC to which the major railway could be linked. Optional. Reference to the railway (spatial object) in the reference dataset of the railway network that is provided in the link to the reference dataset. Optional. External object identifier of the spatial object (major railway). Mandatory. Geometry of the major railway. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as ‘fictitious’, network information, validity information and life cycle information. Mandatory. 1.4. Major roads Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each major road segment. Mandatory. Road code used within the Member State. Optional. Official road name used within the Member State. Optional. European road code used to reference the road. Optional. Number of vehicle passages per year on the major road segment. Mandatory. Actual length of the major road segment, in metres. Mandatory. Information about the dataset of road network that follows the requirements of Directive 2007/2/EC to which the major road could be linked. Optional. Reference to the road (spatial object) in the reference dataset of road network that is provided in the link to the reference dataset. Optional. External object identifier of the spatial object (major road). Mandatory. Geometry of major road. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as ‘fictitious’, network information, validity information and life cycle information. Mandatory. Section 2 Designated competent authorities and bodies responsible for implementing Directive 2002/49/EC 2.1. Competent authority general information Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Name and address of a competent authority responsible for implementing Directive 2002/49/EC, including its unique identifier. Mandatory. 2.2. Competent authority and responsibilities related to noise in agglomerations, reported for each agglomeration. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier of the competent authority. Mandatory. Unique identifier assigned to each agglomeration. Mandatory. Noise source in the agglomeration for which the competent authority is responsible. Mandatory. Role of the competent authority with regard to the agglomeration. Mandatory. 2.3. Competent authority and responsibilities related to noise from major airports. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier of the competent authority. Mandatory. Unique international code of airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization. Mandatory. Role of the competent authority with regard to the major airport. Mandatory. 2.4. Competent authority and responsibilities related to noise from major railways. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier of the competent authority. Mandatory. Role of the competent authority with regard to the major railway. Mandatory. Reporting level in which the competent authority is responsible for major railways. Mandatory. Unique code corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) 1059/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council (2). Mandatory if the reporting level is at any sub-national level. Unique identifier assigned to each major railway segment. Mandatory if the reporting level is a major railway segment. Optional if reporting level is country or any other sub-national level. 2.5. Competent authority and responsibilities related to noise from major roads. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier of the competent authority. Mandatory. Role of the competent authority with regard to the major road. Mandatory. Reporting level in which the competent authority is responsible for major roads. Mandatory. Unique code corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory if the reporting level is at any sub-national level Unique identifier assigned to each major road segment. Mandatory if the reporting level is a major road segment. Optional if reporting level is country or any other sub-national level. 2.6. Competent authority for delimiting quiet areas - inside agglomerations or in open country. Note: for the information under 2.6. , if no quiet area is delimited, no information shall be reported. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier of the competent authority. Mandatory. A quiet area type for which the competent authority is responsible. Mandatory. Unique identifier of the quiet area. Mandatory. 2.7. Territorial units for statistics reference information (3) Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Title of the reference dataset of territorial units for statistics (NUTS). Mandatory if the reporting level of the competent authority for major roads/railways applies to any territorial units for statistics (NUTS). Link to the reference dataset of territorial units for statistics (NUTS). Optional. Title of the reference dataset of Local Administrative Units (LAU). Mandatory if the reporting level of the competent authority for major roads/railways applies to any Local Administrative Units (LAU). Link to the reference dataset of Local Administrative Units (LAU). Optional. Section 3 Noise limit values 3.1. Noise limit report Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Identifier of the noise limit values’ report. Mandatory. Noise limit report details. Mandatory. 3.2. Noise limit values reported in noise limit report Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Noise source for which the noise limit is applicable. Mandatory. Declaration on whether or not a limit value exists. Mandatory. Status of the limit value: in force or in preparation. Mandatory. Destination of use of the area where the noise limit is applied. Mandatory for residential area types where limits are in force or are under preparation. Optional for hospitals, schools and other areas. Noise indicator of the limit value. Mandatory for Lden and Lnight. Optional for all other indicators. Noise level value in dB. Mandatory if the noise limit is in force or in preparation. Further information on the noise limit values. Optional. Section 4 Strategic noise mapping 4.1. Strategic noise mapping – noise contours Note: Noise contour maps are mandatory for major roads, railways and air traffic inside and outside agglomerations. As long as noise contour maps for roads, railways, air traffic and industries inside agglomeration exist those shall also be reported together with the information below. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting. Noise source shown in the noise contour map. Mandatory for major roads, major railways and major airports inside and outside agglomerations. Mandatory for roads, railways, air traffic and industries inside agglomeration if applicable. Identifies the different indicator values or range values of the noise contour map. Mandatory for major roads, major railways and major airports inside and outside agglomerations. Mandatory are the 55 and 65 dB Lden contours. Other noise values or noise indicators are optional. Identifies the different indicator values or range values of the noise contour map. Mandatory for roads, railways, airports and industries inside agglomeration if available. Mandatory are the 60, 65, 70, 75 dB Lden contours. Other noise values or noise indicators are optional. Calendar year for which the noise contour map has been calculated. Mandatory. Geometry (location) of the noise contour maps. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as environmental health determinant type, validity information and life cycle information. Mandatory. 4.2. Noise exposure data for agglomerations Exposure data may be reported for a complete agglomeration or for Local Administrative Units2 covering agglomeration. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each agglomeration. Mandatory. Noise source of the exposed population values inside agglomeration. Mandatory for each individual existing noise source in agglomeration. Optional for all sources in agglomeration combined. Defines the characteristics of the dwellings' façade where noise exposure has been calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade. Optional for other exposure types. Defines the dB range value for Lden or Lnight at which the number of people exposed has been calculated. Mandatory values are: Lden: 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, greater than 75 dB, and Lnight: 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, greater than 70 dB. Optional for other noise levels. Number of people exposed to noise according to the selected Noise source, Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Number of hospitals exposed to noise according to the selected Noise source, Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of schools exposed to noise according to the selected Noise source, Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Unique code corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory if exposure values in agglomeration are reported per Local Administrative Unit (LAU). Unique international code of airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization. Mandatory if exposure data is reported for a specific major airport inside agglomeration. Description of the noise sources considered for calculating exposure data. Mandatory if exposure data is reported for all sources in agglomeration combined. Computation and measurement method being used to calculate the noise maps. Mandatory. Information on criteria used to select the roads and railways that are mapped in agglomerations. Optional. Information on the methods employed to calculate exposure to noise at the most exposed façade as described in Section 2.8 of Annex II to Directive 2002/49/EC. Optional. Link to the published online information. Optional. 4.3. Noise exposure data for major airports Exposure data may be reported per major airport or per Local Administrative Units2 affected by the noise from major airport. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique international code of airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization. Mandatory. Unique code corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory if exposure values related to major airports are reported per Local Administrative Unit (LAU). Defines the characteristics of the dwellings' façade where noise exposure is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade outside agglomeration. Optional for other exposure types. Defines the dB range value for Lden or Lnight at which the number of people exposed is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade Lden: 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, greater than 75 dB, and Lnight: 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, greater than 70 dB. Optional for other noise levels and/or exposure types. Number of people exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Area exposed (in km2) to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of dwellings exposed to noise according to Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of hospitals exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of schools exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Defines the characteristics of the dwellings' façade where noise exposure is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade including agglomerations. Defines the dB range value for Lden at which the number of people exposed is calculated. Mandatory for Lden: higher than 55, 65 and 75 dB respectively. Optional for other noise levels. Number of people exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Area exposed (in km2) to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Number of dwellings exposed to noise according to Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory Number of hospitals exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of schools exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Computation and measurement method being used to calculate the noise maps. Mandatory. Information on the methods employed to calculate exposure to noise at the most exposed façade as described in Section 2.8 of Annex II to Directive 2002/49/EC. Optional. Link to the published online information. Optional. 4.4. Noise exposure data for major railways Exposure data may be reported per territorial units for statistics or Local Administrative Units2 affected by the noise from major railways. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Type of aggregation level for the data being reported, including national or sub-national level, or for all the railways in the country related to the exposure for major railways. Mandatory. Unique code corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory. Unique code corresponding to one or more railways comprised within the territorial unit code. Optional. Defines the characteristics of the dwellings' façade where noise exposure is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade outside agglomeration. Optional for other exposure types. Defines the dB range value for Lden or Lnight at which the number of people exposed is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade Lden: 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, greater than 75 dB, and Lnight: 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, greater than 70 dB. Optional for other noise levels and/or exposure types. Number of people exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Area exposed (in km2) to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of dwellings exposed to noise according to Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of hospitals exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of schools exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Defines the characteristics of the dwellings' façade where noise exposure is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade including agglomerations. Defines the dB range value for Lden at which the number of people exposed is calculated. Mandatory for Lden: higher than 55, 65 and 75 dB respectively. Optional for other noise levels. Number of people exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Area exposed (in km2) to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Number of dwellings exposed to noise according to Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Number of hospitals exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of schools exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Computation and measurement method being used to calculate the noise maps. Mandatory. Information on the methods employed to calculate exposure to noise at the most exposed façade as described in Section 2.8 of Annex II to Directive 2002/49/EC. Optional. Link to the published online information. Optional. 4.5. Noise exposure data for major roads Exposure data may be reported per territorial units for statistics or Local Administrative Units2 affected by the noise from major roads. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Type of aggregation level for the data being reported, including national or sub-national level, or for all the roads in the country related to the exposure for major roads. Mandatory. Unique code corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory. Unique code corresponding to one or more roads comprised within the territorial unit code. Optional. Defines the characteristics of the dwellings' façade where noise exposure is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade outside agglomeration. Optional for other exposure types. Defines the dB range value for Lden or Lnight at which the number of people exposed is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade Lden: 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, greater than 75 dB, and Lnight: 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, greater than 70 dB. Optional for other noise levels and/or exposure types. Number of people exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Area exposed (in km2) to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of dwellings exposed to noise according to Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of hospitals exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of schools exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Defines the characteristics of the dwellings' façade where noise exposure is calculated. Mandatory for most exposed façade including agglomerations. Defines the dB range value for Lden at which the number of people exposed is calculated. Mandatory for Lden: higher than 55, 65 and 75 dB respectively. Optional for other noise levels. Number of people exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Area exposed (in km2) to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Number of dwellings exposed to noise according to Exposure type and Noise level. Mandatory. Number of hospitals exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Number of schools exposed to noise according to the selected Exposure type and Noise level. Optional. Computation and measurement method being used to calculate the noise maps. Mandatory. Information on the methods employed to calculate exposure to noise at the most exposed façade as described in Section 2.8 of Annex II to Directive 2002/49/EC. Optional. Link to the published online information. Optional. 4.6. Territorial units for statistics reference information2 Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Title of the reference dataset of territorial units for statistics (NUTS). Mandatory if noise exposure data are prepared on the level of territorial units NUTS. Link to the reference dataset of territorial units for statistics (NUTS). Optional. Title of the reference dataset of Local Administrative Units (LAU). Mandatory if noise exposure data are prepared on the level of Local Administrative Units (LAU). Link to the reference dataset of Local Administrative Units (LAU). Optional. Section 5 Noise-control programmes 5.1. Noise-control programmes that have been carried out in the past and noise-measures in place in agglomerations Note: for the information under 5.1., if there was no noise-control programme in the past, no information shall be reported Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each agglomeration. Mandatory. Unique identifier assigned to each noise-control programme. Mandatory. Details of the noise-control programme. Mandatory. Further explanation besides the information contained in the noise-control programme report. Optional. Type of aggregation level at which the noise-control programme is established such as national or sub-national level, or for all the agglomeration. Mandatory. Unique code (NUTS or LAU) corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory. Title and version of the territorial units for statistics dataset that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 (NUTS or LAU). Mandatory. Link to Eurostat data set used for the noise data reporting. Optional. 5.2. Noise-control programmes that have been carried out in the past and noise-measures in place in major airports Note: for the information under 5.2., if there was no noise-control programme in the past, no information shall be reported Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique international code of airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization. Mandatory. Unique identifier assigned to each noise-control programme. Mandatory. Details of the noise-control programme. Mandatory. Further explanation besides the information contained in the noise-control programme report. Optional. Type of aggregation level at which the noise-control programme is established, such as national or sub-national level, or for all the airports in the country. Mandatory. Unique code (NUTS or LAU) corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory. Title and version of the territorial units for statistics dataset that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 (NUTS or LAU). Mandatory. Link to Eurostat data set used for the noise data reporting. Optional. 5.3. Noise-control programmes that have been carried out in the past and noise-measures in place in major railways Note: for the information under 5.3., if there was no noise-control programme in the past, no information shall be reported Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each major railway segment. Mandatory if the reporting level is a major railway segment. Optional if reporting level is country or any other sub-national level. Unique identifier assigned to each noise-control programme. Mandatory. Details of the noise-control programme. Mandatory. Further explanation besides the information contained in the noise-control programme report. Optional. Type of aggregation level at which the noise-control programme is established, such as national or sub-national level, or for all the major railways in the country. Mandatory. Unique code (NUTS or LAU) corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory. Title and version of the territorial units for statistics dataset that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 (NUTS or LAU). Mandatory. Link to Eurostat data set used for the noise data reporting. Optional. 5.4. Noise-control programmes that have been carried out in the past and noise-measures in place in major roads Note: for the information under 5.4., if there was no noise-control programme in the past, no information shall be reported Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each major road segment. Mandatory if the reporting level is a major road segment. Optional if reporting level is country or any other sub-national level. Unique identifier assigned to each noise-control programme. Mandatory. Details of the noise-control programme. Mandatory. Further explanation besides the information contained in the noise-control programme report. Optional. Level at which the noise-control programme is established, such as national or sub-national level, or for all the major roads in the country. Mandatory. Unique code (NUTS or LAU) corresponding to the common classification of territorial units for statistics that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003. Mandatory. Title and version of the territorial units for statistics dataset that follows Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 (NUTS or LAU). Mandatory. Link to Eurostat data set used for the noise data reporting. Optional. Section 6 Noise action plans 6.1. Noise action plan for agglomeration Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. The unique identifiers of the agglomerations covered in the noise action plan. Mandatory. Unique identifier of the competent authority responsible for action plan development, collection or approval. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is adopted. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is expected to be implemented. Optional. Details of the document containing the action plan. Optional. Additional information about the legal framework of the noise action plan. Optional. Information on noise limit values in place considered for the evaluation and implementation of noise management and reduction actions. One of the two options shall be provided: Mandatory. Summary of the public consultation documentation. Optional. Start and end date of the public consultation period. Mandatory. Means used to consult the public and reach different stakeholders. Mandatory. Type of stakeholders participating in the public consultation. Optional. Number of people that participated in the public consultation. Optional. Explanation of whether or not any comments were received during the public consultation process. Mandatory. Explanation of how a revision of the noise action plan has been conducted and how comments were taken into account after the public consultation process. Mandatory. Unique identifier assigned to an agglomeration that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Noise sources inside the agglomeration addressed by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 55 dB Lden in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 50 dB Lnight in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to another noise indicator than Lden and Lnight relevant for the noise action plan. Optional. A description of the noise problems identified and situations that need to be improved. Mandatory. Optional to describe prioritization criteria used for developing the noise action plan. Unique identifier assigned to an agglomeration that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Noise sources inside the agglomeration addressed by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Noise abatement measures already existing when adopting the noise action plan. Mandatory. Description of the noise abatement measures that will be implemented within the action plan with expected benefits. Mandatory. Cost for the implementation of the foreseen measures. Optional. Noise abatement measures included in the cost evaluation. Optional. Unique identifier assigned to an agglomeration that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Noise sources inside the agglomeration addressed by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Estimated number of people experiencing noise reduction in the area covered by the action plan. Mandatory if none amongst 6.1.9.5 to 6.1.9.7 is reported. Textual explanation of the methodology used to estimate the number of people experiencing reduction. Mandatory if none amongst 6.1.9.5 to 6.1.9.7 is reported. Estimated number of less people affected by high annoyance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Estimated number of less people affected by high sleep disturbance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. For roads, estimated number of less cases of ischaemic heart disease in the area covered by the action plan. For railways and air-traffic, estimated number of less people affected by an increased risk of ischaemic heart disease in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on any other relevant health effect of noise that has been estimated in the action plan, in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on the assessment methods for harmful effects. Optional. Estimated cost-benefit of the measures described in the action plan. Optional. An indication of whether a long-term strategy to abate noise pollution is included in the noise action plan and an explanation of the strategy. Mandatory. Estimated overall cost of the action plan. Optional. Indication of whether any quiet area is described in the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of the provisions envisaged for evaluating the implementation of the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of how the results of the noise action plan are evaluated. Mandatory. 6.2. Coverage area of noise action plans for agglomerations Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. External object identifier of the spatial object (coverage area of the noise action plan of the agglomeration). Mandatory. Spatial extent of the area covered by a noise action plan for agglomeration. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as Zone type, Specialized zone type, Environmental domain, Legal basis, Designation period, Competent authority, Life cycle information. Mandatory. 6.3. Noise action plans for major airports Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. The unique international airport codes as defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization that are covered in the noise action plan. Mandatory. Unique identifier of the competent authority responsible for action plan development, collection or approval. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is adopted. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is expected to be implemented. Optional. Details of the document containing the action plan. Optional. Additional information about the legal framework of the noise action plan. Optional. Information on noise limit values in place considered for the evaluation and implementation of noise management and reduction actions. One of the two options shall be provided: Mandatory. Summary of the public consultation documentation. Optional. Start and end date of the public consultation period. Mandatory. Means used to consult the public and reach different stakeholders. Mandatory. Type of stakeholders participating in the public consultation. Optional. Number of people that participated in the public consultation. Optional. Explanation of whether any comments were received during the public consultation process. Mandatory. Explanation of how a revision of the noise action plan has been conducted and how comments were taken into account after the public consultation process. Mandatory. Unique international code for an airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 55 dB Lden in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 50 dB Lnight in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to another noise indicator than Lden and Lnight relevant for the noise action plan. Optional. A description of the problems identified and situations that need to be improved. Mandatory. Optional to describe prioritization criteria used for developing the noise action plan. Unique international code for an airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Noise abatement measures already existing when adopting the noise action plan. Mandatory. Description of the noise abatement measures that will be implemented within the action plan with expected benefits. Mandatory. Cost for the implementation of the foreseen measures. Optional. Noise abatement measures included in the cost evaluation. Optional. Unique international code for an airport defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Estimated number of people experiencing noise reduction in the area covered by the action plan. Mandatory if none amongst 6.3.9.4 to 6.3.9.6 is reported. Textual explanation of the methodology used to estimate the number of people experiencing reduction. Mandatory if none amongst 6.3.9.4 to 6.3.9.6 is reported. Estimated number of less people affected by high annoyance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Estimated number of less people affected by high sleep disturbance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Estimated number of less people affected by an increased risk of ischaemic heart disease in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on any other relevant health effect of noise that has been estimated in the action plan, in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on the assessment methods for harmful effects. Optional. Estimated cost-benefit of the measures described in the action plan. Optional. An indication of whether a long-term strategy to abate noise pollution is included in the noise action plan and an explanation of the strategy. Mandatory. Estimated overall cost of the action plan. Optional. Explanation of whether any quiet area is described in the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of the provisions envisaged for evaluating the implementation of the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of how the results of the noise action plan are evaluated. Mandatory. 6.4. Coverage area of noise action plan for major airports Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. External object identifier of the spatial object (coverage area of noise action plan for major airports). Mandatory. Spatial extent of the area covered by a noise action plan for airport. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as Zone type, Specialized zone type, Environmental domain, Legal basis, Designation period, Competent authority, Life cycle information. Mandatory. 6.5. Noise action plan for major railways Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. Indication of the major railways included in the noise action plan through rail identifiers or territorial units for statistics. Mandatory. Unique identifier of the competent authority responsible for action plan development, collection or approval. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is adopted. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is expected to be implemented. Optional. Details of the document containing the action plan. Optional. Additional information about the legal framework of the noise action plan. Optional. Information on noise limit values in place considered for the evaluation and implementation of noise management and reduction actions. One of the two options shall be reported: Mandatory. Summary of the public consultation documentation. Optional. Start and end date of the public consultation period. Mandatory. Means used to consult the public and reach different stakeholders. Mandatory. Type of stakeholders participating in the public consultation. Optional. Number of people that participated in the public consultation. Optional. Explanation of whether any comments were received during the public consultation process. Mandatory. Explanation of how a revision of the noise action plan has been conducted and how comments were taken into account after the public consultation process. Mandatory. Unique identifier assigned to a railway that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 55 dB Lden in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 50 dB Lnight in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to another noise indicator than Lden and Lnight relevant for the noise action plan. Optional. A description of the problems identified and situations that need to be improved. Mandatory. Optional to describe prioritization criteria used for developing the noise action plan. Unique identifier assigned to a railway that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Noise abatement measures already existing when adopting the noise action plan. Mandatory. Description of the noise abatement measures that will be implemented within the action plan with expected benefits. Mandatory. Cost for the implementation of the foreseen measures. Optional. Noise abatement measures included in the cost evaluation. Optional. Unique identifier assigned to a railway that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Estimated number of people experiencing noise reduction in the area covered by the action plan. Mandatory if none amongst 6.5.9.4 to 6.5.9.6 is reported. Textual explanation of the methodology used to estimate the number of people experiencing reduction. Mandatory if none amongst 6.5.9.4 to 6.5.9.6 is reported. Estimated number of less people affected by high annoyance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Estimated number of less people affected by high sleep disturbance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Estimated number of less people affected by an increased risk of ischaemic heart disease in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on any other relevant health effect of noise that has been estimated in the action plan, in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on the assessment methods for harmful effects. Optional. Estimated cost-benefit of the measures described in the action plan. Optional. An indication of whether a long-term strategy to abate noise pollution is included in the noise action plan and an explanation of the strategy. Mandatory. Estimated overall cost of the action plan. Optional. Explanation of whether any quiet area is described in the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of the provisions envisaged for evaluating the implementation of the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of how the results of the noise action plan are evaluated. Mandatory. 6.6. Coverage area of noise action plan for major railways Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. External object identifier of the spatial object (coverage area of noise action plan for major railways). Mandatory. Spatial extent of the area covered by a noise action plan for major railways. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as Zone type, Specialized zone type, Environmental domain, Legal basis, Designation period, Competent authority, Life cycle information. Mandatory. 6.7. Noise action plan for major roads Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. Indication of the major roads included in the noise action plan through roads identifiers or territorial units for statistics. Mandatory. Unique identifier of the competent authority responsible for action plan development, collection or approval. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is adopted. Mandatory. Date when the noise action plan is expected to be implemented. Optional. Details of the document containing the action plan. Optional. Additional information about the legal framework of the noise action plan. Optional. Information on noise limit values in place considered for the evaluation and implementation of noise management and reduction actions. One of the two options shall be reported: Mandatory. Summary of the public consultation documentation. Optional. Start and end date of the public consultation period. Mandatory. Means used to consult the public and reach different stakeholders. Mandatory. Type of stakeholders participating in the public consultation. Optional. Number of people that participated in the public consultation. Optional. Explanation of whether any comments were received during the public consultation process. Mandatory. Explanation of how a revision of the noise action plan has been conducted and how comments were taken into account after the public consultation process. Mandatory. Unique identifier assigned to a road that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 55 dB Lden in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to equal or more than 50 dB Lnight in the area covered by the noise action plan. Mandatory. Number of people exposed to another noise indicator than Lden and Lnight relevant for the noise action plan. Optional. A description of the problems identified and situations that need to be improved. Mandatory. Optional to describe prioritization criteria used for developing the noise action plan. Unique identifier assigned to a road that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Noise abatement measures already existing when adopting the noise action plan. Mandatory. Description of the noise abatement measures that will be implemented within the action plan with expected benefits. Mandatory. Cost for the implementation of the foreseen measures. Optional. Noise abatement measures included in the cost evaluation. Optional. Unique identifier assigned to a road that is included in the noise action plan. Optional. Estimated number of people experiencing noise reduction in the area covered by the action plan. Mandatory if none amongst 6.7.9.4 to 6.7.9.6 is reported. Textual explanation of the methodology used to estimate the number of people experiencing reduction. Mandatory if none amongst 6.7.9.4 to 6.7.9.6 is reported. Estimated number of less people affected by high annoyance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Estimated number of less people affected by high sleep disturbance in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Estimated number of less cases of ischaemic heart disease in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on any other relevant health effect of noise that has been estimated in the action plan, in the area covered by the action plan. Optional. Information on the assessment methods for harmful effects. Optional. Estimated cost-benefit of the measures described in the action plan. Optional. An indication of whether a long-term strategy to abate noise pollution is included in the noise action plan and an explanation of the strategy. Mandatory. Estimated overall cost of the action plan. Optional. Explanation of whether any quiet area is described in the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of the provisions envisaged for evaluating the implementation of the noise action plan. Mandatory. A description of how the results of the noise action plan are evaluated. Mandatory. 6.8. Coverage area of noise action plan for major roads Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each noise action plan. Mandatory. External object identifier of the spatial object (coverage area of noise action plan for major roads). Mandatory. Spatial extent of the area covered by a noise action plan for major roads. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as Zone type, Specialized zone type, Environmental domain, Legal basis, Designation period, Competent authority, Life cycle information. Mandatory. Section 7 Delimited quiet areas in agglomerations or in open country 7.1. Quiet areas in agglomerations or in open country Note: for the information under 7.1. , if no quiet area is delimited, no information shall be reported. Data to be reported Content Mandatory or optional nature of the reporting Unique identifier assigned to each quiet area. Mandatory. Name of the quiet area. Optional. Description of the characteristics of the quiet area such as natural reserve, playground, green space. Mandatory. Any existing documentation related to the delimitation of the quiet area described. Optional. Unique agglomeration identifier where the quiet area described is delimited. Mandatory if quiet area is in an agglomeration. Defines the noise sources against which the quiet area is protected. Optional. Additional noise sources against which the quiet area is protected. Optional. Measures for protecting the designated quiet area from noise. Mandatory. Unique identifier of noise action plan that includes protection or preservation of a quiet area. Mandatory if quiet area is included in a noise action plan. External object identifier of the spatial object (quiet area). Mandatory. Spatial extent of the quiet area. Mandatory. Additional attributes such as Zone type, Specialized zone type, Environmental domain, Legal basis, Designation period, Competent authority, Life cycle information. Mandatory. (1) Commission Regulation (EU) No 1089/2010 of 23 November 2010 implementing Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards interoperability of spatial data sets and services (OJ L 323, 8.12.2010, p. 11). (2) Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May 2003 on the establishment of a common classification of territorial units for statistics (NUTS) (OJ L 154 21.6.2003, p. 1). (3) Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 May 2003 on the establishment of a common classification of territorial units for statistics (NUTS), OJ L 154, 21.06.2003 p. 1.