All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32024R2493 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2493 of 23 September 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 as regards updating the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2493 of 23 September 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 as regards updating the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2024/2493 of 23 September 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 as regards updating the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council C/2024/6542 OJ L, 2024/2493, 27.9.2024, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2024/2493/oj (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force Official Journal EN L series 2024/2493 27.9.2024 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2024/2493 of 23 September 2024 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 as regards updating the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC (1), and in particular Article 14(1) and Article 30f(5) thereof, Whereas: (1) Directive 2003/87/EC establishing a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union (EU ETS) was revised and amended by Directive (EU) 2023/959 of the European Parliament and of the Council (2) to align it with Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council (3) setting a target of at least 55 % net emission reductions by 2030 compared to 1990. (2) Following the amendment of Directive 2003/87/EC by Directive (EU) 2023/958 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4) and Directive (EU) 2023/959, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 (5) should be amended accordingly to incorporate the necessary definitions and detailed arrangements for the monitoring and reporting of emissions from renewable fuels of non-biological origin and recycled carbon fuels and also to ensure proper alignment with sustainability and greenhouse gas savings criteria laid down in Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6), for the monitoring and reporting of emissions from the transport of CO2 by other means than pipelines for geological storage, emissions from aviation including monitoring and reporting of non-CO2 aviation effects, emissions from the new emission trading system for buildings, road transport and non-ETS industry. (3) Under the new emission trading system for buildings, road transport and additional sectors, it is necessary, for the definition of a ‘final consumer’ in Article 3(69) to provide for more specific reference to the definition of regulated entity in Article 3(ae) of Directive 2003/87/EC. (4) Article 5 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 should be amended to reflect that the completeness of monitoring and reporting should cover all process and combustion emissions of the stationary installation, from all emission sources and source streams belonging to activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC and other directly associated activities in line with Article 3(e) of that Directive. (5) To improve the quality of information on biomass, on renewable fuels of non-biological origin (RFNBOs), on recycled carbon fuels (RCFs), and on synthetic low-carbon fuels and to facilitate national reporting under Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7), operators should monitor and report emissions from the non-zero rated and zero-rated carbon fraction of these fuels as memo-items in the emission reports. For that purpose, parameters concerning non-zero-rated and zero-rated biomass, RFNBOs and RCFs, or synthetic low-carbon fuels should be determined and reported for each corresponding source stream under the standard calculation methodology pursuant to Article 24 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 and the mass balance system pursuant to Article 25 of that Regulation. Specific rules are necessary on the determination of composition-related calculation factors concerning non-zero-rated and zero-rated biomass, RFNBOs and RCFs, and synthetic low-carbon fuels, including the zero-rated and non-zero-rated carbon fraction. (6) To avoid systematic underestimation of the total emissions in the mass balance system when zero-rated carbon is contained in the input and in the output streams, it is important for operators to determine the zero-rated carbon content of the output streams. Clear evidence is required to demonstrate that underestimation has been avoided and that the total mass of the zero-rated carbon fractions in the output materials is equivalent to the total mass of zero-rated carbon fractions contained in the input materials. (7) Directive 2003/87/EC, as revised by Directive (EU) 2023/959, specifies that the emission factor of biomass is zero if the biomass complies with the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions savings criteria for the use of biomass fuels established by Directive (EU) 2018/2001, taking into account any necessary adjustments for application under Directive 2003/87/EC, as set out in the implementing acts referred to in Article 14 of that Directive. In order to clarify the conditions under which biomass emissions can be zero-rated and to align with the revised Directive (EU) 2018/2001, Article 38(5) of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 should be amended. Where the relevant sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions savings criteria do not apply to a specific type of biomass, that biomass can be zero-rated directly. However, in this case, operators should still demonstrate that the criteria are not applicable. Assessing the proof of applicability and proof of sustainability is an essential part of the verification where the verifier checks the correct application of the monitoring methodology, including the zero-rating of the biomass. Where sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions savings criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10) do apply, compliance with these criteria is required for zero-rating. Biomass that does not comply with the criteria in this case should be treated as a fossil fuel. Zero-rating of emissions under EU ETS is distinct from support schemes defined in Article 2, point (5) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001. (8) Article 31a of the amended Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8) sets up a Union database to enable the tracing of liquid and gaseous renewable fuels, recycled carbon fuels and synthetic low-carbon fuels (‘the Union Database’). By 21 November 2024, the Union Database should be fully operational. Where compliance is required with the sustainability and the greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29, paragraphs (2) to (7) and (10) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, for biomass, and Article 29a of that Directive, for liquid and gaseous renewable fuels and RCFs, proof of sustainability should be provided in line with Article 30 and 31 of that Directive. To facilitate this process and to reduce the administrative burden, Member States should be able to rely on the evidence provided by EU ETS operators, aircraft operators and regulated entities from the Union Database on the transactions related to any amount of fuel that has been purchased and used during the reporting year and that has been connected to the cancellation of the respective quantity in the Union database. In the case of subsequent non-compliance regarding the proof of sustainability of the quantities cancelled in the databases, the competent authority shall correct the verified emissions accordingly. (9) According to Article 33 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066, sampling is to be representative for the specific batch and free of bias. Where continuous sampling of the flue gas stream is used, the analysis frequency should be aligned with this process and cover the whole reporting year without interruption. (10) Directive (EU) 2023/959 has extended the scope of activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC for the refining of any oil, the production of any iron, the production of alumina, the production of hydrogen and the transport of CO2 through means other than pipelines. In order to ensure alignment with Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC, the Annexes to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 need to be updated. (11) Directive 2003/87/EC recognises the potential role of RCFs and RFNBOs for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in sectors that are hard to decarbonise. To contribute to the decarbonisation, their greenhouse gas emissions savings need to meet the minimum greenhouse gas emissions savings laid out in Article 29a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 and be calculated according to the methodology set out in the act adopted pursuant to that Article. (12) RCFs or RFNBOs that contain carbon in their chemical composition, such as e-kerosene or e-methanol, require a carbon feedstock for their production. Until all stages of the life of a product, in which captured carbon is used, are subject to carbon pricing, in particular at the stage of waste incineration, reliance on accounting for emissions at the point of their release from products into the atmosphere would result in emissions being underestimated. Where RFNBOs or RCFs are produced from captured CO2 under an activity covered by Directive 2003/87/EC, the emissions should be accounted for under that activity. In order to avoid double counting and requiring a double payment for the same emissions, the CO2 emissions from RCFs and RFNBOs that comply with the criteria laid out in Directive (EU) 2018/2001 should have an emission factor of zero. (13) Synthetic low-carbon fuels must comply with the greenhouse gas savings criteria laid down in Article 2 point 13 of Directive (EU) 2024/1788 on common rules for the internal markets in renewable gas and natural gas and in hydrogen. Synthetic low-carbon fuels require carbon feedstock for their production. Subject to review in respect of zero-rated carbon combusted in installations which are exempt from the EU ETS due their high use of biomass pursuant to point 1 of Annex I, to avoid double counting within the EU ETS in accordance with Article 5 of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066, if the carbon content of the fuels stems from the EU ETS and it has therefore been accounted, including when its emissions factor is zero, the emissions from the synthetic low-carbon fuel should be zero-rated. The emissions resulting from synthetic low-carbon fuels with other carbon content should be treated as their fossil fuel equivalents. It is necessary to provide rules for the determination of the fraction of zero-rated synthetic low-carbon fuels. (14) RCFs or RFNBOs that do not meet the greenhouse gas emissions savings laid out in Article 29a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 are considered to lead to insufficient greenhouse gas emissions savings in comparison to fossil fuels. Therefore, the emissions resulting from the combustion of such RCFs or RFNBOs should be treated as their fossil fuel equivalents. As fossil fuels may be blended with RCFs or RFNBOs, it is necessary to provide rules for the determination of the fraction of zero-rated RCF or RFNBO. (15) Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 should determine the monitoring methodology that should be applied to emissions from zero-rated RFNBOs, RCFs and synthetic low-carbon fuels. Provisions should be included for the deduction of total zero-rated RFNBO, RCF and synthetic low-carbon fuels emissions, in the case where the operator uses the measurement-based methodology for the determination of total CO2 emissions. When designing support schemes for renewable or low-carbon fuels, Member States retain the right to specify how to incentivise the different RFNBOs, RCFs or synthetic low carbon fuels. (16) In addition, when applying the measurement-based methodology for biomass-containing fuels and materials, conditions should be added when the biomass fraction equals the zero-rated biomass fraction. Clarifications should also be provided when these conditions are not met and in such case the provisions deployed related to calculation-based approach should be followed by the operator. (17) When the installation’s proposed methodology involves continuous sampling from the flue gas stream, and at the same time the stationary installation consumes natural gas from the grid, to avoid double counting, the CO2 stemming from biogas should be determined by laboratory analysis and this amount should be respectively deducted from the total zero-rated CO2 previously determined by calculation-based approach. (18) Directive 2003/87/EC does not recognise negative greenhouse gas emissions. To avoid generating negative emissions, an operator should not subtract from its emissions any CO2 that originates from zero-rated fuels. In the case of the capture of emissions from a mix of zero and non-zero-rated sources, to ensure clarity and simplicity, the quantity of CO2 resulting from non-zero-rated sources that can be deducted from the operator’s emissions should be established based on the proportion of the zero-rated and non-zero-rated emissions. (19) The activities ‘transport of greenhouse gases for geological storage’, and ‘geological storage of greenhouse gases’, in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC, cover all CO2 transported and stored in a storage site permitted under Directive 2009/31/EC, irrespective of the geographical and physical origin of the CO2. In order to avoid any gaps in the monitoring and reporting framework and to provide the incentives for operators of CO2 transport infrastructure or of CO2 storage sites to minimise leaks, it is necessary to clarify that these operators should monitor and report any emissions from all CO2 for geological storage in their custody, including if originating from activities outside of the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC. (20) As CO2 for geological storage is expected to be transported by a variety of modes, Directive (EU) 2023/959 expanded the scope of the activity ‘transport of greenhouse gases for geological storage’ in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC to any transport mode. Therefore, it is necessary to revise the monitoring and reporting provisions related to the CO2 transport activity to ensure that they are applicable to a CO2 transport infrastructure based on any transport modes. Where a transport mode is also covered by another activity under Directive 2003/87/EC, to avoid the double counting of emissions, the emissions covered by the other activity under that Directive should be excluded from the boundaries of the CO2 transport activity. (21) The transport of CO2 for geological storage may take place over long distances. Therefore, the CO2 may be in transit for lengthy periods. In such cases, it is appropriate to provide the operator of the CO2 transport infrastructure the flexibility to subtract from the emissions to be reported in a given year any amount of CO2 that is still in transit by 31 December of that year, provided that the CO2 shipment reaches its destination and is transferred out to a storage site or to another EU ETS installation no later than 31 January of the following year. (22) The revised Directive 2003/87/EC amended the definition of emissions to also encompass greenhouse gases that are not directly released into the atmosphere. Therefore, these should also be considered emissions under the EU ETS, unless they are stored in a storage site in accordance with Directive 2009/31/EC or they are permanently chemically bound in a product so that they do not enter the atmosphere under normal use, and do not enter the atmosphere under any normal activity taking place after the end of the life of the product. In consequence, the Annexes to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 need to be updated accordingly to account for greenhouse gases released in ways other than directly into the atmosphere, while avoiding the double counting of emissions where greenhouse gases not emitted directly into the atmosphere are re-used within the same installation or in another EU ETS installations. To avoid undue disruptions for installations affected by these changes, their application should be delayed until 1 January 2025 to allow sufficient time for the necessary adaptations. (23) When determining the oxidation or conversion factor of a source stream, carbon monoxide (CO) emitted to the atmosphere should be considered as the molar equivalent amount of CO2. CO that is otherwise transferred in a product or as a feedstock is not considered as an emission under the scope of Directive 2003/87/EC. (24) Article 12(3b) of Directive 2003/87/EC provides that allowances do not need to be surrendered for greenhouse gases which are considered to have been captured and utilised in such a way that they have become permanently chemically bound in a product so that they do not enter the atmosphere under normal use, including any normal activity taking place after the end of the life of the product. It is necessary to include a general provision for operators to determine and subtract from their emissions the amount of CO2 considered to be permanently chemically bound in a product listed in the delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 12(3b) of Directive 2003/87/EC, replacing the provision that allowed to subtract the CO2 considered chemically bound in precipitated calcium carbonate. (25) Having regard to Article 14(5) of Directive 2003/87/EC, the monitoring, reporting and verification framework (MRV) of non-CO2 effects constitutes a stand-alone, distinct exercise from carbon pricing. EU research and innovation activities on the impact and technological solutions of non-CO2 aviation effects are ongoing since 1994 and should continue. Given the uncertainties surrounding the impacts of non-CO2 effects, it is key to start the MRV on non-CO2 effects with a view to ensuring scientific validation of the impacts. (26) Aircraft operators should monitor the non-CO2 aviation effects occurring from 1 January 2025, from the activities performed by aeroplanes equipped with jet engines, enabling the calculation of a CO2 equivalent (CO2(e)) per flight. The aircraft operators should report those non-CO2 aviation effects once a year. However, to facilitate the start of the MRV for non-CO2 effects, in 2025 and 2026, while the reporting may cover all routes, such reporting shall only be required in respect of routes involving two aerodromes located in the European Economic Area (EEA), and routes from an aerodrome located in the EEA departing to Switzerland or to the United Kingdom. In respect of 2025 and 2026, the reporting of non-CO2 aviation effects taking place from other flights is possible. (27) In order to minimise administrative burden, aircraft operators should provide a single monitoring plan for CO2 emissions and non-CO2 effects. (28) The calculation of the CO2(e) per flight should be done using the Global Warming Potential (GWP) metric in three time horizons GWP20, GWP50 and GWP100, to better understand those impacts on climate, applying efficacy, as defined in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066, and the Commission’s non-CO2 aviation effects tracking system (NEATS), to refine the GWP metric. (29) In order to calculate CO2(e) for non-CO2 effects, the aircraft operators should use a CO2(e) calculation approach. This approach includes modules for estimating fuel burn and different emissions (NOx, CO, HC), models calculating CO2(e) using the input data and default values as described in Annex IIIa and Annex IIIb to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066, where data gaps occur. (30) In order to avoid incentivizing underreporting, conservative default values may be used. Where data sourced by the aircraft operator is not available, work needs to continue to enable reporting of measured values, based on the best information available. Relying on default values decreases the precision of the data. (31) Acknowledging the importance of providing appropriate tools to limit the administrative effort of monitoring, reporting and verification of non-CO2 aviation effects, the aircraft operators may rely on the information technology tool, NEATS, provided by the Commission. The aircraft operators may also opt to use their own or third-party information technology tools provided that these tools comply with the provisions of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066, in particular Article 56a, and provided that the Commission approves them. (32) The aircraft operators should securely collect, and store monitored data, including flight details and aircraft information. For this purpose, the aircraft operators may rely on the Commission IT tool and/or third-party resources, ensuring compliance with confidentiality rules and accessibility for verification purposes. (33) In a situation where no data is provided by the aircraft operators NEATS should be able to calculate the CO2(e) automatically, on the basis of data gathered from external sources and the default values as described in Annex IIIa and Annex IIIb to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066. (34) In the event of the unavailability of IT tools, aircraft operators should monitor essential flight and aircraft properties information as an interim measure. (35) In the event of the unavailability of common reference Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) model, aircraft operators should use a location-based simplified approach to calculate the CO2(e) of non-CO2 aviation effects as an interim measure. (36) For the purpose of minimising the administrative burden, small emitters may choose to use a location-based simplified approach to calculate the CO2(e) of non-CO2 aviation effects. (37) Based on the feedback on the implementation of the EU ETS, it is necessary to further facilitate the identification of the operator of an aircraft pursuant to Article 3(o) of Directive 2003/87/EC and to include an additional step in this process. (38) In order to align the provisions of Article 28a(4) of Directive 2003/87/EC and this Regulation concerning the definition of small emitters, this Regulation should be updated to allow operators meeting the criteria defined in Article 28a(4) of that Directive, to use the fuel estimation tools implemented by Eurocontrol. (39) Reporting requirements play a key role in ensuring proper emission monitoring and enforcement of legislation. In order to streamline those reporting requirements, appropriate reporting rules should be established for aircraft operators for the use of different types of alternative aviation fuels, including biofuels, RFNBOs, RCFs and other fuels eligible under the EU ETS support system established pursuant to Article 3c(6) of Directive 2003/87/EC. (40) Emission thresholds apply to aircraft operators for their inclusion into the EU ETS or ICAO’s Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA). Aircraft operators can be considered small emitters or allowed to use simplified tools. In accordance with the purpose of the EU ETS and the principles also included in ICAO’s CORSIA scheme, the calculation of these emissions thresholds should not take into account the possible use of fuels with an emission factor of zero. Therefore, it is appropriate to establish a preliminary emission factor for the purpose of a calculation of these thresholds. (41) In accordance with Directive (EU) 2023/959, the surrendering of allowances under the new emissions trading for buildings, road transport and additional sectors system will start in 2028 for the annual emissions of 2027. However, the monitoring and reporting of emissions under the new emissions trading system will start from 1 January 2025. Clear monitoring and reporting rules for the emissions trading system for buildings, road transport and additional sectors should be laid down sufficiently in advance, in order to facilitate orderly implementation in Member States. In order to reduce administrative burden, to ensure consistency between monitoring methodologies and to build on experiences from the existing emission trading system for stationary installations and aviation, it is appropriate to set up the relevant rules for the new system. (42) In order to ensure a robust level of monitoring accuracy and to minimise the administrative burden for the regulated entities and competent authorities, the scope factor should be applied after the categorisation of the regulated entity and the fuel streams. This should allow more accurate monitoring and should avoid unnecessary changes to the monitoring plans, which reduce the administrative burden for regulated entities and competent authorities. (43) In order to limit the administrative burden, it is appropriate to provide specific rules for regulated entities with low emissions and give flexibility to the competent authorities in the categorisation of regulated entities. (44) In order to facilitate the implementation of the new measures, it is appropriate to provide a time-bound derogation, before 2027, to the application of the scope factor after the categorisation. It is appropriate for the competent authorities to be able to qualify regulated entity as regulated entities with low emissions, or to allow the regulated entity to classify itself and each fuel stream, based on the emissions after the application of the scope factor, with the exclusion of CO2 stemming from zero-rated fuels, where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the competent authority that the scope factor applied for the classification will also remain to be representative in the future years. (45) In order to facilitate verification, it is appropriate that stationary installations operators, aircraft operators, shipping companies and regulated entities submit the information on fuels used for activities referred to in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC together with the annual emissions report. No separate report should be required on the amounts of fuels acquired and used. Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 should therefore be amended accordingly. (46) In order to facilitate the orderly and coherent submission of the monitoring plan for regulated entities to the competent authorities, and considering the provisions that have already been adopted in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/2122 (9) of 17 October 2023, amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066, all provisions contained in this Regulation relating to the new emissions trading for buildings, road transport and additional sectors, should apply from 1 July 2024. (47) Directive 2003/87/EC already provides that the emissions from RFNBOs used for aircraft operators shall be zero-rated before the entry into force of this revision of the Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066. Therefore, in order to ensure consistency, clarity and a level playing field, the rules for monitoring and reporting of emissions from zero-rated RFNBO, RCF and synthetic low-carbon fuels should apply as of 1 January 2024. (48) The measures provided for in this Regulation are in accordance with the opinion of the Climate Change Committee, HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 is amended as follows: (1) Articles 1 and 2 are replaced by the following: ‘Article 1 This Regulation lays down rules for the following: Article 2 This Regulation shall apply to the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions specified in relation to the activities listed in Annex I and III to Directive 2003/87/EC, to activity data from stationary installations, to aviation activities, including non-CO2 aviation effects, and to released fuel amounts from activities referred to in Annex III to that Directive. It shall apply to the following: The monitoring and reporting of non-CO2 aviation effects from 2025 shall cover all non-CO2 effects from aviation activities listed in Annex I to the Directive involving an aerodrome located in the EEA. However, in respect of the monitoring and reporting of non-CO2 aviation effects taking place in 2025 and 2026, such reporting shall only be required in respect of routes involving two aerodromes located in the EEA, and routes from an aerodrome located in the EEA departing to Switzerland or to the United Kingdom. In respect of 2025 and 2026, the non-CO2 aviation effects taking place from other flights may be reported on a voluntary basis.’ (2) Article 3 is amended as follows: (3) Article 4 is replaced by the following: ‘Article 4 Operators and aircraft operators shall carry out their obligations related to the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions and non-CO2 aviation effects under Directive 2003/87/EC in accordance with the principles laid down in Articles 5 to 9 of this Regulation.’ (4) in Article 5, the first subparagraph is replaced by the following: ‘Monitoring and reporting shall be complete and cover all process and combustion emissions from all emission sources and source streams belonging to activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC and other relevant activities included pursuant to Article 24 of that Directive, as well as associated activities included in the boundaries of the installation, and of all greenhouse gases specified in relation to those activities, while avoiding double-counting.’; (5) in Article 6, paragraph 3 is inserted: ‘3. Aircraft operators shall obtain, record, compile, analyse and document monitoring data, including assumptions, references, activity data and calculation factors, in a transparent manner that enables the reproduction of the determination of non-CO2 aviation effects per flight by the verifier and the competent authority.’ (6) Article 8 is replaced by the following: ‘Article 8 Operators and aircraft operators shall enable reasonable assurance of the integrity of emission and non-CO2 aviation effects data to be reported. They shall determine emissions and non-CO2 aviation effects using the appropriate monitoring methodologies set out in this Regulation. Reported emissions and non-CO2 aviation effects data and related disclosures shall be free from material misstatement as defined in Article 3(6) of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2067 (*1), avoid bias in the selection and presentation of information, and provide a credible and balanced account of an installation’s or aircraft operator’s emissions and non-CO2 aviation effects. In selecting a monitoring methodology, the improvements from greater accuracy shall be balanced against additional costs. Monitoring and reporting shall aim for the highest achievable accuracy, unless this is technically not feasible or incurs unreasonable costs. (*1) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2067 of 19 December 2018 on the verification of data and on the accreditation of verifiers pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 334, 31.12.2018, p. 94, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2018/2067/oj).’;" (7) in Article 11(1), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following: ‘1. Each operator or aircraft operator shall monitor greenhouse gas emissions, and non-CO2 aviation effects, on the basis of a monitoring plan approved by the competent authority in accordance with Article 12 of this Regulation, taking into account the nature and functioning of the installation or aviation activity to which it applies.’ (8) in Article 14(2), the following point (aa) is inserted: (9) Article 15(4) is amended as follows: (10) in Article 18(2), second subparagraph, Article 19(2), points (a), (b) and (c), Article 19(5), Article 38(1) and Article 47(2), points (a) and (b), the term “biomass” is replaced by “zero-rated carbon”. (11) in Article 19, paragraph 6 is deleted. (12) Article 24 is amended as follows: (13) Article 25 is amended as follows: (14) Article 30 is amended as follows: (15) in Article 37(2), the last subparagraph is replaced by the following: ‘Where mixed fuels are used, the operator shall provide evidence that application of points (a) or (b) of the first subparagraph does not lead to an underestimation of emissions.’; (16) in Section 2, the title of subsection 5 is replaced by the following: ‘ Treatment of biomass, synthetic low-carbon fuels, RFNBO and RCF ’; (17) Article 38 is amended as follows: (18) Article 39 is amended as follows: (19) the following Article 39a is inserted: ‘Article 39a Determination of RFNBO or RCF or synthetic low-carbon fraction and zero-rated RFNBO or RCF or synthetic low-carbon fraction 1. For fuels or materials containing RFNBOs, RCFs or synthetic low-carbon fuels for which the operator cannot determine the RFNBO or RCF fraction or synthetic low-carbon fraction in accordance with paragraph 2, the operator shall assume the absence of RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel and apply a default RFNBO or RCF fraction or synthetic low-carbon fraction of 0 %. 2. The operator shall determine the following calculation factors relating to the composition of fuels based on the mass balance pursuant to Article 30(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001: By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, if the operator does not want to make use of zero-rating, for the RFNBO or RCF fraction or the synthetic low-carbon fraction other approaches may be used such as a material balance of the blending or production process from which the fuel or material is obtained. 3. The carbon content of fuels qualifying as RFNBOs or RCFs under Directive (EU) 2018/2001 that comply with the greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29a of that Directive, shall be considered zero-rated. The compliance with the criteria laid down in Article 29a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 is to be assessed in accordance with Articles 30 and 31(1) of that Directive. The criteria may also be considered complied with if the operator provides evidence for a purchase of a quantity of RFNBOs or RCFs connected to the cancellation of the respective quantity in the Union Database set up pursuant to Article 31a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, or a national database set up by the Member States in accordance with Article 31a(5) of that Directive. In case of subsequent non-compliance regarding the proof of sustainability of the quantities cancelled in the aforementioned databases, the Competent Authority shall correct the verified emissions accordingly. Where the RFNBO or RCF does not comply with the criteria referred to in the first subparagraph, its carbon content shall be considered as fossil carbon. 4. Synthetic low-carbon fuels shall be zero-rated when their carbon content has been subject to the prior surrendering of allowances under Directive 2003/87/EC, unless that captured carbon is zero-rated carbon as defined in Article 3(38f) of this Regulation. The compliance with the criteria laid down in Article 29a(3) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 is to be assessed in accordance with Articles 30 and 31(1) of that Directive. The criteria may also be considered complied with if the operator provides evidence for a purchase of a quantity of synthetic low-carbon fuels connected to the cancellation of the respective quantity in the Union Database set up pursuant to Article 31a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, or a national database set up by the Member State in accordance with Article 31a(5) of that Directive. In case of subsequent non-compliance regarding the proof of sustainability of the quantities cancelled in the aforementioned databases, the Competent Authority shall correct the verified emissions accordingly. In any other cases, the carbon content of synthetic low-carbon fuels shall be considered as fossil carbon. 5. The operator may determine the RFNBO or RCF fraction and identical zero-rated RFNBO or RCF fraction of natural gas where such fractions have been injected into a natural gas grid using purchase records of RFNBO or RCF of equivalent energy content, provided that the operator provides evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority that: Compliance with this paragraph may be considered demonstrated if the operator provides evidence for a purchase of a quantity of gaseous RFNBO or RCF connected to the cancellation of the respective quantity in the Union Database set up pursuant to Article 31a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, or a national database set up by the Member States in accordance with Article 31a(5) of that Directive. In case of subsequent non-compliance regarding the proof of sustainability of the quantities cancelled in the aforementioned databases, the competent authority shall correct the verified emissions accordingly.’ (20) Article 43 is amended as follows: (21) in Article 44(1), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following: ‘1. The operator shall calculate hourly averages for each parameter, including concentrations and flow, relevant for determining emissions or amounts of CO2 transferred, using a measurement-based methodology by using all data points available for that specific hour.’ (22) in Article 46 and in Annex I, Section 1, points (7)(a), (b) and (c), the term “transport network” is replaced by “CO2 transport infrastructure”. (23) in Article 47(2), the last subparagraph is deleted. (24) Article 48 is amended as follows: (25) Article 49 is amended as follows: (26) the following Article 49a is inserted: ‘Article 49a Emissions permanently chemically bound in a product 1. The operator shall subtract from the emissions of the installation any amount of CO2 originating from non-zero-rated carbon in activities covered by Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC that is not emitted from the installation, but permanently chemically bound in a product listed in the Delegated Regulation adopted pursuant to Article 12(3b) of Directive 2003/87/EC. In the case of CO2 resulting from materials or fuels containing a fraction of zero-rated carbon, the operator shall only subtract from the emissions of the installation the quantity of CO2 permanently chemically bound in a product listed in the Delegated Regulation adopted pursuant to Article 12(3b) of Directive 2003/87/EC proportional to the fraction of carbon that does not originate from zero-rated carbon. 2. For the determination of the quantity of CO2 bound in a product meeting the specifications set out in paragraph 1, the operator shall either apply the standard methodology in accordance with Sections 2 and 4 of Annex II to this Regulation, or apply a mass balance in accordance with Article 25 of this Regulation using the fuels and materials entering and leaving the process in which the CO2 is chemically bound as the relevant source streams for this calculation, while taking into account any combustion emissions related to the process. To this end, the highest tier as defined in Annex II to this Regulation shall be applied as specified in the same Annex for the activity the CO2 arises from. However, the operator may apply the next lower tier provided that the operator demonstrates to the satisfaction of the competent authority that applying the highest tier as defined in Annex II to this Regulation is technically not feasible or incurs unreasonable costs.’ (27) the title to Chapter IV is replaced by the following: ‘ MONITORING OF EMISSIONS AND NON-CO2 EFFECTS FROM AVIATION ’; (28) Article 51 is amended as follows: (29) In Article 52(1), the first two subparagraphs are replaced by the following: ‘1. At the latest four months before an aircraft operator commences aviation activities covered by Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC, it shall submit to the competent authority a monitoring plan for the monitoring and reporting of emissions and non-CO2 aviation effects in accordance with Article 12 of this Regulation. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, an aircraft operator that performs an aviation activity covered by Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC, or monitors and reports non-CO2 aviation effects, for the first time that could not be foreseen four months in advance of the activity shall submit a monitoring plan to the competent authority without undue delay, but no later than six weeks after performance of that activity. The aircraft operator shall provide adequate justification to the competent authority why a monitoring plan could not be submitted four months in advance of the activity.’ (30) Article 53 is amended as follows: (31) the following Article 53a is inserted: ‘Article 53a Reporting rules for the use of alternative aviation fuels 1. The aircraft operator shall monitor the amount of alternative aviation fuels used and report that amount as attributed to each flight or aerodrome pair. 2. Where the alternative aviation fuels are delivered to the aircraft in physically identifiable batches, the aircraft operator shall provide evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority that the alternative aviation fuel is attributed to the flight immediately following the fuel uplift of that flight. Where several subsequent flights are carried out without fuel uplift between these flights, the aircraft operator shall split the amount of the alternative fuel and assign it to these flights proportionally to the emissions from those flights calculated using the preliminary emission factor. 3. Where alternative aviation fuels cannot be physically attributed at an aerodrome to a specific flight, the aircraft operator shall attribute the fuel to its flights for which allowances have to be surrendered in accordance with Article 12(3) of Directive 2003/87/EC proportionally to the emissions from those flights departing from that aerodrome calculated using the preliminary emission factor. In this regard, the aircraft operator must provide evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority that the alternative aviation fuel was delivered to the fuelling system of the departure aerodrome in the reporting period, or 3 months before the start, or 3 months after the end, of that reporting period. 4. For the purpose of paragraphs 2 and 3, the aircraft operator shall provide evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority that: For the purpose of points (i) to (iii), any fuel remaining in tanks after a flight and before an uplift is assumed to be 100 % fossil fuel. For the purpose of demonstrating compliance with the requirements referred to under point (iv), the aircraft operator may use the data recorded in the Union database set up in accordance with Article 31a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 or a national database set up by the Member State in accordance with Article 31a(5) of that Directive.’ (32) Articles 54 and 54a are replaced by the following: ‘Article 54 Determining the biomass fraction for biofuels 1. The aircraft operator shall determine the biomass fraction of mixed aviation fuels containing biofuels. The aircraft operator may either assume the absence of biofuel and apply a default fossil fraction of 100 % or determine a biofuel fraction in accordance with paragraphs 2 or 3. The aircraft operator shall use a default value of 100 % biomass fraction for neat biofuels. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the aircraft operator using mixed aviation fuels containing biofuels may choose to monitor the biofuel content and fossil aviation fuel content as separate source streams if the evidence provided by the fuel suppliers allows such approach. 2. Where biofuels are physically mixed with fossil fuels and delivered to the aircraft in physically identifiable batches, the aircraft operator may carry out analyses in accordance with Articles 32 to 35 to determine the biomass fraction, on the basis of a relevant standard and the analytical methods set out in those Articles, provided that the use of that standard and those analytical methods is approved by the competent authority. Where the aircraft operator provides evidence to the competent authority that such analyses would incur unreasonable costs or are technically not feasible, the aircraft operator may base the estimation of the biofuel content on a material balance of blending fossil fuels and biofuels purchased. If the biomass fraction was determined using the mass balance pursuant to Article 30(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, no evidence for unreasonable costs or technical feasibility shall be required. 3. Where purchased biofuel batches are not physically delivered to a specific aircraft, the aircraft operator shall not use analyses to determine the biomass fraction of the fuels used. The aircraft operator may determine the biomass fraction using purchase records of biofuel of equivalent energy content. Article 54a Specific provisions for eligible aviation fuels 1. For the purpose of Article 3c(6) of Directive 2003/87/EC, the commercial aircraft operator shall establish, document, implement and maintain a written procedure in order to monitor any amounts of neat eligible aviation fuel (in tonnes) used for subsonic flights, and shall report the amounts of eligible aviation fuels claimed as a separate memo-item in its annual emission report. 2. For the purpose of paragraph 1, the aircraft operator shall ensure that any amount of eligible aviation fuel claimed is certified in accordance with Article 30 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 or another certification accepted under Regulation 2023/2405. The competent authority may allow the aircraft operator to use the data recorded in the Union database set up in accordance with Article 31a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 or a national database set up by the Member State in accordance with Article 31a(5) of that Directive. In case of subsequent non-compliance regarding the proof of sustainability of the quantities cancelled in the aforementioned databases, the Competent Authority shall correct the verified amounts of neat eligible aviation fuels accordingly. 3. For mixed aviation fuels, the aircraft operator may either assume the absence of eligible aviation fuel and apply a default fossil fraction of 100 % or determine the amount of neat eligible aviation fuel in accordance with paragraph 3a. 3a. The aircraft operator shall determine the amount of neat eligible aviation fuel as a sum of neat alternative fuels eligible under Article 3c(6) of Directive 2003/87/EC as determined in accordance with Article 53(1) of this Regulation. The neat eligible fuels shall be attributed to each flight or aerodrome pair in accordance with paragraphs 4 or 5. 4. Where eligible aviation fuels are delivered to the aircraft in physically identifiable batches, the aircraft operator shall provide evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority that the eligible aviation fuel is attributed to the flight immediately following the fuel uplift of that flight. Where several subsequent flights are carried out without fuel uplift between these flights, the aircraft operator shall split the amount of the eligible aviation fuels and assign it to these flights proportionally to the emissions from those flights calculated using the preliminary emission factor. 5. Where eligible aviation fuels cannot be physically attributed at an aerodrome to a specific flight, the aircraft operator shall attribute the fuel to its flights for which allowances have to be surrendered in accordance with Article 12(3) of Directive 2003/87/EC and to its flights covered by Article 3c(8) of that Directive proportionally to the emissions from those flights departing from that aerodrome calculated using the preliminary emission factor. For that purpose, the aircraft operator must provide evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority that the eligible aviation fuel was delivered to the fuelling system of the departure aerodrome in the reporting period, or 3 months before the start, or 3 months after the end, of that reporting period. 6. For the purpose of paragraphs 4 and 5, the aircraft operator shall provide evidence to the satisfaction of the competent authority that: For the purpose of points (a), (b) and (c), any fuel remaining in tanks after a flight and before an uplift is assumed to be 100 % not eligible fuel. For the purpose of demonstrating compliance with the requirements referred to under point (d), the aircraft operator may use the data recorded in the Union database set up in accordance with Article 31a of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 or a national database set up by the Member State in accordance with Article 31a(5) of that Directive.’ (33) the following Articles 54b and 54c are inserted: ‘Article 54b Determining the RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fraction 1. The aircraft operator shall determine the RFNBO or RCF fraction or synthetic low-carbon fraction of mixed aviation fuels containing RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel. The aircraft operator may either assume the absence of RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel and apply a default fossil fraction of 100 %, or determine a RFNBO or RCF fraction or synthetic low-carbon fraction in accordance with paragraphs 2 or 3. The aircraft operator shall use a default value of 100 % RFNBO or RCF fraction, or 100 % synthetic low-carbon fraction, as applicable, for neat RFNBO or RCF or neat synthetic low-carbon fuel. By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the aircraft operator using mixed aviation fuels containing RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel, may choose to monitor the RFNBO or RCF content or synthetic low-carbon content and other fossil aviation fuel content, as separate source streams if the evidence provided by the fuel suppliers allows such approach. 2. Where RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel are physically mixed with fossil fuels and delivered to the aircraft in physically identifiable batches, the aircraft operator shall base the estimation of the RFNBO or RCF content or synthetic low-carbon content on a mass balance pursuant to Article 30(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, reflecting the blending of fossil fuels and RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel purchased. 3. Where purchased RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel batches are not physically delivered to a specific aircraft, the aircraft operator may determine the RFNBO or RCF fraction or synthetic low-carbon fraction using purchase records of RFNBO, RCF or synthetic low-carbon fuel of equivalent energy content. Article 54c Conditions for zero-rating biofuels, RFNBO, RCF and synthetic low-carbon fuels by aircraft operators 1. The aircraft operator may count the biomass fraction of a mixed aviation fuel towards the zero-rated biomass fraction only to the extent that the biofuel content complies with the criteria set out in Article 38(5). 2. The aircraft operator may count the RFNBO or RCF fraction of a mixed aviation fuel towards the zero-rated RFNBO or RCF fraction only to the extent that the RFNBO or RCF content complies with the criteria set out in Article 39a(3). 3. The aircraft operator may count the synthetic low-carbon fraction of a mixed aviation fuel towards the zero–rated synthetic low-carbon fraction only to the extent that the synthetic low-carbon content complies with the criteria set out in Article 39a(4). 4. The aircraft operator may claim zero-rated biofuels, zero-rated RFNBO or RCF and zero-rated synthetic low-carbon fuels only to the extent these zero-rated fuels comply with the maximum amount of fuel use determined in accordance with Article 53a of this Regulation, for flights for which allowances have to be surrendered in accordance with Article 12(3) of Directive 2003/87/EC.’ (34) in Article 55(2), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following: ‘2. By way of derogation from Article 53, small emitters and aircraft operators having total annual emissions lower than 3 000 tonnes of CO2 from flights other than those referred to in Article 28a(1), point (a), and Article 3c(8) of Directive 2003/87/EC may estimate the fuel consumption based on distance per aerodrome pair using tools implemented by Eurocontrol or another relevant organisation, which can process all relevant air traffic information and avoid any underestimations of emissions.’ (35) the following Articles 56a and 56b are inserted: ‘Article 56a Calculation of CO2 equivalent for non-CO2 aviation effects 1. Each aircraft operator shall monitor the non-CO2 aviation effects from its activities performed by aeroplanes equipped with jet engines in CO2 equivalent (CO2(e)) per flight. 2. The aircraft operator shall calculate the CO2(e) per flight using the GWP metric, in particular GWP20, GWP50 and GWP100, resulting in CO2(e) values for three-time horizons (20, 50, and 100 years) for each of the monitored flights. 3. The aircraft operator shall use efficacy as defined in this Regulation and in NEATS, to refine the GWP as referred to in paragraph 2 for calculating the CO2(e) per flight unless the aircraft operator provides evidence to the competent authority that it is not possible to use efficacy. 4. To calculate CO2(e) per flight each aircraft operator shall apply a CO2(e) calculation approach covering the following elements: Method C and method D shall be based on input data from the modules referred to in point (a) of this paragraph, data from the aircraft operator and relevant weather data from the aircraft operator or third party-sources. 5. Each aircraft operator shall use Method C to calculate CO2(e) per flight. 6. By way of derogation from paragraph 5, small emitters, as defined in Article 55(1), may use Method D. 7. To apply the CO2(e) calculation models to their flights, aircraft operators shall meet all the following conditions, either using NEATS, pursuant to Annex IIIa, Section 2, own and third-party IT tools, or a combination of NEATS and these tools: 8. Where an aircraft operator plans to use tools referred to in paragraph 7, other than the fuel burn module, the aircraft operator shall first submit the technical specifications of the tools to the Commission. The Commission shall assess the specifications of the tools and, where these tools comply with the requirements in this Regulation, shall approve the tools. Once approved, the tools technical specifications and workflow shall be further described by the aircraft operator in the monitoring plan. Article 56b Data monitoring 1. The aircraft operator shall monitor the data mentioned in Annex IIIa, Section 4. 2. The data monitored as referred to in paragraph 1 shall be sourced by the aircraft operator, including from flight data recorder equipment of the aircraft, where available. 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, the aircraft operator can choose to rely for the monitoring of some or all of the data, on the following: 4. Where data is missing and the aircraft operator has demonstrated that it is not capable of retrieving that data via NEATS or other methods, the aircraft operator shall use default values as provided in Annex IIIa, Section 5 and Annex IIIb. 5. The aircraft operators shall provide the verifier with access to all data that is necessary for the verification, including confidential data. Upon request of the aircraft operator the competent authority shall treat information provided by the aircraft operator as confidential. 6. Where it is not possible to use NEATS due to its unavailability, the aircraft operator shall monitor at a minimum the flight information and aircraft properties per flight. In such case the CO2(e) calculation per flight shall be performed at a later stage by the aircraft operator, at the latest, once NEATS is made available by the Commission. 7. Where it is not possible to use a common reference NWP model due to its unavailability in NEATS, the aircraft operator, shall, by way of derogation from Article 56a(5), use Method D. Once the common reference NWP model is made available, the aircraft operator shall use the appropriate method in line with Article 56a(5) and (6). 8. NEATS shall be updated as appropriate’ (36) Article 58 is amended as follows: (37) Article 66 is amended as follows: (38) in Article 68, the following paragraphs 5 and 6 are inserted: ‘5. The aircraft operator shall submit to the competent authority under the same conditions as referred to in paragraph 1, a separate report as attachment to the annual emissions report, that covers the annual non-CO2 aviation effects. 6. The separate report referred to in paragraph 5 shall contain at least the information listed in Annex X, Section 2a.’ (39) in Article 69(1), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following: ‘1. Each operator shall regularly check whether the monitoring methodology applied can be improved.’ (40) Article 70 is amended as follows: (41) Article 72(1) is replaced by the following: ‘1. Total annual emissions of each of the greenhouse gases CO2, N2O and PFCs, as well as non-CO2 aviation effects shall be reported as rounded tonnes of CO2 or CO2(e). The total annual emissions of the installation shall be calculated as the sum of the rounded values for CO2, N2O and PFCs.’ (42) Article 75d(3) is amended as follows: (43) Article 75e is amended as follows: (44) The title of subsection 4 is replaced by the following: ‘ ’; (45) Article 75m is amended as follows: (46) Article 75n is amended as follows: (47) Annex I is amended as follows: (48) Annex II is amended as follows: (49) Annex IIa is amended as follows: (50) in Annex III, the title is replaced by the following: ‘ Monitoring methodologies for emissions from aviation (Article 53) ’; (51) the following Annexes IIIa and IIIb are inserted: ‘ANNEX IIIa Monitoring methodologies for non-CO2 aviation effects (Article 56a) 1. DEFINITIONS RELATED TO NON-CO2 AVIATION EFFECTS 2. NON-CO2 AVIATION EFFECTS TRACKING SYSTEM (NEATS) NEATS is provided by the Commission to aircraft operators, to accredited verifiers and to competent authorities for the purpose of facilitating and, to the extent possible, automating monitoring, reporting and verification of non-CO2 aviation effects, in order to minimise any administrative burden. NEATS is aligned with the principles established in Article 75(1) of this Regulation and provides a dedicated and secured user interface per aircraft operator, verifier and competent authority. Monitoring: NEATS streamlines the monitoring process as it incorporates directly, or gives access to, available third-party collected flight trajectories and weather data allowing to minimise monitoring by aircraft operators to aircraft properties, as well as to fuel properties, where needed, as defined in Annex IIIa, Section 1 or to render it fully automatic depending on use of default values. NEATS incorporates the CO2(e) calculation approaches as listed in paragraph 4 of Article 56a of this Regulation and provides a common reference NWP model, where enhanced weather data is needed (Method C). This results into the calculation of CO2(e) per flight as part of the monitored data. Reporting: NEATS streamlines the reporting exercise referred to in Article 68(5) of this Regulation. The tool generates automatically the XML table referred to in Annex X, Section 2a(9) to this Regulation at the end of each reporting year, minimising administrative burden associated with reporting. Verification: NEATS streamlines the verification and cross-checks done respectively by the verifier and the competent authority. It provides the means to verify a CO2(e) per flight, while protecting confidential data. Data storage: NEATS allows to store all the data (from aircraft operators and from third parties), securely encoding and protecting from release confidential data, where such data is uploaded by the aircraft operator on NEATS, as long as it is identified as confidential by the aircraft operator. Transparency: NEATS relies on state-of-art models to calculate the CO2(e) for non-CO2 effects. Aircraft operators may develop their own or use third-party tools, provided they comply with the requirements laid down in this Annex. NEATS shall feed into a public website summarising the non-confidential data and CO2(e) per flight and per aircraft operator. 3. FUEL BURN AND EMISSION ESTIMATION MODULES FOR NON-CO2 AVIATION EFFECTS Fuel burn module: The fuel burn module is based on a kinetic approach to aircraft performance modelling, which enables to accurately predict aircraft trajectories and the associated fuel consumption over the entire operation flight envelope and in all phases of a flight. The model processes the theoretical fundamentals to compute aircraft performance parameters, including information on drag, lift, weight, thrust, fuel consumption, as well as the speeds for the climb, cruise, and descent phases of an aircraft, assuming normal aircraft operations. In addition, aircraft-specific coefficients are key data inputs for the computation of the flight trajectory planning of specific aircraft types. Emission-estimation module: The emission-estimation module enables to compute aircraft engine emissions of NOx, HC, and CO by means of correlation equations without proprietary airplane and engine performance models along with proprietary engine emissions characterisations. This module applies exhaust emission indices (EIs) from the ICAO engine type certification under predefined reference conditions on the ground and estimates the corresponding EIs during flight conditions assuming international standard atmosphere (ISA) conditions using correction factors for differences in the ISA conditions of temperature, pressure and humidity. 4. CO2(e) CALCULATION MODELS FOR NON-CO2 AVIATION EFFECTS General criteria: In the CO2(e) calculation models, the aircraft operator shall consider the climate effects of all non-CO2 agents on a per flight basis including flight trajectories (flight plan and flown flight trajectories), as well as aircraft and flight fuel properties. The emissions from each flight shall be accounted for as pulse emissions. When applying the CO2(e) calculation models, flight trajectory-dependent aircraft emission data shall be used to calculate all the following elements: Administrative and computational efforts shall be kept low to ensure feasibility for all stakeholders. The model(s) shall be transparent and suitable for operational use. Depending on the model, there are two types of requirement lists: Method C: For the weather-based approach, detailed climate effects of all aircraft non-CO2 emissions at a specific location and time shall be considered taking into account current weather information to calculate climate-optimised four-dimensional trajectories for individual flight planning. To allow detailed accounting of the climate effects with regards to current atmospheric conditions, different aircraft, propulsion types, as well as fuel properties shall explicitly be considered in the models. Estimates for the formation, life cycle and contrail climate effects for single flights as well as the residence times for the emitted H2O and NOx and their impact on the atmospheric composition shall be included. For being able to output advanced information for use in daily flight planning, the model(s) shall be computationally efficient. Each aircraft operators shall monitor the following data per flight: Method D: For the location-based simplified approach, the aircraft operator shall use climate response model(s) to estimate the impact of all non-CO2 effects per flight on a climatological basis. The tool(s) shall be used to assess the climate benefit of general routing options, while accounting for general differences in aircraft, propulsion types and fuel properties through their physical parameterisations. The CO2(e) calculated with the location-based simplified approach shall average out any large deviations for individual flights over a longer period of time. The model(s) should ensure reduced efforts in data need, computation, and handling, as compared to the model(s) for the weather-based approach. By way of derogation of Method C, small emitters, as defined in Article 55(1) of this Regulation, may monitor the following data per flight: 5. USE OF DEFAULT VALUES FOR NON-CO2 AVIATION EFFECTS Subject to further scrutiny by the competent authority and the Commission, the use of default values shall always result in higher CO2(e) per flight compared to what can be obtained with monitored data. ANNEX IIIb Conservative default engine identifiers per aircraft type (52) Annex IV is amended as follows: (53) Annex V is amended as follows: (54) in the Table of Annex VII, the following rows are inserted after the second row, heading ‘natural gas’: (55) Annex IX is amended as follows: (56) Annex X is amended as follows: (57) in Annex Xa, the introductory sentence is replaced by the following: ‘Together with the information contained in the annual emission report pursuant to Annex X to this Regulation, the operator shall submit the following information for each purchased fuel as defined in Article 3, point (af) of Directive 2003/87/EC:’; (58) in Annex Xb, the introductory sentence is replaced by the following: ‘Together with the information contained in the annual emission report pursuant to Annex X to this Regulation, the regulated entity shall submit the following information for each purchased fuel as defined in Article 3, point (af), of Directive 2003/87/EC:’ ; Article 2 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. It shall apply from 1 January 2024. However, Article 1, points (2)(m), (42) to (46), (49), (57) and (58) shall apply from 1 July 2024. Article 1, points (3), (5) to (8), (9)(c), (21), (25) to (27), (28)(a), (29), (35), (36), (38), (40), (41), (47)(a) (ii) and (iii), (47)(b)(i) first and fourth dash, (47)(b)(iii), (48)(a)(ii), (51), (52)(d), (52)(e), (52)(f), (52)(g)(ii), (52)(h), (52)(i), (52)(j), (53), (55)(a)(ii), (55)(a)(iii), (55)(a)(iv), (55)(b)(ii), (56)(a)(vi), (56)(c) shall apply from 1 January 2025. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 23 September 2024. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN (1) OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2003/87/oj. (2) Directive (EU) 2023/959 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 amending Directive 2003/87/EC establishing a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union and Decision (EU) 2015/1814 concerning the establishment and operation of a market stability reserve for the Union greenhouse gas emission trading system (OJ L 130, 16.5.2023, p. 134, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2023/959/oj). (3) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) (OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2021/1119/oj) (4) Directive (EU) 2023/958 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May 2023 amending Directive 2003/87/EC as regards aviation’s contribution to the Union’s economy-wide emission reduction target and the appropriate implementation of a global market-based measure (OJ L 130, 16.5.2023, p. 115, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2023/958/oj). (5) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 of 19 December 2018 on the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and amending Commission Regulation (EU) No 601/2012 (OJ L 334, 31.12.2018, p. 1, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2018/2066/oj). (6) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/2001/oj). (7) Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council, (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2018/1999/oj). (8) Directive (EU) 2023/2413 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 October 2023 amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and Directive 98/70/EC as regards the promotion of energy from renewable sources, and repealing Council Directive (EU) 2015/652, (OJ L, 2023/2413, 31.10.2023, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2023/2413/oj). (9) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/2122 of 17 October 2023 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2066 as regards updating the monitoring and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L, 2023/2122, 18.10.2023, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2023/2122/oj). ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_impl/2024/2493/oj ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)