All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32009A0610(01) Commission Opinion of 9 June 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the 2nd decommissioning phase of the Bohunice A-1 Nuclear Power Station, located in the Slovak Republic, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 9 June 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the 2nd decommissioning phase of the Bohunice A-1 Nuclear Power Station, located in the Slovak Republic, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 9 June 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the 2nd decommissioning phase of the Bohunice A-1 Nuclear Power Station, located in the Slovak Republic, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 131, 10.6.2009, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 10.6.2009 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 131/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 9 June 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the 2nd decommissioning phase of the Bohunice A-1 Nuclear Power Station, located in the Slovak Republic, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the Slovak text is authentic) 2009/C 131/01 On 17 September 2008, the European Commission received from the Slovak Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the 2nd decommissioning phase of the Bohunice A-1 Nuclear Power Station. On the basis of these data and additional information requested by the Commission on 16 October 2008 and on 28 November 2008, information that was provided by the Slovak Government on 4 December 2008 and on 25 February 2009, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the plant and the nearest point on the territory of another Member State, in this case the Czech Republic, is approximately 38 km. The Austrian and Hungarian borders are at distances of 55 km and 62 km respectively. 2. Under normal operating conditions, the discharges of liquid and gaseous effluents will not cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in another Member State. 3. Low and intermediate level solid radioactive waste will be temporarily stored on-site before being transferred to a disposal facility authorised by the Slovak Government. High-level solid radioactive waste will be stored on-site until a national repository becomes available. 4. Non-radioactive solid waste or residual materials in compliance with clearance levels will be released from regulatory control for disposal as conventional waste or for reuse or recycling. The Commission recommends the Slovak authorities to review the activity levels for release of such materials to the environment in the light of Community guidance, so as to ensure that the criteria for exemption laid down in Directive 96/29/Euratom are complied with. 5. In the case of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents that may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in another Member State will not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the 2nd decommissioning phase of the Bohunice A-1 nuclear power plant in the Slovak Republic, is not liable to result in radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.