All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32009A0428(01) Commission Opinion of 27 April 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Wylfa Nuclear Power Station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 27 April 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Wylfa Nuclear Power Station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 27 April 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Wylfa Nuclear Power Station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 97, 28.4.2009, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) 28.4.2009 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 97/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 27 April 2009 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Wylfa Nuclear Power Station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) 2009/C 97/01 On 20 November 2008, the European Commission received from the British Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Wylfa Nuclear Power Station. On the basis of these data, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the power station and the nearest border with another Member State, in this case Ireland, is 110 km. France and Belgium are the next nearest Member States, their borders being located at 450 km and 540 km respectively, 2. During normal decommissioning operations, discharges of liquid and gaseous effluents will not cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in another Member State, 3. Irradiated fuel elements and solid low level radioactive waste are stored at the site before being transported off-site for reprocessing respectively disposal to licensed facilities within the United Kingdom. Solid intermediate level radioactive waste will be stored on-site awaiting government decisions regarding the choice of a long term repository solution. Non-radioactive solid waste or residual materials which are released from regulatory control will be released for disposal as conventional waste or for reuse or recycling, in compliance with the criteria laid down in the Basic Safety Standards (Council Directive 96/29/Euratom), 4. In the case of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents that may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in another Member State will not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form arising from the decommissioning of the Wylfa Nuclear Power Station in the United Kingdom, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.