All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32021D1137 Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1137 of 30 June 2021 on the request for registration of the European citizens’ initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’, pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/788 of the European Parliament and of the Council (notified under document C(2021) 4951) (Only the English text is authentic) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1137 of 30 June 2021 on the request for registration of the European citizens’ initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’, pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/788 of the European Parliament and of the Council (notified under document C(2021) 4951) (Only the English text is authentic) Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/1137 of 30 June 2021 on the request for registration of the European citizens’ initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’, pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/788 of the European Parliament and of the Council (notified under document C(2021) 4951) (Only the English text is authentic) C/2021/4951 OJ L 246, 12.7.2021, pp. 4–5 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 12.7.2021 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 246/4 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2021/1137 of 30 June 2021 on the request for registration of the European citizens’ initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’, pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/788 of the European Parliament and of the Council (notified under document C(2021) 4951) (Only the English text is authentic) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2019/788 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on the European citizens’ initiative (1), and in particular Article 6(2) and (3) thereof, Whereas: (1) A request for registration of a European citizens’ initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’ was submitted to the Commission on 13 May 2021. (2) The objectives of the initiative are expressed as follows: ‘We are a citizens’ movement driven by young people from all over Europe who want to take concrete action for our environment! In view of the ambitions of the Green Deal for Europe and the Paris Agreement, we call on the European Commission to impose a reliable "European EcoScore". It consists of a label providing European consumers with transparent information about the environmental impact of products manufactured or sold on the European Union market. This compulsory and clearly visible indication on the packaging would provide simple and reliable information on the environmental impact of the product according to the letter selected (“A” = very environmentally friendly, while "F" = very harmful to the environment).’ (3) The initiative lists the following specific objectives: ‘[1] to enable European consumers to make informed choices that take into account the environmental impact of the products on offer, based on a clear and reliable indication; [2] to encourage professionals to reduce the environmental impact of their products while highlighting products that are already environmentally friendly; [3] to offer a uniform label based on a standardised calculation for the whole European territory, avoiding confusion for the consumer facing the multiplication of environmental labels.’ (4) An annex provides further details on the subject matter, objectives and background to the initiative. The organisers applaud the fact that the Union is already taking pro-active action to combat climate change. They claim that there is an increasing demand from consumers for clear and transparent information about the products they buy. They refer to the success of other similar initiatives and labels that indicate the nutritional quality of food products or report on the environmental impact of products. As those are mainly private initiatives, the organisers state that there is a lack of harmonisation in approach and implementation across the Union. In their view, the proposed European ‘EcoScore’ label should be mandatory, offering a uniform indication based on an identical calculation process for the whole of the Union. The determination of the calculation methods to be used should be based on scientific evidence, with the label easily available to consumers (for example, a barcode on the product that can be scanned). (5) The organisers invite the Commission to propose legislation imposing a uniform label for products manufactured or sold within the Union that provides citizens of the Union with transparent information about the environmental impact of those products. (6) That proposal could be based on Article 114 or Article 192 of the Treaty. Article 114 of the Treaty provides a legal basis for the Commission to propose measures for the approximation of provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States, which have as their object the establishment and functioning of the internal market. Article 192 of the Treaty provides a legal basis for the Commission to propose measures to achieve the objectives on Union policy on the environment, laid down in Article 191 of the Treaty, notably the preservation, protection and improvement of the quality of the environment, the protection of human health, prudent and rational utilisation of natural resources and promotion of measures at international level to deal with regional or worldwide environmental problems, and in particular combating climate change. (7) For those reasons, none of the parts of the initiative manifestly falls outside the framework of the Commission’s powers to submit a proposal for a legal act of the Union for the purpose of implementing the Treaties. (8) This conclusion is without prejudice to the assessment of whether the concrete factual and substantive conditions required for the Commission to act, including the compliance with the principle of proportionality, would be met in this case. (9) The group of organisers has provided appropriate evidence that it fulfils the requirements laid down in Article 5(1) and (2) of Regulation (EU) 2019/788 and has designated the contact persons in accordance with Article 5(3), first subparagraph, of that Regulation. (10) The initiative is not manifestly abusive, frivolous or vexatious, nor is it manifestly contrary to the values of the Union as set out in Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union and rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. (11) The initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’ should therefore be registered, HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The European citizens’ initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’ shall be registered. Article 2 This Decision is addressed to the group of organisers of the European citizens’ initiative entitled ‘European EcoScore’, represented by Mr Antoine THILL and Ms Elsa KRAEMER acting as contact persons. Done at Brussels, 30 June 2021. For the Commission Věra JOUROVÁ Vice-President