All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32024H0605 Commission Recommendation (EU) 2024/605 of 18 December 2023 on the consistency of Latvia’s measures with the Union’s climate-neutrality objective and with ensuring progress on adaptation Commission Recommendation (EU) 2024/605 of 18 December 2023 on the consistency of Latvia’s measures with the Union’s climate-neutrality objective and with ensuring progress on adaptation Commission Recommendation (EU) 2024/605 of 18 December 2023 on the consistency of Latvia’s measures with the Union’s climate-neutrality objective and with ensuring progress on adaptation C/2023/9625 OJ L, 2024/605, 7.3.2024, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reco/2024/605/oj (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) Official Journal EN Series L 2024/605 7.3.2024 COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION (EU) 2024/605 of 18 December 2023 on the consistency of Latvia’s measures with the Union’s climate-neutrality objective and with ensuring progress on adaptation (Only the Latvian text is authentic) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 292 thereof, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (1), and in particular Article 7(2) thereof, Whereas: (1) Pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 (the European Climate Law), the Commission is required to assess the consistency of national measures with the climate-neutrality objective and with ensuring progress on adaptation. The Commission assessed the consistency of Latvia’s measures with these objectives (2). The below recommendations are based on that assessment. Latvia should take due account of the present recommendations and follow up on them in accordance with the European Climate Law. (2) While the Union’s net greenhouse gas emissions (including from land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) and excluding international transport) show a steady downward trend overall, broadly in line with the linear trajectory achieving the Union’s 2030 climate target of -55 % and the Union’s 2050 climate-neutrality objective, the pace of emission reduction needs to accelerate, and action by Member States is essential. Progress across Member States has been mixed, with several sectoral challenges and weaknesses that need to be remedied without further delay. The assessment, based on the available information, shows that progress towards the Union’s climate-neutrality objective appears largely insufficient for Latvia. Reliable long-term strategies are the cornerstone for achieving the economic transformation needed to move towards the Union’s climate-neutrality objective. (3) The first step in strengthening the ambition on adaptation should be adopting an appropriate legal framework for national climate policy that sets up binding, regularly updated adaptation goals to measure overall progress in building resilience. Adaptation policies should focus on areas or sectors particularly vulnerable to climate change, or whose activities are key to the resilience of other sectors, or which have significant importance to the national economy or public health. A priority response is required on impacts and risks that are expected to affect critical infrastructure or systems with long life spans, or that are expected to affect systems irreversibly, taking into account interaction with socioeconomic development or other non-climatic drivers. Monitoring and evaluation of adaptation efforts are necessary for maintaining accountability and improving adaptation policy. (4) Private stakeholders are agents of change by providing information, resources, capacities and funding. The local level has competences which can impact climate resilience more broadly. The preparation and implementation of sub-national adaptation policies are of significant importance, HEREBY RECOMMENDS THAT LATVIA TAKES ACTION TO: Consistency of national measures with the climate-neutrality objective 1. Step up climate mitigation efforts by making tangible progress on the existing and planned policies and consider additional, urgent measures to align the expected greenhouse gas emission reductions and projections with the climate-neutrality objective. 2. In particular, effort should be directed to reverse the recent trend in the LULUCF sector. 3. Update and increase the ambition and quality of the national long-term strategy, including by substantiating Latvia’s emission reductions and enhancement of removals targets in individual sectors with credible policies and measures. Consistency of national measures with ensuring progress on adaptation 4. Complete the establishment of an appropriate legal framework for climate change adaptation policy and action. Ensure that the adaptation priorities, strategies, policies, plans and efforts are commensurate with the predicted future climate vulnerabilities and risks, based on the best available science and on the climate prediction and early warning tools available. Ensure that adaptation policies are monitored and evaluated systemically and regularly and that results are reflected in the ensuing revised policy design and implementation. Assess relevant vulnerabilities and risks related to sea level rise. 5. Involve social partners and private sector stakeholders in policy design, implementation and investments. Document the processes and outcomes of relevant consultations. Establish mechanisms to ensure that sub-national policies are prepared and that they are regularly reviewed and updated. Done at Brussels, 18 December 2023. For the Commission Wopke HOEKSTRA Member of the Commission (2) EU Climate Action Progress Report 2023, COM(2023) 653 final, and Commission Staff Working Document – Assessment of progress on climate adaptation in the individual Member States according to the European Climate Law, SWD(2023) 932. ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reco/2024/605/oj ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)