All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32014A1003(02) Commission Opinion of 2 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the IRAW-CRAM Storage Facility for Radioactive Waste located adjacent to the National Radioactive Waste Repository in Slovakia Commission Opinion of 2 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the IRAW-CRAM Storage Facility for Radioactive Waste located adjacent to the National Radioactive Waste Repository in Slovakia Commission Opinion of 2 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the IRAW-CRAM Storage Facility for Radioactive Waste located adjacent to the National Radioactive Waste Repository in Slovakia OJ C 347, 3.10.2014, p. 3–3 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 3.10.2014 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 347/3 COMMISSION OPINION of 2 October 2014 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the IRAW-CRAM Storage Facility for Radioactive Waste located adjacent to the National Radioactive Waste Repository in Slovakia (Only the Slovak text is authentic) (2014/C 347/02) The assessment below is carried out under the provisions of the Euratom Treaty, without prejudice to any additional assessments to be carried out under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the obligations stemming from it and from secondary legislation (1). On 24 March 2014, the European Commission received from the Slovak Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Mochovce IRAW-CRAM Storage Facility for Radioactive Waste. On the basis of these data and additional information requested by the Commission on 29 April 2014 and provided by the Slovak authorities on 5 June 2014, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the IRAW-CRAM storage facility for radioactive waste and the nearest point of another Member State, in this case Hungary is some 40 km. 2. The facility will not be subjected to a discharge authorisation for liquid and gaseous radioactive effluents. Under normal operating conditions, liquid and gaseous radioactive effluents will not be released and the facility is thus not liable to cause an exposure of the population in another Member State that would be significant from the point of view of health. 3. Secondary solid radioactive waste will be transferred to licensed treatment or disposal facilities located in Slovakia. 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents, that may follow the accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the dose likely to be received by the population in another Member State would not be significant from the point of view of health. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form, arising from the IRAW-CRAM Storage Facility for Radioactive Waste located adjacent to the National Radioactive Waste Repository at Mochovce in Slovakia, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in a radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. Done at Brussels, 2 October 2014. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Vice-President (1) For instance, under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, environmental aspects should be further assessed. Indicatively, the Commission would like to draw attention to the provisions of Directive 2011/92/EU on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment, Directive 2001/42/EC on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment, as well as to the Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora and Directive 2000/60/EC establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy.