All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32007A0710(01) Commission opinion of 9 July 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the NCS radioactive waste storage facility at the Hanau site in Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission opinion of 9 July 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the NCS radioactive waste storage facility at the Hanau site in Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission opinion of 9 July 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the NCS radioactive waste storage facility at the Hanau site in Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 157, 10.7.2007, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 10.7.2007 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 157/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 9 July 2007 concerning the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the NCS radioactive waste storage facility at the Hanau site in Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (only the German text is authentic) (2007/C 157/01) On 18 October 2006, the European Commission received from the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the NCS facility at the site of Hanau. On the basis of these data and the additional information requested by the Commission on 7 December 2006 and provided by the German Government on 31 January 2007, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the plant and the nearest point on the territory of another Member State, in this case France, is approximately 150 km. 2. During normal operation, discharges of liquid and gaseous effluents will not cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in other Member States. 3. Solid radioactive waste from the production operations will be eliminated at an approved site. 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents resulting from an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in other Member States would not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form from the operation of the NCS facility at the Hanau site in the Federal Republic of Germany, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in the radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.