All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32022C1223(01) Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2023 and 2024 2022/C 491/01 Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2023 and 2024 2022/C 491/01 Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2023 and 2024 2022/C 491/01 OJ C 491, 23.12.2022, pp. 1–5 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) 23.12.2022 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 491/1 Joint Declaration of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European Commission EU Legislative Priorities for 2023 and 2024 (2022/C 491/01) Our Union’s resolve and capacity to act are being challenged by Russia’s unprovoked, brutal aggression against Ukraine, marked by shocking violence and mounting evidence of war crimes. The spillover effects of Russia’s assault on the way of life we have long taken for granted means our citizens are feeling less stable today, less secure and less confident in the future. Despite Russia’s efforts to weaken and divide the Union, we remain united, resolute and deeply committed to supporting Ukraine and its people. Our efforts will include military and humanitarian aid, political and financial support, as well as continued access of Ukrainians to EU jobs, housing, education, training and healthcare under the temporary protection mechanism. We will also facilitate Ukraine’s access to the single market and the free roaming area, and support Ukraine’s rehabilitation and reconstruction. To maintain economic pressure and undermine Russia’s military capabilities, we will also ensure the effective and continued implementation of sanctions against Russia. We will support Ukraine and the International Criminal Court in documenting and prosecuting possible war crimes, and we will explore options so that full accountability can be ensured. The consequences of this aggression are also being felt in our immediate neighbourhood, with large numbers of persons being displaced, and globally, with dramatically increased food insecurity. At the moment when we have just begun to recover from the pandemic and are going through the radical transformation to combat other serious challenges such as the climate and nature crises, our citizens are confronted with spiralling electricity prices and rising inflation. We are committed to common EU solutions to tackle this cost-of-living crisis for our citizens and businesses that has been compounded by the war in Ukraine. Following the REPowerEU Plan, the EU swiftly reduced its dependency on Russian energy imports by boosting alternative energy sources, savings and storage. Using our joint market power, accelerating the twin transition in the energy sector and reforming the electricity market design will provide us with structural solutions. In this context, strong priority will be given to ensuring the sustainability of the multiannual financial framework in a new geopolitical and economic situation. We will also work towards introducing sufficient new own resources. We welcome the results of the Conference on the Future of Europe (1), which was an inspiring and successful experiment in deliberative democracy. To respond to citizens’ expectations, the institutions will continue to ensure swift and effective follow-up to the recommendations made by the Conference, each within their own sphere of competence. Many Conference proposals have been reflected in the Commission work programme for 2023 and we jointly commit to giving them close attention. With this Joint Declaration, we highlight the key legislative proposals (2) to which our three institutions will commit their best efforts. Delivery on these priorities will be all the more important in view of the 2024 European elections, when citizens will assess how the EU has responded to its current challenges. This concerns both the legislative proposals already with the co-legislators, and those that the European Commission will have put forward by the end of 2023. The three institutions agree to give the utmost priority in 2023 and until the end of the parliamentary term in 2024 to the following policy objectives: 1. To deliver the European Green Deal with its goal of climate neutrality by 2050 despite adverse geopolitical circumstances, we will work to accelerate the green and just transition as a key part of the solution to energy security and the high energy prices, as well as to food security concerns. We will act to swiftly conclude work on the ‘Fit for 55’ package to achieve our 2030 reduction targets, coupled with an enhanced ambition to achieve the REPowerEU objectives of phasing out dependence on Russian fossil fuels and boosting renewable energy in Europe. We will prioritise the overhaul of the EU electricity market, the kick-start of the EU hydrogen market and a faster roll-out of renewables. We will give attention to restoring and protecting biodiversity; soil health; curbing water, air and microplastics pollution, and tackling environmental crime. Aiming to build a circular economy, we will strive to deliver on the right to repair, sustainable product design, tackling packaging waste, and making sure consumers have the right information about green claims. We will act on further climate measures, notably on transport emissions and pollution, greening freight transport as well as on carbon removal certification. We will give priority to reducing waste and its environmental impact. 2. To achieve the digital transition and enhance the EU’s resilience, we will focus on reducing the resource use and the environmental and climate impact, enhancing Europe’s lead in pioneering technologies, our security of supply, competitiveness and resilience, supporting the relevant digital skills, and pursuing a human-centric approach. We will focus our attention on pending proposals on artificial intelligence, data access and use, cyber resilience and cybersecurity, and the reinforcement of our defence industry. To ensure an adequate and diversified supply for the twin transition, we will prioritise measures on critical raw materials and rare earths, as well as semiconductors. To encourage innovative technologies, we will act on the regulatory framework for hyperloop, the new radio spectrum policy programme and secure space-based communication. We will act on the common European mobility data space. We will strengthen the single market, one of our major assets, including by working on the Single Market Emergency Instrument and on improving conditions in platform work. We will also work towards new efficient patent rules and support SMEs in difficult times, including through revised rules on late payments. 3. On the economy that works for people, we will increase efforts to boost competitiveness, secure growth and create employment opportunities for European citizens. We will focus in particular on young people and the development of relevant skills. We will remove the obstacles and burdens holding back our small companies. We will act to put forward an SME Relief package and to support and relieve businesses, including through easier access to capital and data, fast and innovative payment solutions, and streamlined rules on insolvency. We will continue prioritising the implementation of the European Pillar of Social Rights and the Porto Summit declaration, and take further measures to ensure that the social dimension is taken into consideration in all our actions, including the right to disconnect and the elimination of the gender pay gap. We will work towards a swift agreement on the coordination of social security systems to support labour mobility, as well as on deposit insurance, sustainable corporate governance, anti-money laundering, and on a ban on products made with forced labour. We will give due attention to the review of the EU’s economic governance to ensure it functions to support the EU and Member State economies and work to strengthen the capital markets and the role of the euro, including the digital euro, and complete the banking union. We will endeavour to achieve progress on the global tax reform. To support sustainable development globally, we will work towards swift agreement on the generalised scheme of tariff preferences, and a reformed customs code. 4. For a stronger Europe in the world, we must demonstrate our unwavering support to Ukraine and stand firm in our core principles of multilateralism and rules-based order, as well as in our commitment to development and humanitarian aid. In line with the Strategic Compass, we will work further to boost our shared defence and security capabilities and our resilience, including against foreign information manipulation and interference. We will act to set up a framework toolbox to combat corruption. We will continue our cooperation with candidate countries in the Western Balkans, along with Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, in view of their future accession to the Union. To strengthen the EU’s resilience and diversify our supply chains, we will push for full ratification of trade agreements and strengthen our engagement with like-minded partners and allies. 5. To promote our European way of life, we will give absolute priority to finalising the reform of the migration and asylum legislative framework before the end of the legislative term, based on the joint roadmap on the pact on migration and asylum. We will also aim to reach swift progress on the legal migration package, and the revised Schengen Borders Code. As part of the proposed European Year of Skills, we aim to work as a priority on the upcoming proposal on recognising third country qualifications as well as supporting learning mobility within the EU. We will act to conclude work on the digitalisation of visa procedures and travel documents, information exchange between national law enforcement authorities, anti-trafficking measures, the obligation to communicate advance passenger information, freezing and confiscating the proceeds of crime, as well as combatting child sexual abuse. To continue building the European Health Union, we will give priority to the swift adoption and implementation of the European Health Data Space. We will also pay special attention to addressing the issue of mental health and cancer prevention. 6. To protect our democracy and values from unprecedented threats, we will use all tools at our disposal to strengthen and defend the rule of law, equality and anti-discrimination, as well as media freedom and pluralism within the Union. We will work swiftly to conclude work on the transparency and targeting of political advertising, the statute and funding of European political parties and foundations and the electoral rights of mobile Europeans in time for the next European Parliament elections. We will pay particular attention to further initiatives to bolster democratic resilience from within, and defend our democratic system from external interests, disinformation and foreign interference, together with strengthening our anti-corruption legislative framework. We will give priority to pay transparency as well as to combatting violence against women and domestic violence. We will act to safeguard the rights of persons with disabilities and promote intergenerational solidarity. Furthermore, beyond work falling under the ordinary legislative procedure, we declare our commitment: — to continue to stand by Ukraine and to tackle the impact of the Russian aggression on our citizens and businesses; — to the continued implementation of national recovery and resilience plans; — as we mark the 30th anniversary of the single market in 2023, to work together to deepen it by removing barriers and filling gaps, especially in the services sector, to harness its full power; — in the context of the European Year of Skills, to promote Europe as an attractive place for skilled workers and to facilitate intra-EU mobility of skilled labour and trainees; — to accelerate the implementation of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for sustainable development; — to push for higher ambition and increased action at global level to tackle the interconnected climate and biodiversity crises; — to strengthen our diplomatic outreach to world partners, including via the Global Gateway strategy, whilst promoting high environmental, health, social and human rights standards; — to offer a credible European perspective to Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, alongside the Western Balkans, and to maintain our support for the Eastern Partnership and Southern Neighbourhood; — to prioritise trade agreements with like-minded partners, to reinvigorate relations with Latin America and the Caribbean, and to consolidate a renewed partnership with Africa; — to address the threats emanating from transnational organised crime and terrorist organisations by further pursuing the Security Union Strategy 2020-2025. As Presidents of the European Parliament, the Council and the European Commission, we commit our institutions to work on these shared priorities in 2023 and 2024, guided by the fundamental principles of mutual trust, respect, and a collaborative spirit. Europe’s future lies in its ability to adapt with speed, fortitude and unity. We will work together also to ensure proper implementation and enforcement of existing legislation and will closely monitor the timely and effective implementation of this Joint Declaration. Съставено в Брюксел на петнадесети декември две хиляди двадесет и втора година. Hecho en Bruselas, el quince de diciembre de dos mil veintidós. V Bruselu dne patnáctého prosince dva tisíce dvacet dva. Udfærdiget i Bruxelles den femtende december to tusind og toogtyve. Geschehen zu Brüssel am fünfzehnten Dezember zweitausendzweiundzwanzig. Kahe tuhande kahekümne teise aasta detsembrikuu viieteistkümnendal päeval Brüsselis. Έγινε στις Βρυξέλλες, στις δέκα πέντε Δεκεμβρίου δύο χιλιάδες είκοσι δύο. Done at Brussels on the fifteenth day of December in the year two thousand and twenty two. Fait à Bruxelles, le quinze décembre deux mille vingt-deux. Arna dhéanamh sa Bhruiséil, an cúigiú lá déag de mhí na Nollag sa bhliain dhá mhíle fiche a dó. Sastavljeno u Bruxellesu petnaestog prosinca godine dvije tisuće dvadeset druge. Fatto a Bruxelles, addì quindici dicembre duemilaventidue. Briselē, divi tūkstoši divdesmit otrā gada piecpadsmitajā decembrī. Priimta du tūkstančiai dvidešimt antrų metų gruodžio penkioliktą dieną Briuselyje. Kelt Brüsszelben, a kétezer-huszonkettedik év december havának tizenötödik napján. Magħmul fi Brussell, fil-ħmistax-il jum ta’ Diċembru fis-sena elfejn u tnejn u għoxrin. Gedaan te Brussel, vijftien december tweeduizend tweeëntwintig. Sporządzono w Brukseli dnia piętnastego grudnia roku dwa tysiące dwudziestego drugiego. Feito em Bruxelas, em quinze de dezembro de dois mil e vinte e dois. Întocmit la Bruxelles la cincisprezece decembrie două mii douăzeci și doi. V Bruseli pätnásteho decembra dvetisícdvadsaťdva. V Bruslju, petnajstega decembra dva tisoč dvaindvajset. Tehty Brysselissä viidentenätoista päivänä joulukuuta vuonna kaksituhattakaksikymmentäkaksi. Som skedde i Bryssel den femtonde december år tjugohundratjugotvå. (1) Conference on the Future of Europe – Report on the final outcome, available at https://futureu.europa.eu/en/pages/reporting (2) Under the Ordinary Legislative Procedure.