All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 31984D0132 84/132/EEC: Council Decision of 1 March 1984 on the conclusion of the Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas 84/132/EEC: Council Decision of 1 March 1984 on the conclusion of the Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas 84/132/EEC: Council Decision of 1 March 1984 on the conclusion of the Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas OJ L 68, 10.3.1984, pp. 36–37 (DA, DE, EL, EN, FR, IT, NL) This document has been published in a special edition(s) (ES, PT, CS, ET, LV, LT, HU, MT, PL, SK, SL, BG, RO, HR) In force ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dec/1984/132/oj 10.3.1984 EN FR Official Journal of the European Communities L 68/36 COUNCIL DECISION of 1 March 1984 on the conclusion of the Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas (84/132/EEC) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, and in particular Article 235 thereof, Having regard to the proposal from the Commission, Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament (1), Whereas the action programmes of the European Communities on the environment (2) stress the need to protect and to purify the sea, in order for it to continue to play its part in the preservation and development of species, and to maintain the vital ecological balance; Whereas the second action programme of the European Communities on the environment underlines the urgent need for international solutions to the problem of the development and ecological management of coastal regions; Whereas the third action programme of the European Communities on the environment (3), of which the Council and the representatives of the Governments of the Member States approved the main principles on 7 February 1983, makes particular reference to the need for a rational policy for the protection and management of natural resources; Whereas cooperation with the developing countries, and in particular with the Community's Mediterranean partners, for the purposes of protecting the environment is one of the objectives of the second action programme of the European Communities on the environment; Whereas Article 4 of the Convention on the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution, approved by the Community by Decision 77/585/EEC (4), empowers the contracting parties to adopt Additional Protocols prescribing measures, procedures and standards for the implementation of the said Convention; whereas, pursuant to this Article, the Mediterranean States represented at a conference of plenipotentiaries held in Geneva on 2 and 3 April 1982 signed a Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas; Whereas the Community has also approved, by Decision 75/585/EEC, the Protocol for the prevention of pollution of the Mediterranean Sea by dumping from ships and aircraft, and, by Decision 81/420/EEC (5), the Protocol concerning cooperation in combating pollution of the Mediterranean Sea by oil and other harmful substances in cases of emergency and, by Decision 83/101/EEC (6), the Protocol concerning the protection of the Mediterranean Sea from land-based sources of pollution; Whereas the Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas provides for the possible adoption of measures concerning trade, imports and exports of the fauna and flora protected by it and could, therefore, affect the common commercial policy and the free movement of goods between Member States; Whereas some provisions of the said Protocol could affect Council Directive 76/464/EEC of 4 May 1976 on pollution caused by certain dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment of the Community (7), Council Directive 79/409/EEC of 2 April 1979 on the conservation of wild birds (8), Council Directive 79/923/EEC of 30 October 1979 on the quality required of shellfish waters (9) and Council Regulation (EEC) No 348/81 of 20 January 1981 on common rules for imports of cetacean products (10); Whereas the said Protocol sets out to safeguard the common natural resources of the region, to preserve the diversity of the indigenous species and to protect certain natural habitats by setting up a number of specially protected areas; Whereas most of the signatories to the Convention on the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution and to the annexed Protocols enjoy, within the framework of the Community's overall approach to the Mediterranean, a special relationship with the Community, particularly as regards cooperation; whereas the Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas lays down detailed rules for such cooperation in the sectors which it covers; Whereas the Community signed the said Protocol on 30 March 1983; Whereas the Community will participate in the implementation of the said Protocol by exercising its competence as resulting from the existing common rules as well as those acquired as a result of future acts adopted by the Council, and by using the results of Community actions (research — exchange of information) in the fields concerned; Whereas it appears necessary that the Community should approve the said Protocol in order to attain, in the course of the operation of the common market, one of the objectives set by the Community in the field of the protection of the environment and of the quality of life; whereas, since the Treaty does not provide the specific powers of action required for adopting this Decision, recourse should be had to Article 235 thereof, HAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS: Article 1 The Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas is hereby approved on behalf of the European Economic Community. The text of the Protocol is attached to this Decision. Article 2 The President of the Council shall deposit the acts as provided for in Article 18 of the Protocol referred to in Article 1. Done at Brussels, 1 March 1984. For the Council The President H. BOUCHARDEAU (1) OJ No C 322, 28. 11. 1983, p. 278. (2) OJ No C 112, 20. 12. 1973, p. 1 and OJ No C 139, 13. 6. 1977, p. 1. (3) OJ No C 46, 17. 2. 1983, p. 1. (4) OJ No L 240, 19. 9. 1977, p. 1. (5) OJ No L 162, 19. 6. 1981, p. 4. (6) OJ No L 67, 12. 3. 1983, p. 1. (7) OJ No L 129, 18. 5. 1973, p. 23. (8) OJ No L 103, 25. 4. 1979, p. 1. (9) OJ No L 281, 10. 11. 1979, p. 47. (10) OJ No L 39, 12. 2. 1981, p. 1. PROTOCOL concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas THE CONTRACTING PARTIES TO THIS PROTOCOL, BEING PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution, adopted at Barcelona on 16 February 1976, CONSCIOUS of the danger threatening the environment of the Mediterranean Sea area as a whole, in view of the increasing human activities in the region, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT the special hydrographic and ecological characteristics of the Mediterranean Sea area, STRESSING the importance of protecting and, as appropriate, improving the state of the natural resources and natural sites of the Mediterranean Sea, as well as of their cultural heritage in the region, among other means by the establishment of specially protected areas including marine areas and their environment, DESIROUS of establishing close cooperation among themselves in order to achieve that objective, HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: Article 1 1. The Contracting Parties to this Protocol (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Parties’) shall take all appropriate measures with a view to protecting those marine areas which are important for the safeguard of the natural resources and natural sites of the Mediterranean Sea area, as well as for the safeguard of their cultural heritage in the region. 2. Nothing in this Protocol shall prejudice the codification and development of the law of the sea by the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea convened pursuant to resolution 2750 C (XXV) of the General Assembly of the United Nations, nor the present or future claims and legal views of any State concerning the law of the sea and the nature and extent of coastal and flag State jurisdiction. Article 2 For the purposes of the designation of specially protected areas (hereinafter referred to as ‘protected areas’), the area to which this Protocol applies shall be the Mediterranean Sea area as defined in Article 1 of the Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Convention’); it being understood that, for the purposes of the present Protocol, it shall be limited to the territorial waters of the Parties and may include waters on the landward side of the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured and extending, in the case of watercourses, up to the freshwater limit. It may also include wetlands or coastal areas designated by each of the Parties Article 3 1. The Parties shall, to the extent possible, establish protected areas and shall endeavour to undertake the action necessary in order to protect those areas and, as appropriate, restore them, as rapidly as possible. 2. Such areas shall be established in order to safeguard in particular: (a) (b) sites of particular importance because of their scientific, aesthetic, historical, archaeological, cultural or educational interest. Article 4 The Parties to this Protocol shall, at their first meeting, formulate and adopt, if necessary in cooperation with the competent international organizations, common guidelines and, if needed, standards or criteria dealing in particular with: (a) the selection of protected areas; (b) the establishment of protected areas; (c) the management of protected areas; (d) the notification of information on protected areas. Article 5 The Parties may strengthen the protection of a protected area by establishing, within the area to which this Protocol applies, one or more buffer areas in which activities are less severely restricted while remaining compatible with the purposes of the protected area. Article 6 1. If a Party intends to establish a protected area contiguous to the frontier or to the limits of the zone of national jurisdiction of another Party, the competent authorities of the two Parties shall endeavour to consult each other with a view to reaching agreement on the measures to be taken and shall, among other things, examine the possibility of the establishment by the other Party of a corresponding protected area or the adoption by it of any other appropriate measure. 2. If a Party intends to establish a protected area contiguous to the frontier or to the limits of the zone of national jurisdiction of a State which is not a party to this Protocol, the Party shall endeavour to work together with the competent authorities of that State with a view to holding the consultations referred to in paragraph 1. 3. If contiguous protected areas are established by two Parties, or by one Party and by a State which is not a party to this Protocol, special agreements may provide for the means whereby the consultation or the collaboration contemplated in paragraphs 1 and 2 respectively may take place. 4. If a State which is not a party to this Protocol intends to establish a protected area continguous to the frontier or to the limits of the zone of national jurisdiction of a Party to this Protocol, the latter shall endeavour to work together with that State with a view to holding consultations, and possibly concluding a special agreement as referred to in paragraph 3. Article 7 The Parties, having regard to the objectives pursued and taking into account the characteristics of each protected area, shall, in conformity with the rules of international law, progressively take the measures required, which may include: (a) the organization of a planning and management system; (b) the prohibition of the dumping or discharge of wastes or other matter which may impair the protected area; (c) the regulation of the passage of ships and any stopping or anchoring; (d) the regulation of fishing and hunting and of the capture of animals and harvesting of plants; (e) the prohibition of the destruction of plant life or animals and of the introduction of exotic species; (f) the regulation of any act likely to harm or disturb the fauna or flora, including the introduction of indigenous zoological or botanical species; (g) the regulation of any activity involving the exploration or exploitation of the sea-bed or its subsoil or a modification of the sea-bed profile; (h) the regulation of any activity involving a modification of the profile of the soil or the exploitation of the subsoil of the land part of a marine protected area; (i) the regulation of any archaeological activity and of the removal of any object which may be considered as an archaeological object; (j) the regulation of trade in and import and export of animals, parts of animals, plants, parts of plants and archaeological objects which originate in protected areas and are subject to measures of protection; (k) any other measure aimed at safeguarding ecological and biological processes in protected areas. Article 8 1. The Parties shall give appropriate publicity to the establishment of protected areas, as well as of the areas provided for in Article 5, and to their markings and the regulations applying thereto. 2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be notified to the Organization designated in Article 13 of the Convention (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Organization’) which shall compile and keep up to date a directory of protected areas in the area to which this Protocol applies. The Parties shall supply the Organization with all the information necessary for that purpose. Article 9 1. The Parties shall, in promulgating protective measures, take into account the traditional activities of their local populations. To the fullest extent possible, no exemption which is allowed for this reason shall be such as: (a) to endanger either the maintenance of ecosystems protected under the terms of the present Protocol or the biological processes contributing to the maintenance of those ecosystems; (b) to cause either the extinction of or any substantial reduction in, the number of individuals making up the species or animal and plant populations within the protected ecosystems, or any ecologically connected species or populations, particularly migratory species and rare, endangered or endemic species. 2. Parties which allow exemptions with regard to protective measures or do not apply such measures strictly shall inform the Organization accordingly. Article 10 The Parties shall encourage and develop scientific and technical research on their protected areas and on the ecosystems and archaeological heritage of those areas. Article 11 The Parties shall endeavour to inform the public as widely as possible of the significance and interest of the protected areas and of the scientific knowledge which may be gained from them from the point of view of both nature conservation and archaeology. Such information should have an appropriate place in education programmes concerning the environment and history. The Parties should also endeavour to promote the participation of their public and their nature conservation organizations in appropriate measures which are necessary for the protection of the areas concerned. Article 12 The Parties shall, to the extent possible, establish a cooperation programme to coordinate the establishment, planning, management and conservation of protected areas, with a view to creating a network of protected areas in the Mediterranean region, taking fully into account existing networks, especially that of biosphere reserves of Unesco. There shall be regular exchanges of information concerning the characteristics of the protected areas, the experiences acquired and the problems encountered. Article 13 The Parties shall, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 14, exchange scientific and technical information concerning current or planned research and the results expected. They shall, to the fullest extent possible, coordinate their research. They shall, moreover, endeavour to define jointly or to standardize the scientific methods to be applied in the selection, management and monitoring of protected areas. Article 14 1. In applying the principles of cooperation set forth in Articles 12 and 13, the Parties shall forward to the Organization: (a) comparable information for monitoring the biological development of the Mediterranean environment; (b) reports, publications and information of a scientific, administrative and legal nature, in particular: 2. The Parties shall designate persons responsible for protected areas. Those persons shall meet at least once every two years to discuss matters of joint interest and especially to propose recommendations concerning scientific, administrative and legal information as well as the standardization and processing of data. Article 15 1. The Parties shall, directly or with the assistance of competent regional or other international organizations or bilaterally, cooperate, on the entry into force of this Protocol, in formulating and implementing programmes of mutual assistance and of assistance to those developing countries which express a need for it in the selection, establishment and management of protected areas. 2. The programmes contemplated in paragraph 1 should relate, in particular, to the training of scientific and technical personnel, scientific research, and the acquisition, utilization and production by those countries of appropriate equipment on advantageous terms to be agreed among the Parties concerned. Article 16 Changes in the delimitation or legal status of a protected area or the suppression of all or part of such an area may not take place except under a similar procedure to that followed for its establishment. Article 17 1. The ordinary meetings of the Parties to this Protocol shall be held in conjunction with the ordinary meetings of the Contracting Parties to the Convention held pursuant to Article 14 of the Convention. The Parties may also hold extraordinary meetings in conformity with that Article. 2. It shall be the function of the meetings of the Parties to this Protocol, in particular: (a) to keep under review the implementation of this Protocol; (b) to consider the efficacy of the measures adopted, having regard in particular to the area to which the Protocol applies, and to examine the need for other measures, in particular in the form of annexes, or for envisaging, if necessary, an alteration to that area, in conformity with the provisions of Article 16 of the Convention; (c) to adopt, review and amend as required any Annex to this Protocol; (d) to monitor the establishment and development of the network of protected areas provided by Article 12, and to adopt guidelines to facilitate the establishment and development of that system and to increase cooperation among the Parties; (e) to consider the recommendations made by the meetings of the persons responsible for the protected areas, as provided by Article 14 (2); (f) to consider reports transmitted by the Parties to the Organization under Article 20 of the Convention and any other information which the Parties may transmit to the Organization or to the meeting of the Parties. Article 18 1. The provisions of the Convention relating to any protocol shall apply with respect to this Protocol. 2. The rules of procedure and the financial rules adopted pursuant to Article 18 (2) of the Convention shall apply with respect to this Protocol, unless the Parties to this Protocol agree otherwise. 3. This Protocol shall be open for signature, at Geneva on 3 and 4 April 1982, and at Madrid from 5 April 1982 to 2 April 1983 by any Contracting Party to the Convention and any State invited to the Conference of plenipotentiaries on the Protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas, held at Geneva on 2 and 3 April 1982. It shall also be open for signature from 5 April 1982 to 2 April 1983 by any regional economic grouping of which at least one member is a coastal State of the Mediterranean Sea area and which exercises competence in fields covered by this Protocol. 4. This Protocol shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Government of Spain, which will assume the functions of depositary. 5. As from 3 April 1983, this Protocol shall be open for accession by the Contracting Parties to the Convention and by any State or grouping referred to in paragraph 3. 6. This Protocol shall enter into force on the 30th day following the deposit of at least six instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval of, or accession to, the Protocol. In witness whereof, the undersigned, being duly authorized, have signed this Protocol. Done at Geneva on this third day of April one thousand nine hundred and eighty two in a single copy in the Arabic, English, French and Spanish languages, the four texts being equally authoritative. PROTOCOLE relatif aux aires spécialement protégées de la Méditerranée LES PARTIES CONTRACTANTES AU PRÉSENT PROTOCOLE, ÉTANT PARTIES à la convention pour la protection de la mer Méditerranée contre la pollution, adoptée à Barcelone le 16 février 1976, CONSCIENTES du danger qui menace l'environnement de la zone de la mer Méditerranée dans son ensemble, eu égard au développement des activités humaines dans la région, TENANT COMPTE des caractéristiques hydrographiques et écologiques particulières à la zone de la mer Méditerranée, SOULIGNANT qu'il importe de protéger et, le cas échéant, d'améliorer l'état des ressources naturelles et des sites naturels de la mer Méditerranée, ainsi que l'état de leur patrimoine culturel dans la région, entre autres par la création d'aires spécialement protégées comprenant des aires marines et leur environnement, DÉSIREUSES d'établir une étroite collaboration entre elles en vue de la réalisation de cet objectif, SONT CONVENUES DE CE QUI SUIT: Article premier 1. Les parties contractantes au présent protocole (ci-après dénommées « parties ») prennent toutes les mesures appropriées en vue de protéger les aires marines importantes pour la sauvegarde des ressources naturelles et des sites naturels de la zone de la mer Méditerranée, ainsi que pour la sauvegarde de leur patrimoine culturel dans la région. 2. Aucune disposition du présent protocole ne peut porter atteinte à la codification et à l'élaboration du droit de la mer par la Conférence des Nations unies sur le droit de la mer convoquée en vertu de la résolution 2750 C (XXV) de l'Assemblée générale des Nations unies, ni aux revendications ou positions juridiques présentes ou futures de tout État touchant le droit de la mer et la nature et l'étendue de la juridiction de l'État riverain et de l'État du pavillon. Article 2 Aux fins de la désignation d'aires spécialement protégées (ci-après dénommées « aires protégées »), la zone d'application du présent protocole est la zone de la mer Méditerranée délimitée a l'article 1er de la convention pour la protection de la mer Méditerranée contre la pollution (ci-après dénommée « convention »), étant entendu que, pour les besoins du présent protocole, elle est limitée aux eaux territoriales des parties et peut comprendre les eaux qui sont situées en deçà de la ligne de base à partir de laquelle est mesurée la largeur de la mer territoriale et qui s'étendent, dans le cas des cours d'eau, jusqu'à la limite des eaux douces. Elle peut en outre comprendre des zones humides ou des zones côtières désignées par chacune des parties. Article 3 1. Les parties créent, dans la mesure du possible, des aires protégées et elles s'efforcent de mener les actions nécessaires pour en assurer la protection et, le cas échéant, la restauration, dans les plus brefs délais. 2. Ces aires sont créées dans le but de sauvegarder en particulier: a) b) des sites présentant une importance particulière en raison de leur intérêt scientifique, esthétique, historique, archéologique, culturel ou éducatif. Article 4 Les parties au présent protocole élaborent et adoptent lors de leur première réunion, en collaboration si nécessaire avec les organisations internationales compétentes, des lignes directrices et, en tant que de besoin, des normes ou critères communs concernant notamment: a) le choix d'aires protégées; b) la création d'aires protégées; c) la gestion des aires protégées; d) la notification de renseignements sur les aires protégées. Article 5 Les parties peuvent renforcer la protection d'une aire protégée en créant, dans la zone d'application du présent protocole, une ou des aires tampons dans lesquelles les restrictions aux activités, tout en demeurant compatibles avec les finalités assignées à l'aire considérée, sont moins strictes. Article 6 1. Au cas où une partie se propose de créer une aire protégée contiguë à la frontière ou aux limites de la zone de juridiction nationale d'une autre partie, les autorités compétentes des deux parties s'efforcent de se consulter afin de parvenir à un accord sur les mesures à prendre et, entre autres, examinent la possibilité pour l'autre partie de créer une aire protégée correspondante ou d'adopter toute autre mesure appropriée. 2. Au cas où une partie se propose de créer une aire protégée contiguë à la frontière ou aux limites de la zone de juridiction nationale d'un État qui n'est pas partie au présent protocole, la partie s'efforce de se concerter avec les autorités compétentes de cet État en vue de procéder aux consultations prévues au paragraphe 1. 3. Au cas où des aires protégées contiguës sont créées par deux parties ou par une partie et un État qui n'est pas partie au présent protocole, des accords spéciaux peuvent prévoir les modalités de la consultation ou de la concertation respectivement visées aux paragraphes 1 et 2. 4. Au cas où un État non partie au présent protocole se propose de créer une aire protégée contiguë à la frontière ou aux limites de la juridiction nationale d'une partie au présent protocole, cette dernière s'efforce de se concerter avec ledit État pour procéder à des consultations et, éventuellement, conclure un accord tel que prévu au paragraphe 3. Article 7 Les parties, eu égard aux objectifs recherchés et en tenant compte des caractéristiques de chaque aire protégée, prennent progressivement, en conformité avec les règles du droit international, les mesures requises, qui peuvent être entre autres: a) l'organisation d'un système de planification et de gestion; b) l'interdiction de rejeter ou de déverser des déchets ou autres matières susceptibles de porter atteinte à l'aire protégée; c) la réglementation du passage des navires et de tout arrêt ou mouillage; d) la réglementation de la pêche, de la chasse, de la capture d'animaux et de la récolte de végétaux; e) l'interdiction de la destruction de végétaux ou d'animaux et de l'introduction d'espèces exotiques; f) la réglementation de tout acte de nature à nuire à la faune ou à la flore ou à les perturber, y compris l'introduction d'espèces zoologiques ou botaniques autochtones; g) la réglementation de toute activité impliquant l'exploration ou l'exploitation du fond de la mer ou de son sous-sol ou une modification de la configuration du fond de la mer; h) la réglementation de toute activité impliquant une modification de la configuration du sol ou l'exploitation du sous-sol de la partie terrestre d'une aire marine protégée; i) la réglementation de toute activité archéologique et de l'enlèvement de tout objet pouvant être considéré comme un bien archéologique; j) la réglementation du commerce, de l'importation et de l'exportation d'animaux ou de parties d'animaux, de végétaux ou de parties de végétaux et d'objets archéologiques provenant des aires protégées et soumis à des mesures de protection; k) toute autre mesure visant à sauvegarder les processus écologiques et biologiques dans les aires protégées. Article 8 1. Les parties donnent une publicité appropriée à la création des aires protégées ainsi qu'à celle des aires prévues à l'article 5, à leur signalisation et aux réglementations qui s'y appliquent. 2. Les renseignements visés au paragraphe 1 sont notifiés à l'organisation désignée à l'article 13 de la convention (ci-après dénommée « organisation »), qui constitue et tient à jour un répertoire des aires protégées dans la zone d'application du présent protocole. À cette fin, les parties fournissent tous renseignements utiles à l'organisation. Article 9 1. Les parties prennent en considération, dans les mesures de protection qu'elles édictent, les activités traditionnelles de leurs populations locales. Dans toute la mesure du possible, les dérogations accordées de ce fait ne doivent être de nature: a) à compromettre ni le maintien des écosystèmes protégés en vertu du présent protocole, ni les processus biologiques participant au maintien de ces écosystèmes; b) à provoquer ni l'extinction ni une diminution substantielle des effectifs des espèces ou populations animales et végétales incluses dans les écosystèmes protégés ou de celles qui leur sont écologiquement liées, en particulier les espèces migratrices et les espèces rares, menacées ou endémiques. 2. Les parties qui accordent des dérogations aux mesures de protection ou qui ne les appliquent pas strictement en informent l'organisation. Article 10 Les parties encouragent et intensifient les activités de recherche scientifique et technique relatives à leurs aires protégées ainsi qu'aux écosystèmes et au patrimoine archéologique de ces aires. Article 11 Les parties s'efforcent d'informer le public, aussi largement que possible, de la valeur et de l'intérêt des aires protégées et des enseignements scientifiques qu'elles permettent de recueillir aussi bien du point de vue de la conservation de la nature que du point de vue archéologique. Cette information devrait trouver une place appropriée dans les programmes d'enseignement concernant l'environnement et l'histoire. Les parties devraient aussi s'efforcer de faire en sorte que le public et les organisations de protection de la nature des parties concernées participent aux mesures appropriées nécessaires pour protéger les aires concernées. Article 12 Les parties établissent, dans la mesure du possible, un programme de coopération afin de coordonner la création, la planification, la gestion et la conservation des aires protégées, en vue de constituer un réseau d'aires protégées dans la région de la mer Méditerranée, tout en prenant pleinement en considération les réseaux existants, notamment celui des réserves de la biosphère de l'UNESCO. Les caractéristiques des aires protégées, l'expérience acquise et les problèmes constatés font l'objet d'échanges réguliers d'information. Article 13 Les parties échangent, conformément aux procédures définies à l'article 14, des renseignements scientifiques et techniques sur les recherches en cours ou envisagées et sur les résultats escomptés. Elles coordonnent, dans toute la mesure du possible, leurs recherches. Elles s'efforcent, en outre, de définir en commun ou de normaliser les méthodes scientifiques à appliquer dans le choix, la gestion et la surveillance des aires protégées. Article 14 1. Dans la mise en œuvre des principes de coopération définis aux articles 12 et 13, les parties adressent à l'organisation: a) des données comparables permettant de suivre l'évolution biologique du milieu méditerranéen; b) des rapports, publications et informations scientifiques, administratifs et juridiques, notamment: 2. Les parties désignent des responsables pour les aires protégées. Ces responsables se réunissent au moins une fois tous les deux ans pour examiner les questions d'intérêt commun, et notamment proposer des recommandations concernant les renseignements scientifiques, administratifs et juridiques ainsi que la normalisation et le traitement des données. Article 15 1. Les parties, agissant directement ou avec l'aide des organisations régionales ou d'autres organisations internationales qualifiées, ou bilatéralement, coopèrent, dès l'entrée en vigueur du présent protocole, pour élaborer et mettre en œuvre des programmes d'assistance mutuelle et d'assistance aux pays en développement qui en expriment le besoin, pour le choix, la création et la gestion d'aires protégées. 2. Les programmes visés au paragraphe 1 devraient porter, en particulier, sur la formation de personnel scientifique et technique, la recherche scientifique et l'acquisition, l'utilisation et la fabrication de matériel approprié par ces pays à des conditions avantageuses dont il serait convenu entre les parties concernées. Article 16 La modification des délimitations d'une aire protégée ou de son régime juridique, ou la suppression de cette aire en tout ou en partie ne peuvent être décidées qu'en application d'une procédure similaire à celle observée pour sa création. Article 17 1. Les réunions ordinaires des parties au présent protocole se tiennent lors de réunions ordinaires des parties contractantes à la convention organisées en vertu de l'article 14 de ladite convention. Les parties peuvent aussi tenir des réunions extraordinaires conformément audit article 14. 2. Les réunions des parties au présent protocole ont notamment pour objet: a) de veiller à l'application du présent protocole; b) d'examiner l'efficacité des mesures adoptées, eu égard, notamment, à la zone d'application dudit protocole, ainsi que l'opportunité de prendre d'autres dispositions, en particulier sous forme d'annexes ou d'envisager, si nécessaire, une modification de ladite zone, conformément aux dispositions de l'article 16 de la convention; c) d'adopter, de réviser et d'amender, le cas échéant, toute annexe au présent protocole; d) de veiller à la constitution et au développement du réseau d'aires protégées visé à l'article 12 et d'adopter des lignes directrices en vue de faciliter la constitution et le développement de ce réseau et d'intensifier la coopération entre les parties; e) d'examiner les recommandations formulées par les réunions des responsables des aires protégées, conformément à l'article 14 paragraphe 2; f) d'examiner les rapports adressés par les parties à l'organisation en application de l'article 20 de la convention, ainsi que toute autre information que les parties pourraient adresser à l'organisation ou à la réunion des parties. Article 18 1. Les dispositions de la convention se rapportant à tout protocole s'appliquent à l'égard du présent protocole. 2. Le règlement intérieur et les règles financières adoptés conformément à l'article 18 paragraphe 2 de la convention s'appliquent à l'égard du présent protocole, à moins que les parties au présent protocole n'en conviennent autrement. 3. Le présent protocole est ouvert à Genève les 3 et 4 avril 1982 et à Madrid, du 5 avril 1982 au 2 avril 1983, à la signature des parties contractantes à la convention et des États invités à la conférence de plénipotentiaires sur le protocole relatif aux aires spécialement protégées de la Méditerranée, tenue à Genève les 2 et 3 avril 1982. Il est également ouvert, du 5 avril 1982 au 2 avril 1983, à la signature de tout groupement économique régional dont l'un au moins des membres est un État côtier de la zone de la mer Méditerranée et qui exerce des compétences dans des domaines couverts par le présent protocole. 4. Le présent protocole sera soumis à ratification, acceptation ou approbation. Les instruments de ratification, d'acceptation ou d'approbation seront déposés auprès du gouvernement de l'Espagne, qui assumera les fonctions de dépositaire. 5. À partir du 3 avril 1983, le présent protocole est ouvert à l'adhésion des parties contractantes à la convention et de tout État ou groupement visé au paragraphe 3. 6. Le présent protocole entrera en vigueur le trentième jour à compter de la date du dépôt d'au moins six instruments de ratification, d'acceptation ou d'approbation du protocole ou d'adhésion à celui-ci. En foi de quoi, les soussignés, dûment autorisés, ont signé le présent protocole. Fait à Genève, le trois avril mil neuf cent quatre-vingt-deux, en un seul exemplaire en langues anglaise, arabe, espagnole et française, les quatre textes faisant également foi.