All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32023R2772R(02) Corrigendum to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 of 31 July 2023 supplementing Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards sustainability reporting standards (Official Journal of the European Union L, 2023/2772, 22 December 2023) Corrigendum to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 of 31 July 2023 supplementing Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards sustainability reporting standards (Official Journal of the European Union L, 2023/2772, 22 December 2023) Corrigendum to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 of 31 July 2023 supplementing Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards sustainability reporting standards (Official Journal of the European Union L, 2023/2772, 22 December 2023) C/2024/2471 OJ L, 2024/90241, 19.4.2024, ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/corrigendum/2024-04-19/oj (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) Official Journal EN L series 2023/2772 19.4.2024 Corrigendum to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 of 31 July 2023 supplementing Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards sustainability reporting standards 1. On page 16, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, paragraph 91(a): for: ‘the potential financial effects of the events’, read: ‘the anticipated financial effects of the events’. 2. On page 26, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 15(b): for: ‘potential financial effects related to sustainability matters ’, read: ‘anticipated financial effects related to sustainability matters ’. 3. On page 32, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, Appendix B ‘Qualitative characteristics of information’, paragraph QC 17: for: ‘Complementary information presented pursuant to paragraph 113 shall be provided in a way that avoids obscuring material information.’, read: ‘Complementary information presented pursuant to paragraph 114 shall be provided in a way that avoids obscuring material information.’. 4. On page 33, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, Appendix C ‘List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements’, table, third column, sixth row: for: ‘Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities’, read: ‘Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related risks and opportunities’. 5. On page 34, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, Appendix C ‘List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements’, table, third column, eighth row: for: ‘Anticipated financial effects from water and marine resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities’, read: ‘Anticipated financial effects from water and marine resources-related risks and opportunities’. 6. On page 34, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, Appendix C ‘List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements’, table, third column, tenth row: for: ‘Anticipated financial effects from biodiversity and ecosystem-related impacts, risks and opportunities’, read: ‘Anticipated financial effects from biodiversity and ecosystem-related risks and opportunities’. 7. On page 34, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, Appendix C ‘List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements’, table, third column, eleventh row: for: ‘Anticipated financial effects from resource use and circular economy-related impacts, risks and opportunities’, read: ‘Anticipated financial effects from resource use and circular economy-related risks and opportunities’. 8. On page 35, in Annex I, ESRS 1 ‘General requirements’, Appendix C ‘List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements’, table, third column, seventeenth row: for: ‘Percentage of employees with disabilities’, read: ‘Persons with disabilities’. 9. On page 40, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 - Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 – Description of the process to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities’. 10. On page 41, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, paragraph 1: for: ‘This ESRS covers the reporting areas defined in ESRS 1 General requirements section 1.2 Cross-Cutting Standards and reporting areas.’, read: ‘This ESRS covers the reporting areas defined in ESRS 1 General requirements section 1.2 Reporting areas and minimum content disclosure requirements on policies, actions, targets and metrics.’. 11. On page 43, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, title: for: ‘ Use of phase-In provisions in accordance with Appendix C of ESRS 1 ’, read: ‘ Use of phase-in provisions in accordance with Appendix C of ESRS 1 ’. 12. On page 52, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, paragraph 53(c)(ii): for: ‘how the undertaking assesses the likelihood, magnitude, and nature of effects of the identified risk and opportunities (such as the qualitative or quantitative thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by ESRS 1 section 3.3 Financial materiality);’, read: ‘how the undertaking assesses the likelihood, magnitude, and nature of effects of the identified risk and opportunities (such as the qualitative or quantitative thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by ESRS 1 section 3.5 Financial materiality);’. 13. On page 66, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, Appendix B ‘List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other EU legislation’, table, first column, thirty-second row: for: ‘ESRS 2- IRO 1 - E4 paragraph 16 (a) i’, read: ‘ESRS 2- SBM 3 - E4 paragraph 16 (a) i’. 14. On page 66, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, Appendix B ‘List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other EU legislation’, table, first column, thirty-third row: for: ‘ESRS 2- IRO 1 - E4 paragraph 16 (b)’, read: ‘ESRS 2- SBM 3 - E4 paragraph 16 (b)’. 15. On page 66, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, Appendix B ‘List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other EU legislation’, table, first column, thirty-fourth row: for: ‘ESRS 2- IRO 1 - E4 paragraph 16 (c)’, read: ‘ESRS 2- SBM 3 - E4 paragraph 16 (c)’. 16. On page 68, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, Appendix B ‘List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other EU legislation’, table, first column, fifty-fourth row: for: ‘ESRS S1-17 Non-respect of UNGPs on Business and Human Rights and OECD paragraph 104 (a)’, read: ‘ESRS S1-17 Non-respect of UNGPs on Business and Human Rights and OECD Guidelines paragraph 104 (a)’. 17. On page 69, in Annex I, ESRS 2 ‘General disclosures’, Appendix B ‘List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other EU legislation’, table, first column, sixty-third row: for: ‘ESRS S3-1 non-respect of UNGPs on Business and Human Rights, ILO principles or and OECD guidelines paragraph 17’, read: ‘ESRS S3-1 non-respect of UNGPs on Business and Human Rights, ILO principles or OECD guidelines paragraph 17’. 18. On page 74, in Annex I, ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, paragraph 12: for: ‘The resulting disclosures shall be presented in the sustainability statement alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except for ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which the undertaking may, in accordance with ESRS2 paragraph 46, present the disclosures alongside the other disclosures required in this topical standard.’, read: ‘The resulting disclosures shall be presented in the sustainability statement alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except for ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which the undertaking may, in accordance with ESRS 2 paragraph 49, present the disclosures alongside the other disclosures required in this topical standard.’. 19. On page 87, in Annex I, ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 5: for: ‘When disclosing the information required under paragraph 16 (f), the undertaking shall state whether or not it is excluded from the EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks in accordance with the exclusion criteria stated in Articles 12.1 (d) to (g) (46) and 12.2 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark Standards Regulation) (47).’, read: ‘When disclosing the information required under paragraph 16 (g), the undertaking shall state whether or not it is excluded from the EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks in accordance with the exclusion criteria stated in Articles 12(1), points (d) to (g) (46) and Article 12(2) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark Standards Regulation) (47).’. 20. On page 90, in Annex I, ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 17: for: ‘The requirement under paragraph 14 may relate to stand-alone climate change mitigation policies as well as relevant policies on other matters that indirectly support climate change mitigation including training policies, procurement or supply chain policies, investment policies or product development policies.’, read: ‘The requirement under paragraph 22 may relate to stand-alone climate change mitigation policies as well as relevant policies on other matters that indirectly support climate change mitigation including training policies, procurement or supply chain policies, investment policies, or product development policies.’. 21. On page 95, in Annex I, ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 33: for: ‘The information required under paragraph 37 (a) is applicable if the undertaking is operating in at least one high climate impact sector .’, read: ‘The information required under paragraph 38 is applicable if the undertaking is operating in at least one high climate impact sector .’. 22. On page 96, in Annex I, ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 34, table, first column, last row: for: ‘ Total energy consumption (MWh) (calculated as the sum of lines 6, and 11) ’, read: ‘ Total energy consumption (MWh) (calculated as the sum of lines 6, 7 and 11) ’. 23. On page 108, in Annex I, ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 72(b): for: ‘the assessment of assets and business activities considered to be at material transition risk relies on or is part of the process to determine material transition risks as described under paragraphs 20 (c) and AR 11 and to determine scenarios as required under paragraphs AR 12 to AR 13.’, read: ‘the assessment of assets and business activities considered to be at material transition risk relies on or is part of the process to determine material transition risks as described under paragraphs 20 (c) and AR 12 and to determine scenarios as required under paragraphs AR 12 to AR 15.’. 24. On page 111, in Annex I, ESRS E2 ‘Pollution’, Table of contents, Appendix A: Application requirements, Metrics and targets: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement E2-6 – Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related, risks and opportunities’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement E2-6 – Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related risks and opportunities’. 25. On page 115, in Annex I, ESRS E2 ‘Pollution’, paragraph 38(a): for: ‘ anticipated financial effects due to material risks arising from pollution -related impacts and dependencies and how these risks have (or could reasonably be expected to have) a material influence on the undertaking’s , financial position financial performance and cash flows, over the short-, medium- and long-term.’, read: ‘ anticipated financial effects due to material risks arising from pollution -related impacts and dependencies and how those risks have (or could reasonably be expected to have) a material influence on the undertaking’s financial position, financial performance, and cash flows, over the short, medium and long term.’. 26. On page 116, in Annex I, ESRS E2 ‘Pollution’, paragraph 40: for: ‘The information provided under paragraph 38(a) shall include:’, read: ‘The information provided under paragraph 39(a) shall include:’. 27. On page 118, in Annex I, ESRS E2 ‘Pollution’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 12: for: ‘When disclosing information under paragraph 11, the undertaking may include contextual information on the relations between its policies implemented and how they may contribute to the EU Action Plan “Towards a Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil” with for instance elements on:’, read: ‘When disclosing information under paragraph 12, the undertaking may include contextual information on the relations between its policies implemented and how they may contribute to the EU Action Plan “Towards a Zero Pollution for Air, Water and Soil” with for instance elements on:’. 28. On page 132, in Annex I, ESRS E3 ‘Water and marine resources’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 29: for: ‘When disclosing contextual information on water consumption performance required by paragraph 26, the undertaking shall explain the calculation methodologies and more specifically the share of the measure obtained from direct measurement, from sampling and extrapolation, or from best estimates.’, read: ‘When disclosing contextual information on water consumption performance required by paragraph 28(e), the undertaking shall explain the calculation methodologies and more specifically the share of the measure obtained from direct measurement, from sampling and extrapolation, or from best estimates.’. 29. On page 132, in Annex I, ESRS E3 ‘Water and marine resources’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 34: for: ‘The quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms under paragraph 39(a) may be a single amount or a range.’, read: ‘The quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms under paragraph 33(a) may be a single amount or a range.’. 30. On page 136, in Annex I, ESRS E4 ‘Biodiversity and ecosystems’, title: for: ‘ Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of processes to identify and assess material biodiversity and ecosystem-related impacts, risks, dependencies and opportunities ’, read: ‘ Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of processes to identify and assess material biodiversity and ecosystem-related impacts, risks, dependencies and opportunities ’. 31. On page 137, in Annex I, ESRS E4 ‘Biodiversity and ecosystems’, paragraph 20: for: ‘The undertaking shall describe its adopted policies to manage its material impacts, risks, dependencies, and opportunities related to biodiversity and ecosystems.’, read: ‘The undertaking shall describe its adopted policies to manage its material impacts, risks, dependencies and opportunities that are related to biodiversity and ecosystems.’. 32. On page 141, in Annex I, ESRS E4 ‘Biodiversity and ecosystems’, paragraph 44(b): for: ‘anticipated financial effects due to material opportunities related to biodiversity- and ecosystem.’, read: ‘anticipated financial effects due to material opportunities related to biodiversity and ecosystems.’. 33. On page 144, in Annex I, ESRS E4 ‘Biodiversity and ecosystems’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 8(c)(ii): for: ‘the percentage of its procurement spend from suppliers with facilities which are located in risk prone areas (with threatened species on the IUCN Red List of Species, the Birds and Habitats Directive or nationally list of threatened species, or in officially recognised Protected Areas, the Natura 2000 network of protected areas and Key Biodiversity Areas); and’, read: ‘the percentage of its procurement spent from suppliers with facilities which are located in risk prone areas (with threatened species on the IUCN Red List of Species, the Birds and Habitats Directive or nationally list of threatened species, or in officially recognised Protected Areas, the Natura 2000 network of protected areas and Key Biodiversity Areas);’. 34. On page 147, in Annex I, ESRS E4 ‘Biodiversity and ecosystems’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 19(a): for: ‘avoidance through site selection (Locate the entire project away from areas recognised for important biodiversity values);’, read: ‘avoidance through site selection (Locate the entire project away from biodiversity-sensitive areas);’. 35. On page 147, in Annex I, ESRS E4 ‘Biodiversity and ecosystems’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 19(b): for: ‘avoidance through project design (Configure infrastructure to preserve areas at the project site with important biodiversity values); and’, read: ‘avoidance through project design (Configure infrastructure to preserve biodiversity-sensitive areas); and’. 36. On page 157, in Annex I, ESRS E5 ‘Resource use and circular economy’, paragraph 36(b): for: ‘The reparability products, using an established rating system, where possible;’, read: ‘The reparability of products, using an established rating system, where possible;’. 37. On page 164, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Disclosure requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workers and workers’ representatives about impacts’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workforce and workers’ representatives about impacts’. 38. On page 164, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Disclosure requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for own workers to raise concerns’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for own workforce to raise concerns’. 39. On page 164, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Disclosure requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions’. 40. On page 164, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Disclosure requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertaking’s own workforce’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employees in the undertaking’s own workforce’. 41. On page 164, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Disclosure requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-16 – Compensation metrics (pay gap and total compensation)’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-16 – Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration)’. 42. On page 165, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Appendix A: Application requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workers and workers’ representatives about impacts’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workforce and workers’ representatives about impacts’. 43. On page 165, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Appendix A: Application requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and approaches’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions’. 44. On page 165, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Application requirements: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertaking’s own workforce’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employees in the undertaking’s own workforce’. 45. On page 165, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Table of contents, Appendix A.3: for: ‘Appendix A.3: Application Requirements for ESRS S1-4 Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions’, read: ‘Appendix A.3: Application Requirements for ESRS S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions’. 46. On page 167, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, paragraph 10: for: ‘The reporting under this Standard shall be consistent, coherent and where relevant clearly linked with reporting on the undertaking’s own workforce under ESRS S2, in order to ensure effective reporting.’, read: ‘The reporting under this Standard shall be consistent, coherent and where relevant clearly linked with reporting on the undertaking’s value chain workers under ESRS S2, in order to ensure effective reporting.’. 47. On page 174, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, paragraph 58: for: ‘ The undertaking shall disclose information on the extent to which the working conditions and terms of employment of its employees are determined or influenced by collective bargaining agreements and on the extent to which its employees are represented in social dialogue in the European Economic Area (EEA) at the establishment and European level.’, read: ‘ The undertaking shall disclose information on the extent to which the working conditions and terms of employment of its employees are determined or influenced by collective bargaining agreements and on the extent to which its employees are represented in social dialogue in the European Economic Area (EEA). ’. 48. On page 176, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, paragraph 79: for: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the percentage of persons with disabilities amongst its employees subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data.’, read: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the percentage of persons with disabilities amongst its employees , subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data.’. 49. On page 178, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, paragraph 100: for: ‘ The undertaking shall disclose the number of work-related incidents and/or complaints and severe human rights impacts within its own workforce, and any related material fines, sanctions or compensation for the reporting period.’, read: ‘ The undertaking shall disclose the number of work-related incidents and/or complaints and severe human rights impacts within its own workforce, and any related fines, sanctions or compensation for the reporting period.’. 50. On page 182, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 13: for: ‘When explaining how external-facing policies are embedded, the undertaking may, for example, consider internal policies of responsible sourcing, and alignment with other policies relevant to own workers, for example, regarding forced labour.’, read: ‘When explaining how external-facing policies are embedded, the undertaking may, for example, consider internal policies of responsible sourcing, and alignment with other policies relevant to its own workforce, for example, regarding forced labour.’. 51. On page 183, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 22: for: ‘Where the undertaking has agreements with national, European or international trade unions or works councils related to the rights of people its own workforce, this can be disclosed to illustrate how the agreement enables the undertaking to gain insight into the perspectives of such people.’, read: ‘Where the undertaking has agreements with national, European or international trade unions or works councils related to the rights of people in its own workforce, this can be disclosed to illustrate how the agreement enables the undertaking to gain insight into the perspectives of such people.’. 52. On page 184, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, Disclosure requirement S1-3, title: for: ‘ Disclosure Requirement S1-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for own workers to raise concerns ’, read: ‘ Disclosure Requirement S1-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for its own workforce to raise concerns ’. 53. On page 185, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, Disclosure requirement S1-4, title: for: ‘ Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and approaches ’, read: ‘ Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions ’. 54. On page 187, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 49: for: ‘When disclosing information about targets in accordance with paragraph 46, the undertaking may disclose:’, read: ‘When disclosing information about targets in accordance with paragraph 44, the undertaking may disclose:’. 55. On page 197, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 104: for: ‘If the undertaking compiles the information described in AR 105, it shall consider the following:’, read: ‘If the undertaking compiles the information described in AR 103, it shall consider the following:’. 56. On page 199, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A.2, table, first column, ninth row: for: ‘ Gender equality and equal work for equal pay ’, read: ‘ Gender equality and equal pay for work of equal value ’. 57. On page 199, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A.2, table, second column, ninth row: for: ‘Policy for gender equality and equal pay for equal work’, read: ‘Policy for gender equality and equal pay for work of equal value’. 58. On page 200, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A.3, title: for: ‘ Appendix A3 Application Requirements for ESRS S1–4 Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions ’, read: ‘ Appendix A3 Application Requirements for ESRS S1-4 Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions ’. 59. On page 200, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A.3, table, first column, ninth row: for: ‘ Gender equality and equal work for equal pay ’, read: ‘ Gender equality and equal pay for work of equal value ’. 60. On page 201, in Annex I, ESRS S1 ‘Own workforce’, Appendix A.4, table, first column, ninth row: for: ‘ Gender equality and equal work for equal pay ’, read: ‘ Gender equality and equal pay for work of equal value ’. 61. On page 202, in Annex I, ESRS S2 ‘Workers in the value chain’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S2-4 – Taking Action on material impacts, and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to value chain workers, and effectiveness of those actions and approaches’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S2-4 – Taking action on material impacts on value chain workers, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to value chain workers, and effectiveness of those actions’. 62. On page 215, in Annex I, ESRS S2 ‘Workers in the value chain’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 40(d): for: ‘business opportunities related to the undertaking’s dependencies on value chain workers might include the achievement of a future sustainable supply of a commodity by ensuring smallholder farmers earn enough to persuade future generations to keep farming that crop.’, read: ‘opportunities related to the undertaking’s dependencies on value chain workers might include the achievement of a future sustainable supply of a commodity by ensuring smallholder farmers earn enough to persuade future generations to keep farming that crop.’. 63. On page 217, in Annex I, ESRS S3 ‘Affected communities’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S3-4 – Taking action on material impacts, and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to affected communities, and effectiveness of those actions and approaches’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S3-4 – Taking action on material impacts on affected communities, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to affected communities, and effectiveness of those actions’. 64. On page 223, in Annex I, ESRS S3 ‘Affected communities’, paragraph 33: for: ‘In relation to paragraph 29, the undertaking shall describe:’, read: ‘In relation to paragraph 30, the undertaking shall describe:’. 65. On page 223, in Annex I, ESRS S3 ‘Affected communities’, paragraph 37: for: ‘When disclosing the information required under paragraph 31 (c), the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets if it evaluates the effectiveness of an action by setting a target.’, read: ‘When disclosing the information required under paragraph 32 (d), the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets if it evaluates the effectiveness of an action by setting a target.’. 66. On page 227, in Annex I, ESRS S3 ‘Affected communities’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 15: for: ‘When preparing the disclosures described in paragraph 20 b) and c), the following illustrations may be considered:’, read: ‘When preparing the disclosures described in paragraph 21 b) and c), the following illustrations may be considered:’. 67. On page 230, in Annex I, ESRS S3 ‘Affected communities’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 38(c): for: ‘business opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on affected communities may include more easily financing projects and being a partner of choice for communities, governments and other businesses; and’, read: ‘opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on affected communities may include more easily financing projects and being a partner of choice for communities, governments and other businesses; and’. 68. On page 230, in Annex I, ESRS S3 ‘Affected communities’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 39: for: ‘In disclosing the information in AR 41, the undertaking may consider explanations of risks and opportunities stemming from environmental impacts or dependencies (please refer to AR 31 for further details), including related human rights (or social) impacts.’, read: ‘In disclosing the information in AR 38, the undertaking may consider explanations of risks and opportunities stemming from environmental impacts or dependencies (please refer to AR 28 for further details), including related human rights (or social) impacts.’. 69. On page 231, in Annex I, ESRS S3 ‘Affected communities’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 44: for: ‘When disclosing information about targets in accordance with paragraph 38, the undertaking may disclose:’, read: ‘When disclosing information about targets in accordance with paragraph 39, the undertaking may disclose:’. 70. On page 232, in Annex I, ESRS S4 ‘Consumers and end-users’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business mode’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model’. 71. On page 232, in Annex I, ESRS S4 ‘Consumers and end-users’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement S4-4 – Taking action on material impacts, and approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to consumers and end-users and effectiveness of those actions and approaches’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement S4-4 – Taking action on material impacts on consumers and end-users, and approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to consumers and end-users, and effectiveness of those actions’. 72. On page 238, in Annex I, ESRS S4 ‘Consumers and end-users’, paragraph 36: for: ‘Where the undertaking evaluates the effectiveness of an action by setting a target, in disclosing the information required under paragraph 32 (c), the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets.’, read: ‘Where the undertaking evaluates the effectiveness of an action by setting a target, in disclosing the information required under paragraph 31(d), the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets.’. 73. On page 244, in Annex I, ESRS S4 ‘Consumers and end-users’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 35: for: ‘When disclosing the intended positive outcomes of its actions for consumers and/or end-users a distinction is to be made between evidence of certain activities having occurred (for example, that x number of consumers have received information about healthy eating habits) from evidence of actual outcomes for consumers and/or end-users (for example, that x number of consumers have adopted healthier eating habits).’, read: ‘When disclosing the intended positive outcomes of the undertaking's actions for consumers and/or end-users , a distinction is to be made between evidence of certain activities having occurred (for example, that x number of consumers have received information about healthy eating habits) from evidence of actual outcomes for consumers and/or end-users (for example, that x number of consumers have adopted healthier eating habits).’. 74. On page 245, in Annex I, ESRS S4 ‘Consumers and end-users’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 37(c): for: ‘business opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on consumers and/or end- users may include market differentiation and greater customer appeal from offering safe products or privacy-respecting services; and’, read: ‘opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on consumers and/or end- users may include market differentiation and greater customer appeal from offering safe products or privacy-respecting services; and’. 75. On page 245, in Annex I, ESRS S4 ‘Consumers and end-users’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 37(d) for: ‘business opportunities related to the undertaking’s dependencies on consumers and/or end-users may include the achievement of a loyal future consumer base by ensuring, for example, that LGBTQI people are respected and that the undertaking’s selling practices do not exclude such people from the products or services it offers.’, read: ‘opportunities related to the undertaking’s dependencies on consumers and/or end-users may include the achievement of a loyal future consumer base by ensuring, for example, that LGBTQI people are respected and that the undertaking’s selling practices do not exclude such people from the products or services it offers.’. 76. On page 245, in Annex I, ESRS S4 ‘Consumers and end-users’, Appendix A ‘Application requirements’, paragraph AR 42(c): for: ‘references standards or commitments on which the targets are based are to be clearly defined in the reporting (for instance codes of conduct, sourcing policies, global frameworks or industry codes).’, read: ‘the standards or commitments on which the targets are based are to be clearly defined in the reporting (for instance codes of conduct, sourcing policies, global frameworks or industry codes).’. 77. On page 246, in Annex I, ESRS G1 ‘Business Conduct’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement G1-1– Corporate culture and bBusiness conduct policies and corporate culture’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement G1-1– Business conduct policies and corporate culture’. 78. On page 246, in Annex I, ESRS G1 ‘Business Conduct’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement G1-4 – Confirmed incidents of corruption or bribery’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement G1-4 – Incidents of corruption or bribery’. 79. On page 246, in Annex I, ESRS G1 ‘Business Conduct’, table of contents: for: ‘Disclosure Requirement G1-1 – Corporate culture and business conduct policies’, read: ‘Disclosure Requirement G1-1 – Business conduct policies and corporate culture’. 80. On page 255, in Annex II, Table 1 – Acronyms, second column, row for acronym CRR: for: ‘Regulation (EU) 757/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*1) (Capital Requirements Regulation) […] read: ‘Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*2) (Capital Requirements Regulation).’ […] (*1) Regulation (EU) 757/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1).’, (*2) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1).’. ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/corrigendum/2024-04-17/oj ISSN 1977-0677 (electronic edition)