All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32011A0719(01) Commission Opinion of 15 July 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Stoneyhill NORM Descaling and Disposal Facility, located in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 15 July 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Stoneyhill NORM Descaling and Disposal Facility, located in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 15 July 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Stoneyhill NORM Descaling and Disposal Facility, located in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 212, 19.7.2011, pp. 16–17 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 19.7.2011 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 212/16 COMMISSION OPINION of 15 July 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Stoneyhill NORM Descaling and Disposal Facility, located in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) 2011/C 212/05 The assessment below is carried out under the provisions of the Euratom Treaty, without prejudice to any additional assessments to be carried out under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the obligations stemming from it and from secondary legislation. On 3 February 2011, the European Commission received from the British Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the Stoneyhill NORM Descaling and Disposal Facility. On the basis of these data and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the Stoneyhill site and the nearest point on the territory of another Member State, in this case Ireland, is 398 km. 2. The descaling facility will not be subject to a discharge authorisation for liquid and gaseous radioactive effluents. During normal operations, the descaling facility will not discharge liquid radioactive effluents. However, natural radioactive gas (radon) will emanate from the descaling facility and minute amounts of radioactive aerosols will be released; neither will be liable to affect the health of the population of another Member State. 3. During the disposal facility's operational period: 4. Following the disposal facility's operational period: The measures envisaged for the final closure of the disposal facility as described in the General Data provide reliance that the conclusions under point 2 above will remain valid in the long term. 5. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents, which may follow the accidents of the types and magnitudes considered in the General Data, the doses likely to be received by the population in another Member State will not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form from the Stoneyhill NORM Descaling and Disposal Facility in the United Kingdom, during its normal operational life and after its final closure, as well as in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in the radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. Done at Brussels, 15 July 2011. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Member of the Commission