All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32011A1221(01) Commission Opinion of 20 December 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first dismantling stage of the A3 reactor of the Chinon Nuclear Power Station, located in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 20 December 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first dismantling stage of the A3 reactor of the Chinon Nuclear Power Station, located in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 20 December 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first dismantling stage of the A3 reactor of the Chinon Nuclear Power Station, located in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 373, 21.12.2011, pp. 1–2 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 21.12.2011 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 373/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 20 December 2011 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first dismantling stage of the A3 reactor of the Chinon Nuclear Power Station, located in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the French text is authentic) 2011/C 373/01 The assessment below is carried out under the provisions of the Euratom Treaty, without prejudice to any additional assessments to be carried out under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the obligations stemming from it and from secondary legislation. On 7 June 2011, the European Commission received from the French Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the first dismantling stage of the A3 reactor of the Chinon nuclear power station in France. On the basis of these data, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the power station and the nearest border with another Member State, in this case the United Kingdom, is 384 km. Belgium is the next nearest Member State at a distance of 426 km. Spain and Luxembourg are at distances of 460 km and 494 km respectively. 2. During normal dismantling operations the discharges of radioactive liquid and gaseous effluents are not liable to affect the health of the population of another Member State. 3. Solid radioactive waste is temporarily stored on site before being transferred to licensed treatment or disposal facilities located in France. There are no plans to export radioactive waste out of France. The Commission recommends that the residual activity concentration checks, carried out to confirm the conventional nature of the solid waste after decontamination, be such that compliance with the clearance criteria laid down in the basic safety standards directive (Directive 96/29/Euratom) is ensured. 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents that may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses likely to be received by the population in another Member State would not be significant from the point of view of health. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form arising from the first stage of the dismantling of the A3 reactor of the Chinon nuclear power station in France, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in a radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. Done at Brussels, 20 December 2011. For the Commission Günther OETTINGER Member of the Commission