All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32022R1630 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1630 of 21 September 2022 establishing measures for the containment of Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma within certain demarcated areas Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1630 of 21 September 2022 establishing measures for the containment of Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma within certain demarcated areas Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1630 of 21 September 2022 establishing measures for the containment of Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma within certain demarcated areas C/2022/6645 OJ L 245, 22.9.2022, pp. 27–44 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force: This act has been changed. Current consolidated version: 16/03/2025 22.9.2022 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 245/27 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/1630 of 21 September 2022 establishing measures for the containment of Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma within certain demarcated areas THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC (1), and in particular Article 28(1), points (d) and (e), and Article 28(2) thereof, Whereas: (1) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072 (2) lays down, in Part B of Annex II, the list of Union quarantine pests known to occur in the Union territory. (2) Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma (‘the specified pest’) is included in that list, as it is known to occur in certain parts of the Union territory, having significant impact on the cultivation of plants of Vitis L. (‘specified plants’), the main host for that pest. (3) Scaphoideus titanus Ball (‘the specified vector’) has been identified as an efficient vector of the specified pest. This vector plays an important role in the establishment and further spread of Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma (3) in the Union territory, therefore measures for its identification and control should be established. (4) The surveys carried out pursuant to Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 show that eradication of the specified pest in certain demarcated areas is no longer possible. (5) Therefore, measures should be established for the containment of the specified pest within those demarcated areas, consisting of infected zones and buffer zones. Those measures should consist of destruction and removal of the infected specified plants and application of appropriate treatments in order to prevent the spread of the specified pest to the rest of the Union territory. (6) The competent authorities should raise public awareness to ensure that the general public and professional operators, concerned by the containment measures in the demarcated areas, are aware of the applied measures and the delimitation of the demarcated areas for that purpose. (7) Nevertheless, if the specified pest is found in a buffer zone surrounding an infected zone subject to measures for the containment of the specified pest, that new finding should result in the establishment of a new demarcated area by the competent authority, where eradication is pursued. (8) Annual surveys for the presence of the specified pest and the specified vector as set out in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 and in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1231 (4) should be carried out to ensure the early detection of the specified pest in areas of the Union territory where the specified pest is not known to be present. Those surveys should be based on the pest survey card on the specified pest and its vector published by the European Food Safety Authority, as it takes into account the latest scientific and technical developments. (9) The measures provided for in this Regulation are in accordance with the opinion of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food and Feed, HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes measures for the containment of Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma within the demarcated areas where its eradication is not possible. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: (1) ‘the specified pest’ means Grapevine flavescence dorée phytoplasma; (2) ‘the specified plants’ means plants of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds; (3) ‘the specified vector’ means Scaphoideus titanus Ball; (4) ‘the demarcated area for containment’ means an area listed in Annex I, where the specified pest cannot be eradicated; (5) ‘the pest survey card’ means the publication ‘Pest survey card on flavescence dorée phytoplasma and its vector Scaphoideus titanus’ (5) of the European Food Safety Authority. Article 3 Establishment of demarcated areas for containment The competent authorities shall establish the demarcated areas for containment of the specified pest consisting of an infected zone and a buffer zone of a width of at least 2,5 km, surrounding the infected zone. Article 4 Measures within the demarcated areas for containment 1. In the infected zones, the competent authorities shall ensure that the following measures are taken: (a) removal and destruction the specified plants found infected with the specified pest as soon as possible and at the latest before the beginning of the next growing season; (b) application of appropriate treatments to control the specified vector. 2. In the buffer zones, the competent authorities shall ensure the application of appropriate treatments to control the specified vector, in the case of presence of the specified vector. Where the presence of the specified pest has been officially confirmed in the specified plants in the buffer zone, Articles 17 and 18 of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 shall apply. 3. Within the demarcated areas for containment, the competent authorities shall raise public awareness concerning the threat of the specified pest and the measures adopted to prevent its further spread outside of those areas. The competent authorities shall inform the general public and the professional operators concerned of the delimitation of the demarcated area for containment. Article 5 Surveys 1. The competent authorities shall carry out the surveys as provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3, taking into account the information referred to in the pest survey card. 2. They shall carry out annual risk based surveys for the presence of the specified pest and the specified vector in the areas of the Union territory where the specified pest is not known to be present but could become established. 3. In the buffer zones of the demarcated areas for containment, they shall carry out annual surveys, as referred to in Article 19(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031, to detect the presence of the specified pest and its specified vector. Those surveys shall include: (a) visual examinations of the specified plants to detect the specified pest; (b) sampling and testing in case of suspicion of the presence of the specified pest; and (c) appropriate trapping for the detection of the specified vector. Those surveys shall be more intensive than the surveys referred to in paragraph 2 with a higher number of visual examinations, and where appropriate, sampling and testing. Article 6 Reporting By 30 April of each year, Member States shall submit to the Commission and to the other Member States the results of the surveys carried out in the preceding calendar year pursuant to: (a) Article 5(2) of this Regulation, using one of the templates set out in Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1231; (b) Article 5(3) of this Regulation, using one of the templates set out in Annex II to this Regulation. Article 7 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 21 September 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN (1) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4. (2) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072 of 28 November 2019 establishing uniform conditions for the implementation of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and the Council, as regards protective measures against pests of plants, and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) No 690/2008 and amending Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2019 (OJ L 319, 10.12.2019, p. 1). (3) EFSA PLH Panel (EFSA Panel on Plant Health), 2014. Scientific Opinion on pest categorisation of rapevine Flavescence Dorée. EFSA Journal 2014;12(10):3851, 31 pp. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2014.3851. (4) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1231 of 27 August 2020 on the format and instructions for the annual reports on the results of the surveys and on the format of the multiannual survey programmes and the practical arrangements, respectively provided for in Articles 22 and 23 of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and the Council (OJ L 280, 28.8.2020, p. 1). (5) Pest survey card on flavescence dorée phytoplasma and its vector Scaphoideus titanus. EFSA supporting publication 2020:EN-1909. 36 pp. doi:10.2903/sp.efsa.2020.EN-1909. ANNEX I Lists of demarcated areas for containment referred to in Article 2 1. Croatia Number/name of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations 1. Infected zone Panonic Croatia (Bjelovar-Bilogora county, Virovitica-Podravina county, Požega-Slavonija county, Brod-Posavina county, Osijek-Baranja county, Vukovar-Srijem county, Karlovac county, Sisak-Moslavina county) Buffer zone Panonic Croatia (Bjelovar-Bilogora county, Virovitica-Podravina county, Požega-Slavonija county, Brod-Posavina county, Osijek-Baranja county, Vukovar-Srijem county, Karlovac county, Sisak-Moslavina county) Cadastral municipalities 2. Infected zone Adriatic Croatia (Istria county) Cadastral municipalities Bačva, Brkač, Brtonigla, Buje, Donja Mirna, Frata, Grožnjan, Kaldir, Karojba, Kaštel, Kaštelir, Kostajnica, Krasica, Kršete, Labinci, Lovrečica, Materada, Motovun, Nova Vas, Novigrad, Petrovija, Savudrija, Sveti Ivan, Sveti Vital, Umag, Višnjan, Vižinada, Završje, Žbandaj. Buffer zone Adriatic Croatia (Istria county) Cadastral municipalities Baderna, Beram, Brdo, Čepić, Dračevac, Funtana, Fuškulin, Gradina, Grdoselo, Kašćerga, Kringa, Kršikla, Kuberton, Kućibreg, Lim, Lovreč, Marčenegla, Merišće, Momjan, Mugeba, Muntrilj, Mušalež, Novaki Motovunski, Oprtalj, Pazin, Poreč, Rakotule, Rovinj, Rovinjsko Selo, Senj, Sovinjak, Sovišćina, Šterna, Tar, Tinjan, Triban, Trviž, Vabriga, Varvari, Vrh, Vrsar, Zamask, Zrenj, Zumesk. 3. Infected zone North Croatia with the City of Zagreb region (Međimurje County, Varaždin County, Koprivnica-Križevci county, Krapina-Zagorje county, Zagreb county, the City of Zagreb) Cadastral municipalities Buffer zone North Croatia with the City of Zagreb region (Međimurje County, Varaždin County, Koprivnica-Križevci county, Krapina-Zagorje county, Zagreb county, the City of Zagreb) Cadastral municipalities 2. Hungary Extension of buffer zones of demarcated areas for containment of Croatia and Slovenia in the territory of Hungary: Number/name of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations 1. Buffer zone Bács-Kiskun county District of Baja Hercegszántó Buffer zone Baranya county District of Mohács Kölked, Homorúd 2. Buffer zone Zala county District of Letenye Tótszerdahely, Molnári 3. Buffer zone Zala county District of Lenti Bödeháza, Nemesnép, Lendvajakabfa, Márokföld, Szentgyörgyvölgy 4. Buffer zone Zala county District of Lenti Lendvadedes 3. Italy Extension of buffer zones of demarcated areas for containment of Slovenia in the territory of Italy: Number/name of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations (partially) 1. Buffer zone Friuli Venezia Giulia Gorizia Province Dolegna Del Collio, Gorizia, San Floriano Del Collio, Savogna D’isonzo 2. Buffer zone Friuli Venezia Giulia Trieste Province Duino-Aurisina, Monrupino, Muggia, San Dorligo Della Valle – Dolina, Sgonico, Trieste 3. Buffer zone Friuli Venezia Giulia Udine Province Prepotto 4. Portugal Number/name of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations 1. Infected zone Northern Portugal Alijó, Amarante, Amares, Baião, Barcelos, Braga, Cabeceiras de Basto, Castelo de Paiva, Celorico de Basto, Cinfães, Esposende, Fafe, Felgueiras, Guimarães, Lousada, Maia, Marco de Canaveses, Monção, Mondim de Basto, Paços de Ferreira, Paredes, Paredes de Coura, Penafiel, Peso da Régua, Ponte de Lima, Póvoa de Lanhoso, Póvoa de Varzim, Ribeira de Pena, Sabrosa, Santa Marta de Penaguião, Santo Tirso, Trofa, Valença, Valongo, Vieira do Minho, Vila do Conde, Vila Nova de Famalicão, Vila Pouca de Aguiar, Vila Real, Vila Verde and Vizela; Part of the following municipalities: Arcos de Valdevez, Ponte da Barca, Terras de Bouro and Viana do Castelo. Buffer zone Northern Portugal Mesão Frio; Part of the following municipalities: Arcos de Valdevez, Armamar, Arouca, Boticas, Caminha, Chaves, Carrazeda de Ansiães, Gondomar, Lamego, Matosinhos, Melgaço, Montalegre, Murça, Porto, Ponte da Barca, Resende, Santa Maria da Feira, São João da Pesqueira, Tabuaço, Terras de Bouro, Valpaços, Viana do Castelo, Vila Nova de Cerveira, Vinhais.. Central Portugal Part of municipality Castro Daire. 5. Slovenia Number/name of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations 1. Infected zone Western Slovenia Ankaran, Koper, Izola and Piran; and Sežana, Komen (except cadastral municipalilty Brestovica – ID 2408) and Renče-Vogrsko. Buffer zone Western Slovenia Brda, Nova Gorica, Miren-Kostanjevica, Šempeter- Vrtojba, Ajdovščina, Vipava, Divača and Hrpelje-Kozina, and cadastral municipality Brestovica (ID 2408) in municipality Komen. 2. Infected zone South Eastern Slovenia Dolenjske Toplice, Straža, Mirna peč, Novo mesto (except cadastral municipalities Črešnjice – ID 1458 and Herinja vas – ID 1459). Buffer zone South Eastern Slovenia Žužemberk, Trebnje, Mirna, Šentrupert, Sevnica, Krško, Brežice, Mokronog-Trebelno, Šmarješke Toplice, Škocjan, Šentjernej, Kostanjevica na Krki, Semič, Črnomelj and Metlika, and cadastral municipalities in municipality Novo mesto: Črešnjice (ID 1458) and Herinja vas (ID 1459). 3. Infected zone North-Eastern Slovenia Buffer zone North-Eastern Slovenia 6. Spain Extension of buffer zones of demarcated areas for containment of Portugal in the territory of Spain: Number/name of demarcated area (DA) Zone of DA Region Municipalities or other administrative/geographic delimitations 1. Buffer zone Galicia Pontevedra province A cañiza: Arbo: Crecente: Tomiño: Tui: As Neves: Salvaterra do Miño: Salceda de Caselas: Galicia Orense Province Padrenda: Part of parishes of Crespos (San Xoán), Desteriz (San Miguel), O Condado (Santa María) and Padrenda (San Cibrán). ANNEX II Templates for reporting of the results of the annual surveys carried out pursuant to Article 6(b) PART A 1. Template for the reporting of the results of annual surveys 2. Instructions on how to fill in the template If this template is filled, the template in Part B of this Annex is not to be filled. For column 1 : Indicate the name of the geographical area, outbreak number or any information that allows identification of this demarcated area (DA) and the date when it was established. For column 2 : Indicate the size of the DA before the start of the survey. For column 3 : Indicate the size of the DA after the survey. For column 4 : Indicate the approach: Containment (C). Please, include as many rows as necessary, depending on the number of DA per pest and the approaches these areas are subject to. For column 5 : Indicate the zone of the DA where the survey was carried out, including as many rows as necessary: Infected zone (IZ) or buffer zone (BZ), using separate rows. When applicable, indicate the area of the IZ where the survey was carried out (e.g. last 20 km adjacent to the BZ, around nurseries, etc.) in different rows. For column 6 : Indicate the number and the description of the survey sites, by choosing one of the following entries for the description: For column 7 : Indicate, which are the risk areas identified based on the biology of the pest(s), presence of host plants, eco-climatic conditions and risk locations. For column 8 : Indicate the risk areas included in the survey, from those identified in column 7. For column 9 : Indicate plants, fruits, seeds, soil, packaging material, wood, machinery, vehicles, water, other, specifying the specific case. For column 10 : Indicate the list of plant species/genera surveyed using one row per plant species/genera. For column 11 : Indicate the months of the year when the survey was carried out. For column 12 : Indicate the details of the survey, depending on the specific legal requirements of each pest. Indicate with N/A when the information of certain column is not applicable. For columns 13 and 14 : Indicate the results, if applicable, providing the information available in the corresponding columns. ‘Undetermined’ are those analysed samples for which no result was obtained due to different factors (e.g. below detection level, unprocessed sample-not identified, old). For column 15 : Indicate the outbreak notifications of the year when the survey took place for findings in the BZ. The outbreak notification number does not need to be included when the competent authority has decided that the finding is one of the cases referred to in Article 14(2), Article 15(2) or Article 16 of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031. In this case, indicate the reason for not providing this information in column 16 (‘Comments’). PART B 1. Template for the reporting of the results of statistically based annual surveys 2. Instructions on how to fill in the template If this template is filled, the template in Part A of this Annex is not to be filled. Explain the underlying assumptions for the survey design per pest. Summarise and justify: — the target population, epidemiological unit and inspection units; — the detection method and method sensitivity; — the risk factor(s), indicating the risk levels and corresponding relative risks and proportions of host plant population. For column 1 : Indicate the name of the geographical area, outbreak number or any information that allows identification of this demarcated area (DA) and the date when it was established. For column 2 : Indicate the size of the DA before the start of the survey. For column 3 : Indicate the size of the DA after the survey. For column 4 : Indicate the approach: Containment (C). Please, include as many rows as necessary, depending on the number of DA per pest and the approaches these areas are subject to. For column 5 : Indicate the zone of the DA where the survey was carried out, including as many rows as necessary: Infected zone (IZ) or buffer zone (BZ), using separate rows. Where applicable, indicate the area of the IZ where the survey was carried out (e.g. last 20 km adjacent to the BZ, around nurseries, etc.) in different rows. For column 6 : Indicate the number and the description of the survey sites, by choosing one of the following entries for the description: For column 7 : Indicate the months of the year when the surveys were carried out. For column 8 : Indicate the chosen target population providing accordingly the list of host species/genera and area covered. The target population is defined as the ensemble of inspection units. Its size is defined typically for agricultural areas as hectares, but could be lots, fields, greenhouses etc. Please justify the choice made in the underlying assumptions. Indicate the inspection units surveyed. ‘Inspection unit’ means plants, plant parts, commodities, materials, pest vectors that had been scrutinised for identifying and detecting the pests. For column 9 : Indicate the epidemiological units surveyed, indicating its description and unit of measurement. ‘Epidemiological unit’ means a homogeneous area where the interactions between the pest, the host plants and the abiotic and biotic factors and conditions would result into the same epidemiology, should the pest be present. The epidemiological units are a subdivision of the target population that are homogenous in terms of epidemiology with at least one host plant. In some cases the whole host population in a region/area/country may be defined as epidemiological unit. They could be Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics (NUTS) regions, urban areas, forests, rose gardens or farms, or hectares. The choice of the epidemiological units has to be justified in the underlying assumptions. For column 10 : Indicate the methods used during the survey including the number of activities in each case, depending on the specific legal requirements of each pest. Indicate with N/A when the information of certain column is not available. For column 11 : Indicate an estimation of the sampling effectiveness. Sampling effectiveness means the probability of selecting infected plant parts from an infected plant. For vectors, it is the effectiveness of the method to capture a positive vector when it is present in the survey area. For soil, it is the effectiveness of selecting a soil sample containing the pest when the pest is present in the survey area. For column 12 : ‘Method sensitivity’ means the probability of a method to correctly detect pest presence. The method sensitivity is defined as the probability that a truly positive host tests positive. It is the multiplication of the sampling effectiveness (i.e. probability of selecting infected plant parts from an infected plant) by the diagnostic sensitivity (characterised by the visual inspection and/or laboratory test used in the identification process). For column 13 : Provide the risk factors in different rows, using as many rows as necessary. For each risk factor indicate the risk level and corresponding relative risk and proportion of host population. For column B : Indicate the details of the survey, depending on the specific legal requirements for each pest. Indicate with N/A when the information of certain column is not applicable. The information to be provided in these columns is related to the information included in the column 10 ‘Detection methods’. For column 18 : Indicate the number of trapping sites in case this number differs from the number of traps (column 17) (e.g. the same trap is used in different places). For column 21 : Indicate the number of samples found positive, negative or undetermined. ‘Undetermined’ are those analysed samples for which no result was obtained due to different factors (e.g. below detection level, unprocessed sample-not identified, old). For column 22 : Indicate the outbreak notifications of the year when the survey took place. The outbreak notification number does not need to be included when the competent authority has decided that the finding is one of the cases referred to in Article 14(2), Article 15(2) or Article 16 of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031. In this case, indicate the reason for not providing this information in column 25 (‘Comments’). For column 23 : Indicate the sensitivity of the survey, as defined in International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM) 31. This value of the achieved confidence level of pest freedom is calculated based on the examinations (and/or samples) performed given the method sensitivity and the design prevalence. For column 24 : Indicate the design prevalence based on a pre-survey estimate of the likely actual prevalence of the pest in the field. The design prevalence is set as a goal of the survey and corresponds to the compromise the risk managers are making between the risk of having the pest and the resources available for the survey. Typically, for a detection survey a value of 1 % is set.