All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32019R0318 Commission Regulation (EU) 2019/318 of 19 February 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 and Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles (Text with EEA relevance.) Commission Regulation (EU) 2019/318 of 19 February 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 and Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles (Text with EEA relevance.) Commission Regulation (EU) 2019/318 of 19 February 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 and Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles (Text with EEA relevance.) OJ L 58, 26.2.2019, pp. 1–56 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 26.2.2019 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 58/1 COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2019/318 of 19 February 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 and Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on type-approval of motor vehicles and engines with respect to emissions from heavy duty vehicles (Euro VI) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information and amending Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 and Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directives 80/1269/EEC, 2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC (1), and in particular Article 4(3) and Article 5(4)(e) thereof, Having regard to Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles (Framework Directive) (2), and in particular Article 39(7) thereof, Whereas: (1) Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 (3) introduces a common method to objectively compare the performance of heavy-duty vehicles placed on the Union market as regards their CO2 emissions and fuel consumption. It lays down provisions for the certification of components with an impact on CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles, introduces a simulation tool for the purpose of determining and declaring CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of those vehicles and lays down, inter alia, requirements for Member States' authorities and manufacturers to verify the conformity of the certification of the components and the conformity of the simulation tool operation. (2) The experience gained following the entry into force of Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 has led to the identification of several aspects of the common method for determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles, the operation of the simulation tool, the certification of components, separate technical units and systems and the procedure for the checking of conformity of the operation of the simulation tool and of the certification of components, separate technical units and systems which need clarification. Those clarifications also have an impact on the information provided by manufacturers in accordance with Directive 2007/46/EC. (3) The Commission has carried out an assessment regarding the technical and economic implications of the necessary clarifications. (4) The improvement of the common method to objectively compare the performance of heavy-duty vehicles in terms of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption should increase the competitiveness of Union industry and the transparency in the market as regards the fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles. (5) Liquefied natural gas (LNG) is an available alternative fuel to diesel for heavy-duty vehicles. The deployment of upcoming innovative LNG-based technologies will contribute to further decrease in CO2 emissions as compared to diesel vehicles. To ensure that LNG is covered by the engine test procedure, it is appropriate to include LNG as an additional reference fuel in the certification of engines in order to determine the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles. (6) It is appropriate to take into account the specificities of vocational vehicles, i.e. vehicles that are used for other purposes than the delivery of goods. Those vehicles should therefore be attributed to specific sub-groups within the existing vehicle groups to distinguish them from vehicles that are used only for the delivery of goods and their CO2 emissions should be determined in accordance with dedicated mission profiles. (7) It is also appropriate to clearly define those vehicles which, due to their advanced powertrains, including electric, hybrid electric and dual-fuel powertrains, cannot for the moment be subject to the requirement of determining their CO2 emissions or fuel consumption using the available simulation tool. In order to ensure a good understanding of the rate of market penetration of those vehicles, a specific procedure should be provided for to allow a clear identification of those vehicles and their respective powertrains. (8) It is essential for achieving CO2 reductions that the CO2 emissions of newly produced heavy-duty vehicles are in conformity with the values determined pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400. The conformity of the operation of the simulation tool and of the certification of the components, separate technical units and systems with an impact on CO2 emissions and fuel consumption should therefore be verified using an on-road verification testing procedure, in addition to the procedures already set out in Regulation (EU) 2017/2400. The verification testing procedure should be carried out by manufacturers and be verified by approval authorities. (9) It should be possible for the approval authorities to impose remedial measures for any systematic irregularities with regard to the certification of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of components, separate technical units or systems and the operation of the simulation tool, including when such irregularities are identified in the course of the investigation following a vehicle failure in the verification testing procedure. If the approval authorities find no irregularities with regard to the certification of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of components, separate technical units or systems or to the operation of the simulation tool despite the vehicle test failure, it should be possible for the Commission to examine a potential malfunction of the simulation tool. (10) During the verification testing procedure, the wheel torque, engine speed, engaged gear and fuel consumption of the heavy-duty vehicle should be measured on the road, close to the simulation tool mission profile, and compared to the fuel consumption calculated by the simulation tool. For a successfully passed verification testing procedure, the calculated fuel consumption should correspond to the measured fuel consumption within a certain tolerance. (11) The systematic verification of the results of a numerical simulation by a physical test is a new concept in the European type approval legislation. The underlying verification test procedure will therefore be evaluated with a view to possible improvements. The Commission and the approval authorities should therefore be authorised to collect the results of verification test procedures from manufacturers and to evaluate them. (12) In order to ensure sufficient time for the approval authorities and manufacturers to adapt to the new provisions, the obligation to verify CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of new vehicles using the on-road verification testing procedure should be applicable as of 1 July 2020. (13) The CO2 emissions data for vehicles falling within vehicle groups 4, 5, 9 and 10 that have been determined in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 are to be monitored under Regulation (EU) 2018/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4), starting in 2019. The aim of the amendments to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 set out in this Regulation is to ensure that reliable CO2 emissions data can be collected for all the vehicles concerned by Regulation (EU) 2018/956 for 2019. It is therefore important to ensure that the amendments set out in this Regulation enter into force without delay. (14) The measures provided for in this Regulation are in accordance with the opinion of the Technical Committee — Motor Vehicles, HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Amendments to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) in Article 2, paragraph 2 is replaced by the following: ‘2. In case of multi-stage type-approvals or individual approvals of vehicles referred to in paragraph 1, this Regulation shall apply only to base vehicles equipped at least with a chassis, engine, transmission, axles and tyres.’; (2) Article 3 is amended as follows: (3) Article 5 is amended as follows: (4) Article 9 is amended as follows: (5) in Article 12, paragraphs 6 and 7 are added: ‘6. In the case of ZE-HDVs, He-HDVs and dual-fuel vehicles, the simulation tool input data shall include the information set out in Table 5 of Annex III. 7. Where the vehicle is to be registered, sold or put into service with snow tyres and standard tyres, the vehicle manufacturer may choose which of the tyres to use for determining the CO2 emissions.’; (6) in Article 13, paragraph 8 is replaced by the following: ‘8. The standard value for tyres shall be the one for C3 snow tyres as set out in Table 2 of Part B of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*1). (*1) Regulation (EC) No 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles, their trailers and systems, components and separate technical units intended therefor (OJ L 200, 31.7.2009, p. 1).’;" (7) Article 20 is amended as follows: (8) in Article 23, in paragraph 1, the first subparagraph is replaced by the following: ‘1. Where the approval authority finds, pursuant to Articles 20 and 22, that the measures taken by the manufacturer to ensure that the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of the components, separate technical units and systems listed in Article 12(1) and which have been the subject of certification in accordance with Article 17 do not deviate from the certified values are not adequate, the approval authority shall request the manufacturer to submit a plan of remedial measures no later than 30 calendar days after receipt of the request from the approval authority.’; (9) Article 24 is amended as follows: (10) Annex I is amended in accordance with Annex I to this Regulation; (11) Annex III is amended in accordance with Annex II to this Regulation; (12) Annex IV is amended in accordance with Annex III to this Regulation; (13) Annex V is amended in accordance with Annex IV to this Regulation; (14) Annex VI is amended in accordance with Annex V to this Regulation; (15) Annex VII is amended in accordance with Annex VI to this Regulation; (16) Annex VIII is amended in accordance with Annex VII to this Regulation; (17) Annex IX is amended in accordance with Annex VIII to this Regulation; (18) Annex X is amended in accordance with Annex IX to this Regulation; (19) a new Annex Xa is inserted as set out in Annex X to this Regulation. Article 2 Amendments to Directive 2007/46/EC Annexes I, IV and IX to Directive 2007/46/EC are amended in accordance with Annex XI to this Regulation. Article 3 Entry into force and application This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. Article 2 shall apply as of 1 September 2019. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 19 February 2019. For the Commission The President Jean-Claude JUNCKER (1) OJ L 188, 18.7.2009, p. 1. (2) OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1. (3) Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 of 12 December 2017 implementing Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-duty vehicles and amending Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulation (EU) No 582/2011 (OJ L 349, 29.12.2017, p. 1). (4) Regulation (EU) 2018/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the monitoring and reporting of CO2 emissions from and fuel consumption of new heavy-duty vehicles (OJ L 173, 9.7.2018, p. 1). ANNEX I Table 1 of Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is replaced by the following: ‘Table 1 Vehicle groups for vehicles of category N Description of elements relevant to the classification in vehicle groups Vehicle group Allocation of mission profile and vehicle configuration Axle configuration Chassis configuration Technically permissible maximum laden mass (tons) Long haul Long haul (EMS) Regional delivery Regional delivery (EMS) Urban delivery Municipal utility Construction 4 × 2 Rigid lorry > 3,5 –7,5 (0) Rigid lorry (or tractor) (**) > 7,5 – 10 1 R R Rigid lorry (or tractor) (**) > 10 – 12 2 R+T1 R R Rigid lorry (or tractor) (**) > 12 – 16 3 R R Rigid lorry > 16 4 R+T2 R R R Tractor > 16 5 T+ST T+ST+T2 T+ST T+ST+T2 T+ST Rigid lorry > 16 4v (***) R R Tractor > 16 5v (***) T+ST 4 × 4 Rigid lorry > 7,5 – 16 (6) Rigid lorry > 16 (7) Tractor > 16 (8) 6 × 2 Rigid lorry all weights 9 R+T2 R+D+ST R R+D+ST R Tractor all weights 10 T+ST T+ST+T2 T+ST T+ST+T2 Rigid lorry all weights 9v (***) R R Tractor all weights 10v (***) T+ST 6 × 4 Rigid lorry all weights 11 R+T2 R+D+ST R R+D+ST R R Tractor all weights 12 T+ST T+ST+T2 T+ST T+ST+T2 T+ST 6 × 6 Rigid lorry all weights (13) Tractor all weights (14) 8 × 2 Rigid lorry all weights (15) 8 × 4 Rigid lorry all weights 16 R 8 × 6 8 × 8 Rigid lorry all weights (17) (**) In these vehicle classes tractors are treated as rigid lorries but with specific curb weight of tractor (***) Sub-group “v” of vehicle groups 4, 5, 9 and 10: these mission profiles are exclusively applicable to vocational vehicles ANNEX II Annex III to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) in point 2, point (1) is replaced by the following: ‘(1) “Parameter ID”: Unique identifier as used in the simulation tool for a specific input parameter or set of input data’; (2) point 3 is amended as follows: (3) in point 4.3, in the second paragraph (‘For vehicles of groups 1, 2 and 3’), point (d) is deleted; (4) the following points 8 to 8.4 are added: ‘8. Advanced driver assistance systems (1) In case of multiple PTOs mounted to the transmission, only the component with the highest losses according to point 3.6 of Annex IX, for its combination of criteria “PTOShaftsGearWheels” and “PTOShaftsOtherElements”, shall be declared.’; ANNEX III Annex IV to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) PART I is amended as follows: (2) PART II is amended as follows: (3) PART III is deleted. ANNEX IV Annex V to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) in point 3.1.5, point (4) is replaced by the following: (2) point 3.2 is amended as follows: (3) in point 4.3.5.2.1, the seventh paragraph is replaced by the following: ‘The 6 additional target engine speed setpoints shall be determined in accordance with the following provisions: (4) in point 4.3.5.2.2, the second paragraph is replaced by the following: ‘All target torque setpoints at a particular target engine speed setpoint that exceed the limit value defined by the full load torque value at this particular target engine speed setpoint minus 5 percent of Tmax_overall, shall be replaced by one single target torque setpoint at full load torque at this particular target engine speed setpoint. Each of these replacement setpoints shall be measured only once during the FCMC test sequence defined in accordance with paragraph 4.3.5.5. Figure 2 exemplarily illustrates the definition of the target torque setpoints.’; (5) in point 5.1, the first paragraph is replaced by the following: ‘Total engine work over a cycle or a defined period shall be determined from the recorded values of engine power determined in accordance with paragraph 3.1.2 of this Annex and paragraphs 6.3.5 and 7.4.8 of Annex 4 to UN/ECE Regulation 49 Rev.06.’; (6) in point 5.3.3.1, in Table 4, the last row ‘Natural gas/PI’ is replaced by the following: (7) in point 6.1.8, the second paragraph below the title is replaced by the following: ‘The value shall be rounded to 2 places to the right of the decimal point in accordance with ASTM E 29-06.’; (8) in Appendix 2, PART 1 is amended as follows: (9) Appendix 3 is amended as follows: (10) Appendix 4 is amended as follows: (11) in Appendix 5, point 1 is amended as follows: (12) Appendix 6 is amended as follows: (13) Appendix 7 is amended as follows: (14) in Appendix 8, point 8.1 is replaced by the following: ANNEX V Annex VI to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) in point 3.1.2.1, the fourth paragraph below the title is replaced by the following: ‘Total tested time per transmission individual and gear shall not exceed 5 times the actual testing time per gear (allowing re-testing of transmission if needed due to measuring or rig error).’; (2) in point 3.3.8.2, the second sentence is replaced by the following: ‘The measured and averaged torque at the input shaft shall be below ± 5 Nm or ± 0,5 % of the torque set point whichever value is larger for each measured operating point for the complete torque loss series.’; (3) in point 5.1.6.2.2.4, point (1) is replaced by the following: (4) in point 8.1.3, the third paragraph is replaced by the following: ‘ X shall be replaced by 1,5 % for SMT/AMT/DCT transmissions and 3 % for APT transmissions or transmission with more than 2 friction shift clutches.’; (5) Appendix 2 is amended as follows: (6) Appendix 3 is amended as follows: (7) Appendix 4 is amended as follows: (8) Appendix 5 is amended as follows: (9) Appendix 7 is amended as follows: (10) Appendix 12 is amended as follows: (1) DCT shall be declared as transmission type AMT.’ ANNEX VI Annex VII to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) in point 4.3, the second sentence below the title is replaced by the following: ‘The torque loss results shall be complemented in accordance with 4.4.8 and formatted in accordance with Appendix 6 for the further processing by the simulation tool.’; (2) in point 4.4.1, in the first paragraph below the title, the following sentence is added: ‘The torque measurement sequence shall be performed and recorded twice.’; (3) in point 4.4.2, the paragraph below the title is replaced by the following: ‘The measurement duration for each single grid point shall be 5-20 seconds.’; (4) in point 4.4.3, the first paragraph below the title is replaced by the following: ‘The recorded values for each grid point within the 5-20 seconds interval in accordance with point 4.4.2 shall be averaged to an arithmetic mean.’; (5) point 4.4.5.1 is replaced by the following: (6) point 4.4.8.5 is replaced by the following: (7) in point 6.2.1, Figure 2 is replaced by the following: ‘ Figure 2 Speed and torque range for conformity of the certified CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties testing ’ (8) in point 6.4.1, points (a) and (b) are replaced by the following: (9) Appendix 2 is amended as follows: (10) in Appendix 4, point 3.1 is amended as follows: (11) Appendix 5 is amended as follows: (12) Appendix 6 is amended as follows: ANNEX VII Annex VIII to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) in point 3, second paragraph below the title is replaced by the following: ‘Vehicles which are not member of a family shall use the standard values for Cd·Adeclared as described in Appendix 7 to this Annex. In this case no input data on air drag shall be provided. The allocation of standard values is done automatically by the simulation tool.’; (2) points 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 are replaced by the following: (3) in point 3.3.7, point iii is replaced by the following: (4) in point 3.5.3.1, point (vii) is replaced by the following: (5) in point 3.5.3.2, after the paragraph below the title, the following text is added: ‘In case it is not possible to maintain high speed for a complete round, e.g. due to curves being too narrow, it is allowed to deviate from target speed requirement during the curves, including the nearby straight portions that are needed for slowing down and accelerating the vehicle. Deviations shall be minimized as far as possible. Alternatively, the warm-up phase may be performed on a nearby road, if the target speed is maintained within ± 10 km/h for 90 % of the warm-up time. The part of the warm-up phase used for driving from the road to the standstill area of the test track for zeroing of the torque meters shall be included in the other warm-up phase set out in point 3.5.3.4. The time for this part shall not exceed 20 minutes. The speed and time during the warm-up phase shall be recorded by the measurement equipment.’; (6) point 3.5.3.4 is replaced by the following: (7) in point 3.6.5, point d. is replaced by the following: (8) point 3.9 is amended as follows: (9) Table 2 is amended as follows: the fourth row ‘Gross vehicle mass’ and tenth row ‘Gear box type’ below the title are replaced by the following: (10) in Table 4, the title is replaced by the following: ‘ Table 4 Input data for air drag pre-processing tool – measurement section configuration file ’; (11) in point 3.10.1.1, point xi is replaced by the following: (12) in point 3.11, the second paragraph below the title is replaced by the following: ‘Several declared values Cd·Adeclared can be created based on a single measured Cd·Acr (0) as long as the family provisions in accordance with point 4 of Appendix 5 are fulfilled.’; (13) Appendix 2 is replaced by the following: ‘Appendix 2 Air drag information document pursuant to … Air Drag type or family (if applicable): General remark: For simulation tool input data an electronic file format needs to be defined which can be used for data import to the simulation tool. The simulation tool input data may differ from the data requested in the information document and vice versa (to be defined). A data file is especially necessary wherever large data such as efficiency maps need to be handled (no manual transfer/input necessary). … 0.0. GENERAL PART 1 ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE (PARENT) AIR DRAG AND THE AIR DRAG TYPES WITHIN AN AIR DRAG FAMILY 1.0. SPECIFIC AIR DRAG INFORMATION 1.3. Body specifications (according to standard body definition) 1.4. (Semi-) Trailer specifications (according to (semi-) trailer specification by standard body) 1.5. Parameter defining the family in accordance with the description of the applicant (parent criteria and deviated family criteria) LIST OF ATTACHMENTS Attachment 1 to Information Document Information on test conditions (if applicable) (14) in Appendix 3, in Table 7, the sixth row ‘Vehicle group 9’ below the title is replaced by the following: (15) in Appendix 4, in Table 15, the title is replaced by the following: ‘Specifications standard semitrailer “ST1” ’; (16) Appendix 5 is amended as follows: (17) in Appendix 6, point 2 is amended as follows: (18) in Appendix 7, in point 2, the paragraph above Table 19 is replaced by the following: (19) Appendix 8 is amended as follows: “Type”: Data type of the parameter string … sequence of characters in ISO8859-1 encoding token … sequence of characters in ISO8859-1 encoding, no leading/trailing whitespace date … date and time in UTC time in the format: YYYY-MM-DD T HH:MM:SS Z with italic letters denoting fixed characters e.g. “2002-05-30T09:30:10Z” integer … value with an integral data type, no leading zeros, e.g. “1800” double, X … fractional number with exactly X digits after the decimal sign (“.”) and no leading zeros e.g. for “double, 2”: “2345.67”; for “double, 4”: “45.6780” “Unit” … physical unit of the parameter Set of input parameters Table 1 Input parameters “AirDrag” (20) Appendix 9 is replaced by the following: ‘Appendix 9 Input parameters for the simulation tool Introduction This Appendix describes the list of parameters to be provided by the vehicle manufacturer as input to the simulation tool. The applicable XML schema as well as example data are available at the dedicated electronic distribution platform. The XML is automatically generated by the air drag pre-processing tool. Definitions (1) (2) (3) Parameter name Parameter ID Type Unit Description/Reference Manufacturer P240 token Model P241 token CertificationNumber P242 token Identifier of the component as used in the certification process Date P243 date Date and time when the component hash is created AppVersion P244 token Number identifying the version of the air drag pre-processing tool CdxA_0 P245 double, 2 [m2] Final result of the air drag pre-processing tool. TransferredCdxA P246 double, 2 [m2] CdxA_0 transferred to related families in other vehicle groups in accordance with Table 16 of Appendix 5. In case no transfer rule was applied CdxA_0 shall be provided. DeclaredCdxA P146 double, 2 [m2] Declared value for air drag family In case standard values in accordance with Appendix 7 shall be used in the simulation tool, no input data for air drag component shall be provided. The standard values are allocated automatically in accordance with the vehicle group scheme. ANNEX VIII Annex IX to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) point 1 is amended as follows: (2) in point 2, point (17) is replaced by the following: (3) point 3.2 is amended as follows: (4) in point 3.3, the third paragraph is replaced by the following: ‘If the technology used in the vehicle is not listed, the technology “standard alternator” shall be considered in the simulation tool.’; (5) in point 3.5, Table 9 is replaced by the following: ‘Table 9 Mechanical power demand of AC system (6) in point 3.6, in the paragraph below the title, the third sentence is replaced by the following: ‘Application related power consumptions at engaged PTO are added by the simulation tool and are not described in the following.’. ANNEX IX Annex X to Regulation (EU) 2017/2400 is amended as follows: (1) point 3.4.1 is replaced by the following: (2) in point 3.4.2, the first sentence is replaced by the following: ‘The tyre manufacturer shall use the markings affixed to the side wall of the tyre or affix an additional identifier to the tyre.’; (3) Appendix 1 is replaced by the following: ‘Appendix 1 MODEL OF A CERTIFICATE OF A COMPONENT, SEPARATE TECHNICAL UNIT OR SYSTEM Maximum format: A4 (210 × 297 mm) CERTIFICATE ON CO2 EMISSIONS AND FUEL CONSUMPTION RELATED PROPERTIES OF A TYRE FAMILY of a certificate on CO2 emission and fuel consumption related properties of a tyre family in accordance with Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2400, as amended by Commission Regulation (EU) 2019/318 Certification number: … Hash: … Reason for extension: … (4) Appendix 2 is amended as follows: (5) Appendix 3 is amended as follows: (6) in Appendix 4, point 2.1 is replaced by the following: (1) “delete as appropriate” ANNEX X ‘ANNEX Xa Conformity of simulation tool operation and of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of components, separate technical units and systems: verification testing procedure 1. Introduction This Annex sets out the requirements for the verification testing procedure which is the test procedure for verifying the CO2 emissions of new heavy-duty vehicles. The verification testing procedure consists of an on-road test to verify the CO2 emissions of new vehicles after production. It shall be carried out by the vehicle manufacturer and verified by the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool. During the verification testing procedure the torque and speed at the driven wheels, the engine speed, the fuel consumption, the engaged gear of the vehicle and the other relevant parameters listed in point 6.1.6 shall be measured. The measured data shall be used as input to the simulation tool, which uses the vehicle-related input data and the input information from the determination of the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of the vehicle. For the verification testing procedure simulation, the instantaneously measured wheel torque and the rotational speed of the wheels as well as the engine speed shall be used as input, as described in Figure 1 instead of the vehicle speed, in accordance with point 6.1.6. The fan power during the verification testing procedure shall be calculated in accordance with the measured fan speed. The measured fuel consumption shall be within the tolerances set out in point 7 and compared to the fuel consumption simulated with the verification data set to pass the verification testing procedure. As part of the verification testing procedure, the correctness of the vehicle input data set from the certification of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of the components, separate technical units and systems shall also be reviewed to check the data and the data handling process. The correctness of the input data relating to components, separate technical units and systems relevant for air drag and for rolling resistance of the vehicle shall be verified in accordance with point 6.1.1. Figure 1 Schematic picture of the verification testing procedure method 2. Definitions For the purposes of this Annex the following definitions shall apply: (1) “verification test relevant data set” means a set of input data for components, separate technical units and systems and input information used for CO2 determination of a verification testing procedure relevant vehicle; (2) “verification testing procedure relevant vehicle” means a new vehicle for which a value of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption was determined and declared in accordance with Article 9; (3) “corrected actual mass of the vehicle” means the corrected actual mass of the vehicle in accordance with point 2(4) of Annex III; (4) “actual mass of the vehicle” is as defined in Article 2(6) of Regulation (EU) No 1230/2012; (5) “actual mass of the vehicle with payload” means the actual mass of the vehicle with the superstructure and with the payload applied in the verification testing procedure; (6) “wheel power” means the total power at the driven wheels of a vehicle to overcome all driving resistances at the wheel, computed in the simulation tool from the measured torque and rotational speed of the driven wheels; (7) “control area network signal” or “CAN signal” means a signal from the connection with the vehicle electronic control unit as referred to in paragraph 2.1.5 of Appendix 1 to Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 582/2011; (8) “urban driving” means the total distance driven during the fuel consumption measurement at speeds below 50 km/h; (9) “rural driving” means the total distance driven during the fuel consumption measurement at speeds from 50 km/h to 70 km/h; (10) “motorway driving” means the total distance driven in the fuel consumption measurement at speeds above 70 km/h; (11) “crosstalk” means the signal at the main output of a sensor (My), produced by a measurand (Fz) acting on the sensor, which is different from the measurand assigned to this output; the coordinate system assignment is defined in accordance with ISO 4130. 3. Vehicle selection The number of new vehicles to be tested per year of production ensures that the relevant variations of components, separate technical units or systems used are covered by the verification testing procedure. The vehicle selection for the verification test shall be based on following requirements: (a) The vehicles for verification test shall be selected out of the vehicles from the production line for which a value of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption has been determined and declared in accordance with Article 9. The components, separate technical units or systems mounted in or on the vehicle shall be out of series production and shall correspond to those mounted at production date of the vehicle. (b) The vehicle selection shall be made by the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool based on proposals from the vehicle manufacturer. (c) Only vehicles with one driven axle shall be selected for verification test. (d) It is recommended to include in each verification test relevant data set engine, axle and transmission with highest sales numbers per manufacturer. The components, separate technical units or systems may be tested all in one vehicle or in different vehicles, under the condition that each component is covered by minimum one verification test on one vehicle. (e) Vehicles which use standard values for CO2 certification of their components, separate technical units or systems instead of measured values for the transmission and for the axle losses shall not be selected for the verification test as long as vehicles complying with the requirements in points a) to c) and using measured loss maps for these components, separate technical units or systems in the CO2 certification, are produced. (f) The minimum number of different vehicles with different combinations of verification test relevant data sets to be tested by verification test per year shall be based on the sales numbers of the vehicle manufacturer as set out in Table 1: Table 1 Determination of the minimum number of vehicles to be tested by the vehicle manufacturer (g) The vehicle manufacturer shall finalize the verification test within a period of 10 months after the date of selection of the vehicle for the verification test. 4. Vehicle conditions Each vehicle for the verification test shall be in series conditions as typically delivered to the customer. No changes in hardware such as lubricants or in the software such as auxiliary controllers are allowed. 4.1. Vehicle run in Run in of the vehicle is not mandatory. If the total mileage of the test vehicle is less than 15 000 km, an evolution coefficient for the test result shall be applied as defined in point 7. The total mileage of the test vehicle shall be the odometer reading at start of the fuel consumption measurement. The maximum mileage for the verification testing procedure shall be 20 000 km. 4.2. Fuel and lubricants All lubricants shall be in line with the series configuration of the vehicle. For the fuel consumption measurement as described in point 6.1.5, reference fuel as set out in point 3.2 of Annex V shall be used. The fuel tank shall be full at start of the fuel consumption measurement run. 5. Measurement equipment All laboratory reference measurement equipment, used for calibration and verification, shall be traceable to national (international) standards. The calibration laboratory shall comply with the requirements of ISO 9000 series and either ISO/TS 16949 or ISO/IEC 17025. 5.1. Torque The direct torque at all driven axles shall be measured with one of the following measurement systems fulfilling the requirements listed in Table 2: (a) hub torque meter; (b) rim torque meter; (c) half-shaft torque meter. The calibrated range shall be at least 10 000 Nm; the measurement range shall cover the entire range of torque occurring during the verification testing procedure of the tested vehicle. The drift shall be measured during the verification test described in point 6 by zeroing the torque measurement system in accordance with point 6.1.5 after the pre-conditioning phase by lifting the axle and measuring the torque at lifted axle directly after the verification test again. For a valid test result a maximum drift of the torque measurement system over the verification testing procedure of 150 Nm (sum of both wheels) shall be proven. 5.2. Vehicle speed The vehicle speed shall be used for possible plausibility checks of the gear signal later on and shall be based on the CAN signal. 5.3. Gear engaged The engaged gear does not need to be measured but shall be calculated by the simulation tool based on measured engine speed, the vehicle speed and the tyre dimensions and transmission ratios of the vehicle in accordance with point 7. The gear position may be provided also from the CAN signal to check possible deviations from the gear position calculated by the simulation tool. In case of deviations of the gear position in more than 5 % of the test duration, the reasons for the deviation shall be investigated and reported by the vehicle manufacturer. The input data on gear position shall be used in the simulation tool to compute the gear dependent losses in the gear box. The engine speed shall be taken by the simulation tool from the input data as defined in point 5.4. 5.4. Rotational speed of the engine The signal from the connection with the vehicle electronic control unit via the open on-board diagnostic interface shall be used to measure the engine speed. Alternative measurement systems are allowed if they fulfil the requirements set out in Table 2. 5.5. Rotational speed of the wheels at the driven axle The measurement system for the rotational speed of left and right wheel at the driven axle for the assessment of the power demand at the wheels as input to the simulation tool for the verification test simulation shall fulfil the requirements set out in Table 2. 5.6. Rotational speed of fan The CAN signal for the fan speed may be used, if available. Alternatively an external sensor fulfilling the requirements set out in Table 2 may be used. 5.7. Fuel measurement system The fuel consumed shall be measured on-board with a measurement device reporting the total amount of fuel consumed in kilograms. The fuel measurement system shall be based on one of the following measurement methods: (a) Measurement of fuel mass. The fuel measuring device shall fulfil the accuracy requirements set out in Table 2 for the fuel mass measurement system. (b) Measurement of fuel volume together with correction for the thermal expansion of the fuel. The fuel volume measurement device and fuel temperature measurement device shall fulfil the accuracy requirements set out in Table 2 for the fuel volume measurement system. The fuel mass consumed shall be calculated in accordance with the following equations: where: 5.8. Vehicle weight The following masses of the vehicle shall be measured with equipment fulfilling the requirements set out in Table 2: (a) actual mass of the vehicle; (b) actual mass of the vehicle with payload. 5.9. General requirements for the on-board measurements All data shall be recorded at least in 2 Hz frequency or at recommended frequency from the equipment maker, whichever is the higher value. The input data for the simulation tool may be composed from different recorders. The following input data shall be provided from measurements: (a) torque at the driven wheels per wheel; (b) rotational speed at the driven wheels per wheel; (c) gear (optional); (d) engine speed; (e) fan speed; (f) vehicle speed; (g) fuel flow. The torque and rotational speed at the wheels shall be recorded in one data-logging system. If different data-logging systems are used for the other signals, one common signal, such as vehicle speed, shall be recorded to ensure correct time alignment of the signals. The accuracy requirements set out in Table 2 shall be met by all measurement equipment used. Any equipment not listed in Table 2 shall fulfil the accuracy requirements set out in Table 2 of Annex V. Table 2 Requirements of measurement systems Measurement system Accuracy Rise time (1) Balance for vehicle weight 50 kg or < 0,5 % of max. calibration whichever is smaller — Rotational speed wheels < 0,5 % of max. calibration ≤ 1 s Fuel mass flow for liquid fuels < 1,0 % of reading or < 0,5 % of max. calibration whichever is larger ≤ 2 s Fuel volume measurement system (2) < 1,0 % of reading or < 0,5 % of max. calibration whichever is larger ≤ 2 s Temperature of the fuel ± 1 °C ≤ 2 s Sensor for measuring the rotational speed cooling fan 0,4 % of reading or 0,2 % of max. calibration of speed whichever is larger ≤ 1 s Engine speed As set out in Annex V Wheel torque For 10 kNm calibration: < 40 Nm accuracy < 20 Nm crosstalk < 0,1 s The maximum calibration values shall be at least 1,1 times the maximum predicted value expected during all test runs for the respective measurement system. For the torque measurement system the maximum calibration may be limited to 10 kNm. Accuracy given shall be met by the sum of all single accuracies in the case more than one scale is used. 6. Test procedure 6.1. Vehicle preparation The vehicle shall be taken from the series production and selected as set out in point 3. 6.1.1. Validation of input data The manufacturer's records file for the vehicle selected shall be used as basis for validating the input data. The vehicle identification number of the vehicle selected shall be the same as the vehicle identification number in the customer information file. Upon request by the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool, the vehicle manufacturer shall provide, within 15 working days, the manufacturer's records file, the input information and input data necessary to run the simulation tool as well as the certificate of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties for all relevant components, separate technical units or systems. 6.1.1.1. Verification of components, separate technical units or systems and input data and information The following checks shall be performed for the components, separate technical units and systems mounted on the vehicle: (a) Simulation tool data integrity: the integrity of the cryptographic hash of the manufacturer's records file in accordance with Article 9(3) re-calculated during the verification testing procedure with the hashing tool shall be verified by comparison with the cryptographic hash in the certificate of conformity; (b) Vehicle data: the vehicle identification number, axle configuration, selected auxiliaries and power take off technology shall match the selected vehicle; (c) Component, separate technical unit or system data: the certification number and the model type imprinted on the certificate of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties shall match the component, separate technical unit or system installed in the selected vehicle; (d) The hash of the simulation tool input data and the input information shall match the hash imprinted on the certificate of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties for the following components, separate technical units or systems: 6.1.1.2. Verification of the vehicle mass If requested by the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool, a verification of the corrected actual mass of the vehicle shall be included into the verification of input data. For the verification of the mass, the mass in running order of the vehicle shall be verified in accordance with point 2 of Appendix 2 to Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1230/2012. 6.1.1.3. Actions to be taken In case of discrepancies in the certification number or the cryptographic hash of one or more files regarding the components, separate technical units or systems listed in subpoints (d)(i) to (vii) of point 6.1.1.1 the correct input data file fulfilling the checks in accordance with points 6.1.1.1 and 6.1.1.2 shall replace the incorrect data for all further actions. If no complete input data set with correct certificates of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties is available for the components, separate technical units or systems listed in subpoints (d)(i) to (vii) of point 6.1.1.1 the verification test shall end and the vehicle fails the verification testing procedure. 6.1.2. Run in phase After the validation of input data in accordance with point 6.1.1, a run in phase up to maximum 15 000 km odometer reading may take place, with no need to use the reference fuel, if the odometer reading of the vehicle selected is below 15 000 km. In case of damage of any of the components, separate technical units or systems listed in point 6.1.1.1, the component, separate technical units or systems may be replaced by an equivalent component, separate technical units or systems with the same certification number. The replacement shall be documented in the test report. All relevant components, separate technical units or systems shall be checked before the measurements to exclude unusual conditions, such as incorrect oil fill levels, plugged air filters or on-board diagnostic warnings. 6.1.3. Set up of measurement equipment All measurement systems shall be calibrated in accordance with the provisions of the equipment maker. If no provisions exist, the recommendations from the equipment maker shall be followed for calibration. After the run in phase, the vehicle shall be equipped with the measurement systems set out in point 5. 6.1.4. Set up of the test vehicle for the fuel consumption measurement Tractors of the vehicle groups defined in Table 1 of Annex I shall be tested with any type of semitrailer, providing the loading defined below can be applied. Rigid lorries of the vehicle groups defined in Table 1 of Annex I shall be tested with trailer, if a trailer connection is mounted. Any body type or other device to carry the loading set out below can be applied. The bodies of the vehicles may differ from the standard bodies set out in Table 1 of Annex I for the certification of CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of component, separate technical units or systems. The vehicle payload shall be at minimum to a mass leading to a total test weight of 90 % of the maximum gross combined weight or gross vehicle weight for rigid lorries without trailer. The tyre inflation pressure shall be in line with the recommendation of the manufacturer. The tyres of the semitrailer may differ from the standard tyres set out in Table 2 of Part B of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 661/2009 for the CO2 certification of tyres. All settings influencing the auxiliary energy demand shall be set to minimum reasonable energy consumption where applicable. The air conditioning shall be switched off and venting of the cabin shall be set lower than medium mass flow. Additional energy consumers not necessary to run the vehicle shall be switched off. External devices to provide energy on board, such as external batteries, are allowed only for running the extra measurement equipment for the verification testing procedure listed in Table 2 but shall not provide energy to serial vehicle equipment. A particle filter regeneration may be initiated and shall be achieved before the verification test. If an initiated particle filter regeneration cannot be achieved before the verification test, the test is invalid and shall be repeated. 6.1.5. Verification test 6.1.5.1. Route selection The route selected for the verification test shall fulfil the requirements set out in Table 3. The routes may include both public and private tracks. 6.1.5.2. Vehicle pre conditioning No specific pre-conditioning of the vehicle is required. 6.1.5.3. Vehicle warm up Before the fuel consumption measurement starts, the vehicle shall be driven for warm up as set out in Table 3. The warm up phase shall not be considered in the evaluation of the verification test. 6.1.5.4. Zeroing of the torque measurement equipment Zeroing of the torque measurement equipment shall follow the instruction of the equipment maker. It shall be ensured for zeroing, that the torque on the driven axle is zero. For zeroing, the vehicle shall be stopped directly after the warm up phase and zeroing shall be performed directly after the vehicle stop to minimise cool down effects. Zeroing shall be finished within less than 20 minutes. 6.1.5.5. Fuel consumption measurement The fuel consumption measurement shall start directly after the zeroing of the wheel-torque measurement equipment at vehicle stand still and engine idling. The vehicle shall be driven during the measurement in a driving style avoiding unnecessary braking of the vehicle, gas pedal pumping and aggressive cornering. The setting for the electronic control systems which is activated automatically at vehicle start shall be used, and gear shifts shall be performed by the automated system if applicable. If only manual settings for the electronic control systems are available, the settings leading to higher fuel consumption per kilometre shall be selected. The duration of the fuel consumption measurement shall be within the tolerances set out in Table 3. The fuel consumption measurement shall end also at vehicle stand still in idling condition directly before the measurement of the drift of the torque measurement equipment. 6.1.5.6. Measurement of the drift of the torque measurement equipment Directly after the fuel consumption measurement, the drift of the torque measurement equipment shall be recorded by measuring the torque at the same vehicle conditions as during the zeroing process. If the fuel consumption measurement does not end at zero vehicle speed, the vehicle shall be stopped for the drift measurement in moderate deceleration. 6.1.5.7. Boundary conditions for the verification test The boundary conditions to be met for a valid verification test are set in Table 3. If the vehicle passes the verification test in accordance with point 7, the test shall be set valid even if the following conditions are not met: — undercut of minimum values for parameter No 1, 2, 6, 9 in Table 3, — exceedance of maximum values for parameter No 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12 in Table 3. Table 3 Parameters for a valid verification test No Parameter Min. Max. Applicable for 1 Warm up [minutes] 60 2 Average velocity at warm up [km/h] 70 (3) 100 3 Fuel consumption measurement duration [minutes] 80 120 4 Distance based share urban driving 2 % 8 % vehicle groups 4, 5, 9, 10 5 Distance based share rural driving 7 % 13 % 6 Distance based share motorway driving 74 % — vehicle groups 4, 5, 9, 10 7 Time share of idling at stand still 5 % 8 Average ambient temperature 5 °C 30 °C 9 Road condition dry 100 % 10 Road condition snow or ice 0 % 11 Seal level of the route [m] 0 800 12 Duration of continuous idling at stand still [minutes] 3 In case of extraordinary traffic conditions, the verification test shall be repeated. 6.1.6. Data reporting The data recorded during the verification testing procedure shall be reported to the approval authority that granted the licence to operate the simulation tool as follows: (a) The data recorded shall be reported in a constant 2 Hz signals as set out in Table 1. The data recorded at higher frequencies than 2 Hz shall be converted into 2 Hz by averaging the time intervals around the 2 Hz nodes. In case of e.g. 10 Hz sampling, the first 2 Hz node is defined by the average from second 0,1 to 0,5, the second node is defined by the average from second 0,6 to 1,0. The time stamp for each node shall be the last time stamp per node, i.e. 0,5, 1,0, 1,5 etc. (b) The wheel power shall be calculated from the measured wheel torque and rotational wheel speed. All values shall first be converted into 2 Hz signals in accordance with point (a). Then the wheel power for each driven wheel shall be calculated from the 2 Hz torque and speed signals as set out in the following equation: where: The wheel power input data for the verification test simulation with the simulation tool shall be the sum of the power of all driven wheels of the vehicle as set out in the following equation: where: Table 4 Data reporting format for measured data for the simulation tool in the verification test Quantity Unit Header input data Comment time node [s] <t> vehicle speed [km/h] <v> engine speed [rpm] <n_eng> engine cooling fan speed [rpm] <n_fan> torque left wheel [Nm] <tq_left> torque right wheel [Nm] <tq_right> wheel speed left [rpm] <n_wh_left> wheel speed right [rpm] <n_wh_right> gear [-] <gear> optional signal for MT and AMT fuel flow [g/h] <fc> for standard NCV (point 7.2) 7. Test evaluation The simulated fuel consumption shall be compared to the measured fuel consumption using the simulation tool. 7.1. Simulation of the fuel consumption The input data and input information for the simulation tool for the verification test shall be the following: (a) The certified CO2 emissions and fuel consumption related properties of the following components, separate technical units or systems: (b) The input data set out in Table 4. The power calculated by the simulation tool by the equations of longitudinal dynamics from the measured vehicle speed and road gradient course may be used for plausibility checks to test if the total simulated cycle work is similar to the measured value. The simulation tool shall calculate the gears engaged during the verification test by calculating the engine speeds per gear at the actual vehicle speed and selecting the gear that provides the engine speed closest to the measured engine speed. The measured wheel power shall replace in the verification test mode of the simulation tool the simulated power demand at the wheels. The measured engine speed and the gear defined in the verification test input data shall replace the corresponding simulation part. The standard fan power in the simulation tool shall be replaced by the fan power calculated from the measured fan speed in the simulation tool as follows: where: Pfan = fan power to be used in the simulation for the verification test [kW] RPMfan = measured rotational speed of the fan [1/s] Dfan = diameter of the fan [m] C1, C2, C3 = generic parameters in the simulation tool: C1 = 7 320 W C2 = 1 200 rpm C3 = 810 mm The steering pump, compressor and generator shall be attributed standard values in accordance with Annex IX. All other simulation steps and data handling concerning axle, transmission and engine efficiency shall be identical to the application of the simulation tool to determine and declare the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of new vehicles. The simulated fuel consumption value shall be the total fuel flow over the verification test relevant test distance, from the end of the zeroing after the warm up phase to the end of the test. The total verification test relevant test distance shall be calculated from the vehicle speed signal. The results from the simulation tool for the verification test shall be calculated as follows: where: VT work = Verification test work calculated by the simulation tool for the complete fuel consumption measurement phase [kWh] FCsim = Fuel consumption simulated by the simulation tool over the complete fuel consumption measurement phase [g/kWh] fs = Simulation rate [Hz] FCsim (t) = Instantaneous fuel consumption simulated by the simulation tool over the test [g/s] 7.2. Calculation of the measured fuel consumption The measured fuel flow shall be integrated for the same time span as the simulated fuel consumption. The measured fuel consumption for the total test shall be calculated as follows: where: FCm = Fuel consumption measured by integrating fuel mass flow over the complete fuel consumption measurement phase [g/kWh] FCm (t) = Instantaneous fuel mass flow measured during the fuel consumption measurement phase [g/s] fs = Sampling rate [Hz] VT workm = Verification test work at the wheel calculated from the measured wheel torque and wheel rotational speeds over the complete fuel consumption measurement phase [kWh] Pwheel-i-measured,t = Positive power at the left (i = l) and right (i = 2) wheel calculated from the measured wheel torque and wheel rotational speeds at time step t where only power values greater zero are considered Torquei = instantaneously measured torque at the wheel “i” in time step “t” [Nm] rpmi = instantaneously measured rotational speed at the wheel “i” in time step “t” [min– 1] The measured fuel consumption values shall be corrected for the net calorific value (NCV) as set out in point 3 of Annex V to calculate the verification test results. where: NCVmeas = NCV of the fuel used in the verification test determined in accordance with point 3.2 of Annex V [MJ/kg] NCVstd = Standard NCV in accordance with Table 4 of Annex V [MJ/kg] FCm,corr = Fuel consumption measured by integrating fuel mass over the complete fuel consumption measurement phase corrected for the test fuel NCV [g/kWh] 7.3. Pass/Fail check The vehicle shall pass the verification test if the ratio of corrected measured fuel consumption to simulated fuel consumption is below the tolerances set out in Table 5. In the case of a shorter run-in phase than 15 000 km the influence on the fuel efficiency of the vehicle may be corrected with the following evolution coefficient: [g/kWh] where: FCm-c = Fuel consumption measured and corrected of a shorter run-in phase mileage = run-in distance [km] ef = Evolution coefficient of 0,98 For vehicle odometer reading above 15 000 km, no correction shall be applied. The ratio of measured and simulated fuel consumption for the total verification test relevant trip shall be calculated as verification test ratio in accordance with the following equation: Where: CVTP = Ratio of fuel consumption measured and simulated in the verification testing procedure For a comparison with the declared CO2 emissions of the vehicle in accordance with Article 9, the verified CO2 emissions of the vehicle are determined as follows: where: CO2verified = verified CO2 emissions of the vehicle in [g/t-km] CO2declared = declared CO2 emissions of the vehicle in [g/t-km] If a first vehicle fails the tolerances for CVTP, two more tests may be performed on the same vehicle or two more similar vehicles may be tested on request of the vehicle manufacturer. For the evaluation of the pass criterion set out in Table 5, the averages of the verification testing procedure ratio from the up to three tests shall be used. If the pass criterion is not reached, the vehicle fails the verification testing procedure. Table 5 Pass fail criterion for the verification test CVPT Pass criterion for the verification testing procedure < 1,075 8. Reporting procedures The test report shall be established by the vehicle manufacturer for each vehicle tested and shall include at least the following results of the verification test: 8.1. General 8.1.1. Name and address of the vehicle manufacturer 8.1.2. Address(es) of assembly plant(s) 8.1.3. The name, address, telephone and fax numbers and email address of the vehicle manufacturer's representative 8.1.4. Type and commercial description 8.1.5. Selection criteria for vehicle and CO2 relevant components (text) 8.1.6. Vehicle owner 8.1.7. Odometer reading at test start of the fuel consumption measurement (km) 8.2. Vehicle information 8.2.1. Vehicle model 8.2.2. Vehicle identification number (VIN) 8.2.3. Vehicle category (N2, N3) 8.2.4. Axle configuration 8.2.5. Maximum gross vehicle weight (t) 8.2.6. Vehicle group 8.2.7. Corrected actual mass of the vehicle (kg) 8.2.8. Cryptographic hash of the manufacturer's records file 8.2.9. Vehicle combination's gross combined weight in the verification test (kg) 8.3. Main engine specifications 8.3.1. Engine model 8.3.2. Engine certification number 8.3.3. Engine rated power (kW) 8.3.4. Engine capacity (l) 8.3.5. Engine reference fuel type (diesel/LPG/CNG …) 8.3.6. Hash of the fuel map file/document 8.4. Main transmission specifications 8.4.1. Transmission model 8.4.2. Transmission certification number 8.4.3. Main option used for generation of loss maps (Option1/Option2/Option3/Standard values) 8.4.4. Transmission type 8.4.5. Number of gears 8.4.6. Transmission ratio final gear 8.4.7. Retarder type 8.4.8. Power take off (yes/no) 8.4.9. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.5. Main retarder specifications 8.5.1. Retarder model 8.5.2. Retarder certification number 8.5.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.5.4. Hash of the retarder efficiency map file/document 8.6. Torque converter specification 8.6.1. Torque converter model 8.6.2. Torque converter certification number 8.6.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.6.4. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.7. Angle drive specifications 8.7.1. Angle drive model 8.7.2. Axle certification number 8.7.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.7.4. Angle drive ratio 8.7.5. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.8. Axle specifications 8.8.1. Axle model 8.8.2. Axle certification number 8.8.3. Certification option used for generation of a loss map (standard values/measurement) 8.8.4. Axle type (e.g. standard single driven axle) 8.8.5. Axle ratio 8.8.6. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.9. Aerodynamics 8.9.1. Model 8.9.2. Certification option used for generation of CdxA (standard values/measurement) 8.9.3. CdxA Certification number (if applicable) 8.9.4. CdxA value 8.9.5. Hash of the efficiency map file/document 8.10. Main tyre specifications 8.10.1. Tyre certification number on all axles 8.10.2. Specific rolling resistance coefficient of all tyres on all axles 8.11. Main auxiliary specifications 8.11.1. Engine cooling fan technology 8.11.2. Steering pump technology 8.11.3. Electric system technology 8.11.4. Pneumatic system technology 8.12. Test conditions 8.12.1. Actual mass of the vehicle (kg) 8.12.2. Actual mass of the vehicle with payload (kg) 8.12.3. Warm up time (minutes) 8.12.4. Average velocity at warm up (km/h) 8.12.5. Fuel consumption measurement duration (minutes) 8.12.6. Distance based share urban driving (%) 8.12.7. Distance based share rural driving (%) 8.12.8. Distance based share motorway driving (%) 8.12.9. Time share of idling at stand still (%) 8.12.10. Average ambient temperature (°C) 8.12.11. Road condition (dry, wet, snow, ice, others please specify) 8.12.12. Maximum seal level of the route (m) 8.12.13. Maximum duration of continuous idling at stand still (minutes) 8.13. Results of the verification test 8.13.1. Average fan power calculated for the verification test by the simulation tool (kW) 8.13.2. Work over the verification test calculated by the simulation tool (kW) 8.13.3. Work over the verification test measured (kW) 8.13.4. NCV of the fuel used in the verification test (MJ/kg) 8.13.5. Fuel consumption in the verification test measured (g/km) 8.13.6. Fuel consumption in the verification test measured, corrected (g/kWh) 8.13.7. Fuel consumption in the verification test simulated (g/km) 8.13.8. Fuel consumption in the verification test simulated (g/kWh) 8.13.9. Mission profile (long haul/long haul(EMS)/regional/regional(EMS)/urban/municipal/construction) 8.13.10. Verified CO2 emissions of the vehicle (g/tkm) 8.13.11. Declared CO2 emissions of the vehicle (g/tkm) 8.13.12. Ratio of fuel consumption measured and simulated in the verification testing procedure in (-) 8.13.13. Passed the verification test (yes/no) 8.14. Software and user information 8.14.1. Simulation tool version (X.X.X) 8.14.2. Date and time of the simulation (1) Rise time means the difference in time between the 10 percent and 90 percent response of the final analyser reading (t90 – t10). (2) The accuracy shall be met for the integral fuel flow over 100 minutes. (3) Or maximum vehicle speed if lower than 70 km/h ANNEX XI Annexes I, IV and IX to Directive 2007/46/EC are amended as follows: (1) Annex I is amended as follows: (2) in Annex IV, Part I, explanatory note 16 is replaced by the following: (3) Annex IX is amended as follows: