No Product Raw materials (reference to provisions of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009) Import and transit conditions Third countries’ lists Certificates/model documents 1 Processed manure, derived products from processed manure, frass and guano from bats Category 2 material referred to in Article 9, point (a). The processed manure, the derived products from processed manure and the guano from bats must have been produced in accordance with Chapter I, Section 2, of Annex XI. Third countries listed in: (a) Part 1 of Annex XIII or Part 1, Section A, of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 for the processed manure of ungulates, frass or guano from bats, and the following third countries: (b) Part 1 of Annex IV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 for the processed manure of solipeds; or (c) Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 for the processed manure of poultry. Annex XV, Chapter 17. 2 Blood products, еxcluding from equidae, for the manufacture of derived products for uses outside the feed chain for farmed animals Category 1 material referred to in Article 8, points (c) and (d), and Category 3 material referred to in Article 10, points (a), (b), (d) and (h). The blood products must have been produced in accordance with Section 2. The following third countries: (a) in the case of untreated blood products of ungulates: Third countries or parts of third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 from which imports of fresh meat of any domestic ungulate species is authorised and only for the period indicated in columns 7 and 8 of that Part. (b) in the case of untreated blood products of poultry and other avian species: Third countries or parts of third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404. (c) in the case of untreated blood products of other animals: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII, Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, or in Annex V or Annex VI to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. (d) in the case of treated blood products of any species: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII or Part 1, Section A, of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, in Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 or in Annex VI to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405, and the following third countries: (a) In the case of untreated blood products: Annex XV, Chapter 4 (C). (b) In the case of treated blood products: Annex XV, Chapter 4 (D). 3 Blood and blood products from equidae Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, points (a), (b), (d) and (h). The blood and the blood products shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 3. The following third countries: (a) in the case of blood that has been collected in accordance with Chapter IV, point 1 of Annex XIII or where blood products have been produced in accordance with point 2(b)(i) of that Chapter: Third countries or parts of third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex IV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, from which the importation of registered horses or registered equidae is allowed or Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. (b) in the case of blood products which have been treated in accordance with Chapter IV, point 2(b)(ii), of Annex XIII: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex IV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, Part 1 of Annex XIII to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, from which the importation of registered horses or registered equidae is allowed or Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405 Annex XV, Chapter 4(A) 4 Fresh or chilled hides and skins of ungulates Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (a), and point (b)(iii). The hides and skins shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 4, points 1 and 4. The hides and skins come from a third country, or, in the case of regionalisation in accordance with Union legislation, a part of a third country listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 or Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405, from which Member States authorise imports of fresh meat from the same species. Annex XV, Chapter 5(A). 5 Treated hides and skins of ungulates Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (a), point (b)(i) and (iii) and point (n). The hides and skins shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 4, points 2, 3 and 4. (a) In the case of treated hides and skins of ungulates: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex IV, Part 1 of Annex XIII or Part 1, Section A, of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, and the following third countries: (b) In the case of treated hides and skins of ruminants that are intended for dispatch to the Union and which have been kept separate for 21 days or will undergo transport for 21 uninterrupted days before importation into the Union: Any third country. (a) In the case of treated hides and skins of ungulates, other than those which comply with the requirements set out in Section 4, point 2: Annex XV, Chapter 5(B). (b) In the case of treated hides and skins of ruminants and of equidae that are intended for dispatch to the Union and which have been kept separate for 21 days or will undergo transport for 21 uninterrupted days before importation into the Union: The official declaration set out in Annex XV, Chapter 5(C). (c) In the case of treated hides and skins of ungulates which comply with the requirements set out in Section 4, point 2: No certificate is required 6 Game trophies and other preparations from animals Category 2 materials referred to in Article 9, point (f), derived from wild animals not suspected of being infected with a disease communicable to humans or animals and Category 3 material referred to in Article 10, point (a), point (b)(i), (iii) and (v) and point (n). The game trophies and other preparations shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 5. (a) In the case of game trophies and other preparations referred to in Section 5, point 2: Any third country. (b) In the case of game trophies and other preparations referred to in Section 5, point 3: (i) Game trophies from birds: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, from which the Member States authorise imports of fresh poultry meat, and the following countries and territories: (ii) Game trophies from ungulates: Third countries listed in the appropriate columns for fresh meat of ungulates in Part 1 of Annex XIII to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, including any restrictions laid down in the column for specific conditions for fresh meat, or in Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405 in case of solipeds. (a) In the case of game trophies referred to in Section 5, point 2: Annex XV, Chapter 6(A). (b) In the case of game trophies referred to in Section 5, point 3: Annex XV, Chapter 6(B). (c) In the case of game trophies referred to in Section 5, point 1: No certificate is required. 7 Pig bristles Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (b)(iv). The pig bristles must have been obtained from animals originating, and slaughtered in a slaughterhouse, in the third country of origin. (a) In the case of untreated pig bristles: Third countries, or, in the case of regionalisation, regions thereof, listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII or Section A of Part 1 of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 and the following third countries which have been free of African swine fever during the period of 12 months prior to the date of importation into the Union: (b) In the case of treated pig bristles: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII or Part 1, Section A, of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 and the following third countries which may not have been free of African swine fever during the period of 12 months prior to the date of importation into the Union: (a) If no case of African swine fever has occurred during the period of 12 months prior to the date of importation into the Union: Annex XV, Chapter 7(A). (b) Where one or more cases of African swine fever have occurred during the period of 12 months prior to the date of importation into the Union: Annex XV, Chapter 7(B). 8 Untreated wool and hair produced from animals other than those of the porcine species Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, points (h) and (n). (1) The dry untreated wool and hair must be: (a) securely enclosed in packaging; and (b) sent directly to a plant producing derived products for uses outside the feed chain or a plant carrying out intermediate operations, under conditions which prevent the spreading of pathogenic agents. (2) The wool and hair are wool and hair as referred to in Article 25(2), point (e). (2) Third country or region thereof (a) listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 and authorised for imports into the Union of fresh meat of ruminants not subject to additional specific conditions; and (b) free of foot and mouth disease and, in the case of wool and hair of sheep and goats, of sheep pox and goat pox in accordance with Part A of Annex IV to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/692 (*). (1) For imports of untreated wool and hair, no certificate is required. (2) A declaration of the importer in accordance with Chapter 21 of Annex XV is required. 9 Treated feathers, parts of feathers and down Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (b)(v) and points (h) and (n). The treated feathers or parts of feathers shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 6. Any third country. For imports of treated feathers, parts of feathers and down, no certificate is required. 10 Apiculture by-products Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (e). (a) In the case of apiculture by-products intended for use in apiculture, other than beeswax in the form of honeycomb: (i) The apiculture by-products have been subjected to a temperature of – 12 °C or a lower temperature for a period of at least 24 hours; or (ii) In the case of beeswax, the material has been processed in accordance with any of the processing methods 1 to 5 or processing method 7, as set out in Chapter III of Annex IV, and refined before importation into the Union. (b) In the case of beeswax, other than beeswax in the form of honeycomb, for purposes other than feeding to farmed animals, the beeswax has been refined or processed in accordance with any of the processing methods 1 to 5 or processing method 7, as set out in Chapter III of Annex IV before importation into the Union. (a) In the case of apiculture by-products intended for use in apiculture: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII or Section A of Part 1 of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, and the following third countries: (b) In the case of beeswax for purposes other than feeding to farmed animals: Any third country. (a) In the case of apiculture by-products intended for use in apiculture: Annex XV, Chapter 13. (b) In the case of beeswax for purposes other than feeding to farmed animals: A commercial document attesting the refinement or processing. 11 Bones and bone products (excluding bone meal), horns and horn products (excluding horn meal) and hooves and hoof products (excluding hoof meal) for uses other than as feed material, organic fertiliser or soil improver Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (a), point (b)(i) and (iii), and points (e) and (h). The products shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 7. Any third country. The products shall be accompanied by: (a) a commercial document as et out in Section 7, point 2; and (b) a declaration of the importer in accordance with Annex XV, Chapter 16 in at least one official language of the Member State of first entry into the Union and in at least one official language of the Member State of destination. 12 Petfood, including dogchews (a) In the case of processed petfood and of dogchews: materials referred to in Article 35, point (a)(i) and (ii). (b) In the case of raw petfood: materials referred to in Article 35, point (a)(iii). The petfood and the dogchews must have been produced in accordance with Chapter II of Annex XIII. (a) In the case of raw petfood: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII, Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 or Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405, from which Member States authorise imports of fresh meat from the same species and where bone-in meat is authorised. In the case of fish materials, third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. (b) In the case of dogchews and petfood other than raw petfood: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII, Part 1 of Annex XIV or Part 1, Section A, of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, and the following third countries: (AL) Albania (EC) Ecuador (DZ) Algeria (GE) Georgia (only processed petfood other than canned petfood) (LK) Sri Lanka (SA) Saudi Arabia (only processed petfood of poultry origin) (SV) El Salvador (TW) Taiwan In the case of processed petfood derived from fish materials, third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. (a) In the case of canned petfood: Annex XV, Chapter 3(A). (b) In the case of processed petfood other than canned petfood: Annex XV, Chapter 3(B). (c) In the case of dogchews: Annex XV, Chapter 3(C). (d) In the case of raw petfood: Annex XV, Chapter 3(D). 13 Flavouring innards for the manufacture of petfood Materials referred to in Article 35, point (a) The flavouring innards must have been produced in accordance with Chapter III of Annex XIII. Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 or Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405, from which Member States authorise imports of fresh meat from the same species and where bone-in meat is authorised. In the case of flavouring innards from fish materials, third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. In the case of flavouring innards of poultry origin, third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, from which Member States authorise imports of fresh poultry meat. In the case of flavouring innards from certain wild land mammals and leporidae, third countries listed in Annex V or Annex VI to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405 from which Member States authorise imports of fresh meat from the same species. Annex XV, Chapter 3(E). 14 Animal by-products for the manufacture of petfood other than raw petfood and of derived products for uses outside the feed chain (a) Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, points (a) to (m). (b) In the case of materials for the manufacture of petfood, Category 1 materials referred to in Article 8, point (c). (c) In the case of fur for the manufacture of derived products, Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (n). The products shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 8. (a) In the case of animal by-products for the manufacture of petfood: (i) In the case of animal by-products from bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine and equine animals, including farmed and wild animals: Third countries or parts of third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 or Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405, from which imports of fresh meat for human consumption is authorised. (ii) In the case of raw material from poultry including ratites: Third countries or parts of third countries from which Member States authorise imports of fresh poultrymeat, which are listed in Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404. (iii) In the case of raw material from fish: Third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. (iv) In the case of raw material from other wild land mammals and leporidae: Third countries listed in Annexes V or VI to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. (b) In the case of animal by-products for the manufacture of pharmaceuticals: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII, Part 1 of Annex XIV or Part 1,Section A, of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 or in Annex I, Annex V or Annex VI to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405, and the following third countries: (c) In the case of animal by-products for the manufacture of products for uses outside the feed chain for farmed animals, other than pharmaceuticals: Third countries listed in Part 1 of XIII or Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, in Annex I, Annex V or Annex VI to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. In the case of material from fish, third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. (d) In the case of fur for the manufacture of derived products: Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 from which the entry into the Union of fresh meat of ungulates is authorised. (a) In the case of animal by-products for the manufacture of processed petfood: Annex XV, Chapter 3(F). (b) In the case of animal by-products for the manufacture of products for uses outside the feed chain for farmed animals: Annex XV, Chapter 8. 15 Animal by-products for use as raw petfood Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, point (a) and point (b)(i) and (ii). The products shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 8. Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII or Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, or in Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405, from which Member States authorise imports of fresh meat from the same species and where bone in meat is authorised. In the case of fish materials, third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. Annex XV, Chapter 3(D). 16 Animal by-products for use in feed for fur animals Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, points (a) to (m) The products shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 8. Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII or Part 1 of Annex XIV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404, or Annex I to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405 from which Member States authorise imports of fresh meat from the same species and where bone in meat is authorised. In the case of fish materials, third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. Annex XV, Chapter 3(D). 17 Rendered fats for certain purposes outside the feed chain for farmed animals (a) In the case of materials destined for the production of biodiesel, oleochemical products or renewable fuels referred to in point L of Section 2 of Chapter IV of Annex IV: Categories 1, 2 and 3 materials referred to in Articles 8, 9 and 10. (b) In the case of materials destined for the production of renewable fuels referred to in Section 2, point J, of Chapter IV of Annex IV: Categories 2 and 3 materials referred to in Articles 9 and 10. (c) In the case of materials destined to organic fertilisers and soil improvers: Category 2 materials referred to in Article 9, points (c) and (d) and point (f)(i), and Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, other than in points (c) and (p). (d) In the case of materials destined to other purposes: Category 1 materials referred to in Article 8, points (b), (c) and (d), Category 2 materials referred to in Article 9, points (c) and (d) and point (f)(i), and Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, other than in points (c) and (p). The rendered fats shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 9. Third countries listed in Part 1 of Annex XIII or Section A of Part 1 of Annex XV to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/404 and the following third countries: In the case of fish materials, third countries listed in Annex IX to Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/405. Chapter 10(B) of Annex XV. 18 Fat derivatives (a) In the case of fat derivatives for uses outside the feed chain for farmed animals: Category 1 materials referred to in Article 8, points (b), (c) and (d), Category 2 materials referred to in Article 9, points (c) and (d) and Article 9, point (f)(i), and Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10. (b) In the case of fat derivatives for use as feed: Category 3 materials other than materials referred to in Article 10, points (n), (o) and (p); The fat derivatives shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 10. Any third country. (a) In the case of fat derivatives for uses outside the feed chain for farmed animals: Annex XV, Chapter 14(A). (b) In the case of fat derivatives for use as feed: Annex XV, Chapter 14(B). 19 Photogelatine Category 1 materials referred to in Article 8, point (b), and Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10. The imported photogelatine shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 11. Photogelatine may only be imported from establishments of origin in the United States and in Japan that are authorised in accordance with Section 11. Annex XV, Chapter 19. 20 Horns and horn products, excluding horn meal, and hooves and hoof products, excluding hoof meal, for the production of organic fertilisers or soil improvers Category 3 materials referred to in Article 10, points (a), (b), (h) and (n). The products shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 12. Any third country. Annex XV, Chapter 18.