All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32022R1193 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1193 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1193 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1193 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014 C/2022/4754 OJ L 185, 12.7.2022, pp. 27–46 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force: This act has been changed. Current consolidated version: 29/10/2024 12.7.2022 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 185/27 COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2022/1193 of 11 July 2022 establishing measures to eradicate and prevent the spread of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014 THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC (1), and in particular Article 28(1), point (a), and points (c) to (h) thereof, Whereas: (1) Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 provides the basis for Union legislation on protective measures against pests of plants. As that Regulation establishes a new set of rules, it repeals, with effect from 1 January 2022, several acts which were based on the previous rules in the sector. (2) One of those repealed acts is Council Directive 98/57/EC (2) which set out measures against the pest Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996, later renamed Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014 (‘the specified pest’), the pathogenic agent of the potato brown rot disease. (3) Furthermore, since the adoption of that Directive, new scientific developments have taken place concerning the biology and distribution of the specified pest, while new testing methods have been developed to detect and identify it as well as methods to eradicate it, and to prevent its spread. (4) It is therefore appropriate to adopt new measures for plants of Solanum tuberosum L. (potato), other than seeds, and plants, other than fruits and seeds, of Solanum lycopersicum (L.) Karsten ex Farw (tomato) (‘the specified plants’), to eradicate the specified pest in case it is found present in the Union territory, and to prevent its spread. Certain measures laid down in Directive 98/57/EC, in particular those concerning the eradication and prevention of the spread of the specified pest, are, however, still appropriate and should therefore be provided for. (5) Member States’ competent authorities should conduct annual surveys for the presence of the specified pest on the specified plants in their territory, in order to ensure the most effective and early detection of that pest. The rules on annual surveys should be adapted to the intended use of the specified plants, to ensure that visual inspections, sampling and testing take place at the most appropriate time and under the most suitable conditions for each plant and its use. (6) In case of a suspicion of the presence of the specified pest, the competent authority of the Member State concerned should conduct testing in accordance with international standards, in order to confirm or refute that presence. (7) Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed, the competent authority of the Member State concerned should without delay take appropriate measures for eradicating it and preventing its further spread. The first of those measures should be the establishment of a demarcated area. (8) Further eradication measures should also be provided for. Specified plants designated as infected by the specified pest should not be planted in the Union territory, and the competent authority of the Member State concerned should ensure that the infected specified plants are destroyed or disposed of otherwise, under conditions which prevent the spread of the specified pest. Specific measures should be provided for as regards testing, sampling and on-site actions, in order to ensure that there is no identifiable risk of the specified pest spreading. Specific measures should be provided to prevent the specified pest from spreading out of the demarcated areas by infected surface water and via cultivated or wild solanaceous host plants. (9) This Regulation should enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union to ensure that it applies as soon as possible after the repeal of Directive 98/57/EC. (10) The measures provided for in this Regulation are in accordance with the opinion of the Standing Committee on Plants, Animals, Food, and Feed, HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: Article 1 Subject matter This Regulation establishes measures for the purpose of eradicating Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996, emend. Safni et al. 2014, the cause of the potato brown rot, and prevent its spread within the Union territory. Article 2 Definitions For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply: (1) ‘specified pest’ means Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith 1896) Yabuuchi et al. 1996 emend. Safni et al. 2014; (2) ‘specified plants’ means plants of Solanum tuberosum L. (potato), other than seeds, and plants, other than fruits and seeds, of Solanum lycopersicum (L.) Karsten ex Farw (tomato); (3) ‘solanaceous host plants’ means wild and cultivated plants of Solanaceae; (4) ‘volunteer specified plants’ means specified plants which appear in the places of production without having been planted; (5) ‘tubers intended to be planted in their place of production’ means tubers produced in a specific place of production which are intended to permanently remain in that place and are not intended to be certified. Article 3 Annual surveys 1. The competent authorities shall carry out annual surveys for the presence of the specified pest on the specified plants in their territory, in surface water used for irrigation of the specified plants, and in liquid waste, in accordance with the following requirements: (a) as regards tubers other than those for planting, the surveys shall comprise: (b) as regards tubers for planting, other than those intended to be planted in their place of production, surveys shall systematically comprise visual inspection of the growing crops and of lots in store, sampling in store or sampling from the growing crops as late as possible between desiccation of haulms and harvest; (c) as regards tubers intended to be planted in their place of production, the surveys shall be performed on the basis of the identified risk concerning the presence of the specified pest and shall comprise: (d) as regards plants of tomato, surveys shall comprise visual inspection, at appropriate times, of at least the growing crop at the place of production of plants intended for replanting; (e) as regards solanaceaous host plants, other than the specified plants, and surface water and liquid waste, surveys shall be conducted in accordance with appropriate methods and, where appropriate, samples shall be taken. 2. The number, origin and timing of the collection of samples shall be based on sound scientific and statistical principles and the biology of the specified pest, taking into account the particular potato and tomato production systems of the Member States concerned. 3. Member States shall report to the Commission and the other Member States, by 30 April of each year, the results of the annual surveys carried out during the preceding calendar year. They shall report the results of those surveys in accordance with the template set out in Annex II. Article 4 Measures in case of suspicion of the presence of the specified pest 1. The competent authority shall ensure that samples taken for the purpose of the surveys are subject to the detection tests referred to in point 2.1 of Annex I. 2. Pending the results of the detection tests, the competent authority shall: (a) prohibit the movement of the specified plants from all crops, lots or consignments from which the samples have been taken, except the specified plants under its control for which it has been established that there is no identifiable risk of the specified pest spreading; (b) trace the origin of the suspected presence; (c) carry out official control of the movement of any specified plants, other than those referred to in point (a), produced on the place of production from which the samples referred to in point (a) were taken; (d) prohibit the use of surface water on specified plants and on other cultivated solanaceous host plants until the confirmation or refutation of the presence of the specified pest in the surface water, except where it allows the use of surface water on tomatoes and other cultivated solanaceous host plants grown in greenhouses, on condition that water is disinfected through appropriate methods authorised by the competent authority. 3. Pending the results of the detection tests, the competent authority shall ensure that all of the following elements are retained and appropriately conserved: (a) all remaining tubers sampled and, wherever possible, all remaining plants sampled; (b) remaining specified plant extracts, DNA extracts and additional prepared material for the test; (c) the pure culture, when appropriate; (d) all relevant documentation. 4. Where the suspicion of the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in accordance with point 1.1 of Annex I, the competent authority shall ensure that the tests referred to in Annex I are carried out on the samples taken for the purpose of the surveys to confirm or refute the presence of the specified pest. Article 5 Measures in case of confirmation of the presence of the specified pest 1. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in accordance with point 1.2 of Annex I, paragraphs 2 to 6 shall apply. 2. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed on specified plants, the competent authority shall, without delay, take all the following measures: (a) establish an investigation to determine the extent and primary source(s) of infection in accordance with Annex III, with further tests in accordance with Article 4(1), on at least all clonally related stocks of tubers for planting; (b) establish a demarcated area, which shall consist at least of an infested zone containing all of the following elements: (c) establish, where necessary to address the phytosanitary risk, a buffer zone around the infested zone taking into account the elements of a possible spread of the specified pest as referred to in point 2 of Annex IV; (d) designate: 3. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed on crops of solanaceaous host plants other than the specified plants, and where production of the specified plants is identified at risk, the competent authority shall take the following measures: (a) establish an investigation to determine the extent and primary source(s) of infection in accordance with Annex III, with further tests in accordance with Article 4(1), on at least all clonally related stocks of tubers for planting; and (b) establish a demarcated area, which shall consist of an infested zone. The infested zone shall contain the following: (a) the host plants from which the infected sample was taken; (b) the host plants liable to be infected by the specified pest and designated as probably infected, through pre- or post-harvest contact, or through simultaneous production, irrigation or spraying steps with the infected host plants. The competent authority shall designate: (a) the host plants referred to in the second subparagraph, point (a), as infected; (b) the hosts plants referred in the second subparagraph, point (b), as probably infected. 4. Where the presence of the specified pest is confirmed in surface water, in liquid waste discharges from industrial processing or from packaging premises handling specified plants, or on associated wild solanaceous host plants, and where production of the specified plants is identified at risk through irrigation, spraying or flooding with surface water, the competent authority shall take the following measures: (a) establish an investigation in accordance with Annex III, including a survey at appropriate times on samples of surface water and liquid waste, and on wild solanaceous host plants if present, in order to determine the extent of the infection; and (b) establish a demarcated area containing an infested zone taking into account the elements of a possible spread of the specified pest as referred to in point 2 of Annex IV. The infested zone shall contain the following: (a) the surface water from which the infected sample(s) was (were) taken; (b) the surface water liable to be infected, taking into account the elements listed in point 1 of Annex IV. The competent authority shall designate: (a) the surface water referred to in the second subparagraph, point (a), as infected; (b) the surface water referred to in the second subparagraph, point (b), as probably infected. 5. Where a Member State has submitted an outbreak notification in EUROPHYT, the neighbouring Member States which are referred to in the notification shall determine the extent of probable infection and establish a demarcated area in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 4. In case of outbreak in surface water, a notification shall not be required for infected surface water contained in areas that are already demarcated. 6. The competent authorities shall ensure that all of the following elements are retained and properly conserved: (a) the material specified in Article 4(3) until at least the completion of all tests; (b) the material related to the second detection test and to the identification tests when appropriate, until the completion of all tests; (c) if applicable, the pure culture of the specified pest, until at least one month after the notification procedure under paragraph 5. Article 6 Measures for eradicating the specified pest 1. Specified plants designated as infected by the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i), shall not be planted. The competent authority shall ensure that the infected specified plants are destroyed or are otherwise disposed of in another way, in accordance with point 1 of Annex V provided that it is established that there is no identifiable risk for of the specified pest spreading. Where specified plants have been planted before they are designated as infected, the planted material shall be immediately destroyed or disposed of in another way in accordance with point 1 of Annex V. The production site(s) where the infected specified plants have been planted shall be designated as infected. A demarcated area shall be established in accordance with Article 5(2), point (b). 2. Specified plants designated as probably infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(ii), and specified plants for which a risk has been identified pursuant to Article 5(4) shall not be planted and shall, under the control of their competent authorities, be put to appropriate use or disposal as specified in point 2 of Annex V, provided that it is established that there is no identifiable risk for spreading of the specified pest. Where specified plants have been planted before they are designated as probably infected, the planted material shall be immediately destroyed or the measures as specified in point 2 of Annex VI, shall apply. The production site(s) where the probably infected specified plants have been planted shall be designated as probably infected. A demarcated area shall be established in accordance with Article 5(2), point (b). 3. Any machinery, vehicle, vessel, store, or units thereof, and any other objects including packaging material, designated as infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i) or probably infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(ii), and Article 5(4) third subparagraph, point (b), shall either be destroyed or cleaned and disinfected using methods as specified in point 3 of Annex V. 4. In addition to the measures provided for in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 the measures specified in point 4 of Annex V shall be applied in the demarcated areas. Article 7 Specific testing measures for tubers for planting 1. Where the presence of the specified pest has been confirmed in a production site of tubers for planting, the competent authority shall ensure that the tests referred to in Annex I are carried out on the clonally related lines of the infected lots of tubers or, where the absence of clonally related lines is established, on the tubers or lots of tubers which have been in direct or indirect contact with the infected lots of tubers. 2. Where the presence of the specified pest has been confirmed in production sites of tubers for planting in a certification scheme, the tests referred to in Annex I shall be carried out either on each plant of the initial clonal selection or on representative samples of the basic seed potatoes. Article 8 Entry into force This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. Done at Brussels, 11 July 2022. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN (1) OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4. (2) Council Directive 98/57/EC of 20 July 1998 on the control of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al. (OJ L 235, 21.8.1998, p. 1). ANNEX I Scheme for the tests to be performed pursuant to Articles 3, 4, 5, and 7 1. GENERAL PRINCIPLES ON THE PRESENCE OF THE SPECIFIED PEST 1.1. The presence of the specified pest is suspected where a positive result is obtained in the first detection test performed on the specified plant, or on water samples. 1.2. The presence of the specified pest is confirmed in the following cases: One of those two identification tests shall be a test referred to in points 2.2(e), (f) and (g). 2. TESTS 2.1. Detection tests The detection tests shall be such as to consistently detect at least 104 cells/ml resuspended pellet acquired from asymptomatic samples. The second detection test shall be based on different biological principles or different nucleotide regions than the first detection test. The detection tests are the following: (a) immunofluorescence tests as described in international diagnostic standards; (b) isolation of the specified pest on the semi-selective growth medium mSMSA, as described in international diagnostic standards; (c) conventional PCR test using the primers of Pastrik et al., (2002) (1), as described in international diagnostic standards; (d) TaqMan® Real-time PCR tests using primers and probes of: (e) LAMP (loop-mediated isothermal amplification) test using the primers of Lenarčič et al. (2014) (6) (only for symptomatic plant material), as described in international diagnostic standards. 2.2. Identification tests The identification tests are the following: (a) immunofluorescence tests as described in international diagnostic standards; (b) conventional PCR tests using the primers of Pastrik et al. (2002), as described in full detail in international diagnostic standards; (c) TaqMan® Real-time PCR tests using primers and probes of: (d) LAMP (loop-mediated isothermal amplification) test using the primers of Lenarčič et al. (2014), as described in international diagnostic standards; (e) phylotype-specific multiplex conventional PCR test (Opina et al. (1997) (7); Fegan & Prior (2005) (8)), as described in international diagnostic standards; (f) DNA barcoding (Wicker et al. (2007) (9)), as described in international diagnostic standards; (g) MALDI-TOF MS (van de Bilt et al. (2018) (10)), as described in international diagnostic standards. 3. FLOW CHARTS OF PROCEDURES Flow chart No 1: Diagnostic procedure for the presence of the specified pest in samples of the specified plant. a Isolation can be used as the first or the second detection test. If the presence of the specified pest is suspected on the growth medium, colonies shall be purified to obtain pure cultures on which two identification tests shall be performed. b One of these two identification tests shall be a test referred to in points 2.2(e), (f) and (g). Positive results in the two identification tests are required to confirm the presence of the pest. c The third detection test shall be based on different biological principles or different nucleotide regions. Flow chart No 2: Diagnostic procedure for the specified pest in water samples. a One of these two identification tests shall be a test referred to in points 2.2(e), (f) and (g). Positive results in the two identification tests are required to confirm the presence of the pest. 4. SAMPLE PREPARATION 4.1. Samples from asymptomatic tubers The standard sample shall contain 200 tubers per test. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process the heel end cores to obtain the extract for detection of the specified pest is described in international diagnostic standards. 4.2. Samples from asymptomatic specified plants Detection of latent infections shall be carried out on composite samples of stem segments or leaf petioles. The procedure may be applied for up to 200 stem parts or 200 leaf petioles from different plants in one sample. The appropriate laboratory procedure to disinfect and process the stem or leaf petiole segments to obtain the extract for the detection of the specified pest is described in international diagnostic standards. 4.3. Samples from symptomatic material of the specified plants Sections of tissue shall be aseptically removed from the vascular ring in a potato tuber or from the vascular strands in stems of specified plants showing wilting symptoms. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process these tissues to obtain the extract for the detection of the specified pest is described in full detail in international diagnostic standards. 4.4. Samples of surface or recirculation water (including potato processing or sewage effluents) The principal test for the detection of the specified pest in samples of surface water, water from recirculation systems and effluent samples (potato processing industry) is selective isolation. The appropriate laboratory procedure to process water samples is described in international diagnostic standards. (1) Pastrik, K.H., Elphinstone, J.G., Pukall, R. (2002) Sequence analysis and detection of Ralstonia solanacearum by multiplex PCR amplification of 16S-23S ribosomal intergenic spacer region with internal positive control. European Journal of Plant Pathology 108, 831–842. (2) Weller, S.A, Elphinstone, J.G., Smith, N., Boonham, N., Stead, D.E. (2000). Detection of Ralstonia solanacearum strains with a quantitative, multiplex, real-time, fluorogenic PCR (TaqMan) assay. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, 2853–2858. https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/AEM.66.7.2853-2858.2000 (3) Vreeburg, R.A.M., Bergsma-Vlami, M., Bollema, R.M., de Haan, E.G., Kooman-Gersmann, M., Smits-Mastebroek, L., Tameling, W.I.L., Tjou-Tam-Sin, N.N.A., van de Vossenberg B.T.L.H, Janse, J.D. (2016). Performance of real-time PCR and immunofluorescence for the detection of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus and Ralstonia solanacearum in potato tubers in routine testing. Bulletin OEPP/EPPO Bulletin 46, 112–121. (4) Vreeburg, R., Zendman, A., Pol A., Verheij, E., Nas, M., Kooman-Gersmann, M. (2018). Validation of four real-time TaqMan PCRs for the detection of Ralstonia solanacearum and/or Ralstonia pseudosolanacearum and/or Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers using a statistical regression approach. EPPO Bulletin 48, 86–96. (5) Massart, S., Nagy, C., Jijakli, M.H. (2014). Development of the simultaneous detection of Ralstonia solanacearum race 3 and Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus in potato tubers by a multiplex real-time PCR assay. European Journal of Plant Pathology 138, 29–37. (6) Lenarčič, R., Morisset, D., Pirc, M., Llop, P., Ravnikar, M., Dreo, T. (2014). Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of specific endoglucanase gene sequence for detection of the bacterial wilt pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum. PLoS ONE 9(4), e96027. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0096027 (7) Opina, N., Tavner, F., Holloway, G., Wang, J.F., Li, T.H., Maghirang, R., Fegan, M., Hayward, A.C., Viji Krishnapillai, A., Wai-Foong Hong, Holloway, B.W, Timmis, J.N. (1997). A novel method for development of species and strainspecific DNA probes and PCR primers for identifying Burkholderia solanacearum (formerly Pseudomonas solanacearum). Asia-Pacific Journal of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology 5, 19–30. (8) Fegan, M., Prior, P. (2005). How complex is the ‘ Ralstonia solanacearum species complex’. In Bacterial Wilt Disease and the Ralstonia solanacearum Species Complex (eds Allen C, Hayward AC & Prior P), pp. 449–461. American Phytopathological Society, St Paul, MN (US). (9) Wicker, E., Grassart, L., Coranson-Beaudu, R., Mian, D., Guilbaud, C., Fegan, M., Prior, P. (2007). Ralstonia solanacearum strains from Martinique French West Indies) exhibiting a new pathogenic potential. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73, 6790–6801. (10) van de Bilt, J.L.J., Wolsink, M.H.L., Gorkink-Smits, P.P.M.A., Landman, N.M., Bergsma-Vlami, M. (2018). Application of Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometry for rapid and accurate identification of Ralstonia solanacearum and Ralstonia pseudosolanacearum. European Journal of Plant Pathology, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-018-1517-5 ANNEX II Survey template referred to in Article 3(3) Template for presenting brown rot survey results for the potato and tomato harvests of the preceding calendar year. This table shall only be used for the survey results for the potatoes and tomatoes harvested in your country. MS Category Cropping area (ha) Laboratory testing Visual inspection of tubers (1) Visual inspections of the growing crop (1) Other information Number of samples Number of lots Size of the lots (in t or ha) Sampling period No of positive Number of samples inspected Size of sample No. of posi-tive samples (2) Number of visual inspections No. of ha (potatoes) or plants (tomatoes) No. of posi-tive results (2) Samples Lots Certified tubers for planting Other tubers for planting (specify) Ware and processing potatoes Other tubers (specify) Tomatoes intended for replanting Other hosts (specify species, river/area) Water (specify river/area/location of premises) (1) Shall be understood as macroscopic examination of tubers or crops. (2) Symptoms were found, a sample was taken and the laboratory testing confirmed the presence of the specified pest. ANNEX III Investigation referred to in Article 5(2), point (a), Article 5(3), first subparagraph, point (a) and in Article 5(4) first subparagraph, point (a) The investigation referred to in Article 5(2), point (a), in Article 5(3), first subparagraph, point (a), and in Article 5(4), first subparagraph, point (a), shall concern the following elements, where relevant: (1) places of production: (2) surface water used for irrigation or spraying of the specified plants, or which has flooded field(s) or place(s) of production confirmed to be infected with the specified pest. ANNEX IV Elements for the designation of items as probably infected by the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (b)(ii) and Article 5(4) second subparagraph, point (b) and for the determination of the possible spread of the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (c) and Article 5(4), first subparagraph, point (b) 1. The elements be considered for the designation of an item as probably infected by the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (b)(ii) and Article 5(4) second subparagraph, point (b) are the following: 2. The elements to be considered in the determination of the possible spread of the specified pest pursuant to Article 5(2), point (c), and Article 5(4), first subparagraph, point (b), are the following: ANNEX V Eradication measures as referred to in Article 6 1. The measures referred to in Article 6(1) shall be one or more of the following: Any remaining waste associated with and arising from the above shall be disposed of by officially approved methods in accordance with Annex VI. 2. The appropriate use or disposal of the specified plants designated as probably infected pursuant to Article 6(2), shall be carried out under the control of the competent authority. That competent authority shall approve the following uses, and the related waste disposal, of those specified plants: 3. The appropriate methods for cleaning and disinfection of the objects referred to in Article 6(3) shall be those for which it has been established that there is no identifiable risk of the specified pest spreading and shall be employed under the supervision of the competent authorities of the Member States. 4. The series of measures to be implemented by Member States within the demarcated area(s), established pursuant to Article 5 and referred to in Article 6(4), shall include the measures set out in points 4.1 and 4.2: 4.1. Measures to be taken in places of production designated as infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i): 4.1.1. In a production site or unit of protected crop production designated as infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i), all of the measures set out in points (1), (2) and (3), or all of the measures set out in points (4), (5), (6) and (7) shall be taken: 4.1.2. In all other production sites of the infected place of production and under the condition that the competent authorities have established that the risk of volunteer specified plants and of wild solanaceous host plants of the specified pest as appropriate has been eliminated, the following conditions shall apply: 4.1.3. Immediately following the designation of infection pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i), and after the first subsequent growing year: 4.1.4. In a unit of protected crop production designated as infected pursuant to Article 5(2), point (d)(i), where complete replacement of the growing medium is possible: 4.2. Within the demarcated area, in addition to the measures detailed under point 4.1, Member States shall take the following measures: (1) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2072 of 28 November 2019 establishing uniform conditions for the implementation of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and the Council, as regards protective measures against pests of plants, and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) No 690/2008 and amending Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2019 (OJ L 319, 10.12.2019, p. 1). ANNEX VI Requirements for officially approved waste disposal as referred to in point (1) of Annex V The officially approved waste disposal methods referred to in point 1 of Annex V shall comply with the following requirements: (1) Specified plant waste including rejected potatoes, potato peelings and tomatoes and any other solid waste associated with the specified plants (including soil, stones and other debris) shall be disposed by one of the following methods: For the purposes of point (a), the waste shall be conveyed directly to the site under containment conditions such that there is no risk of loss of the waste. (2) Prior to disposal, liquid waste containing suspended solids shall be subjected to filtration or settlement processes to remove such solids, which shall be disposed in accordance with point 1. The liquid waste shall be: