All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 31992Y0625(02) Council Resolution of 15 June 1992 on the renewal of the Community Plan of Action in the field of radioactive waste Council Resolution of 15 June 1992 on the renewal of the Community Plan of Action in the field of radioactive waste Council Resolution of 15 June 1992 on the renewal of the Community Plan of Action in the field of radioactive waste OJ C 158, 25.6.1992, pp. 3–5 (ES, DA, DE, EL, EN, FR, IT, NL, PT) In force Council Resolution of 15 June 1992 on the renewal of the Community Plan of Action in the field of radioactive waste Official Journal C 158 , 25/06/1992 P. 0003 - 0005 COUNCIL RESOLUTION of 15 June 1992 on the renewal of the Community Plan of Action in the field of radioactive waste (92/C 158/02) THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES, Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, Having regard to the draft resolution submitted by the Commission, Whereas the Commission has presented to the Council a communication on a renewed Community Plan of Action in the field of radioactive waste to succeed the plan which expires in 1992 and which is the subject of the Council resolution of 18 February 1980 (1); Whereas in implementing the new Plan of Action the Commission will be assisted by an Advisory Committee on the plan, such as that provided for in the said resolution; Whereas radioactive waste is produced by the use of nuclear energy and by the utilization of radionuclides in medicine, industrial activities and research; Whereas such radioactive waste must be managed and stored with due regard to the safety of workers and the public and to environmental protection; Whereas the Community Plan of Action in the field of radioactive waste has been successful, in particular by enabling technical, legal, administrative and social issues, and particularly those relating to information of the public, to be considered within one and the same framework; Whereas the current Community activities relating to such issues shall be continued and expanded in the light of the results of the research programmes, the more comprehensive approach to safety and environmental protection that is now required and the new context created by the technical and practical issues resulting from the abolition of frontier controls within the Community and the gradual enlargement of the Community; Whereas it is important to develop cooperation between the Community and third countries, in particular those of central and eastern Europe including the republics of the former Soviet Union, in the field of the management and storage of radioactive waste taking into account the new challenges likely to arise following the future dismantling of several nuclear plants using outdated technology, REAFFIRMS the important role the Community's research programme on radioactive waste played in providing a better understanding and contributing to a wider dissemination of knowledge, leading to safer and more efficient management, storage and disposal of radioactive waste with regard to industrial safety and the protection of the public and the environment; APPROVES the Community Plan of Action which forms an integral part of this resolution; NOTES that the Commission will take the necessary measures for putting this Plan into effect. (1) OJ No C 51, 29. 2. 1980, p. 1. ANNEX PLAN OF ACTION IN THE FIELD OF RADIOACTIVE WASTE The Plan refers to the problems posed by radioactive waste arising from nuclear power production, from the use of radioisotopes for medical, industrial and research purposes and from possible concentration of natural radioisotopes resulting from industrial activities. It runs from 1993 to 1999 and is reviewable every three years. It is based on the following seven points: 1. Continuous analysis of the situation The Commission will periodically provide the Council with an analysis of the situation and prospects in the field of radioactive waste management in the Member States, with special reference to safety and environmental protection requirements and the requirements of nuclear programmes and activities involving radioisotopes. The Commission will also keep the European Parliament informed of this analysis. This analysis will set out, in particular: - the status of research and technological development work under way or scheduled, together with the relevant timetables, - the applicability of techniques and the situation as regards works and installation construction, projects completed, under way or scheduled, together with the relevant timetables, - the list of the storage installations which the Member States intend to construct and put into service having regard to the nature of the products to be stored, together, where applicable, with the relevant timetable, - the list of management practices and strategies defined or to be defined in the Member States in accordance with the safety rules applicables in each Member State, - the status of the administrative, regulatory and legal structures and frameworks relating to radioactive waste management in each Member State and in the Community. 2. Development of technical cooperation in the Community in relation to the long-term or final storage of radioactive waste Concerted action and information exchange with regard to the study and opening up of long-term or final storage sites. Examination of technical options and programmes concerning demonstration activities in various Member States. Encouragement of technical cooperation in the field of storage. 3. Concerted action on the safe management and storage of radioactive waste Concerted action by the responsible national authorities, particularly on matters relating to safety, shall be continued and, when relevant, intensified. Such a system should make it possible to: - develop a common approach and work towards harmonization at Community level on radioactive waste management strategies and practices wherever possible, - approximate national practices and regulations in the field of safety of disposal, with particular reference to the different waste categories, - draw up recommendations regarding safety assessment in the storage of radioactive waste and establish the relevant criteria, - generally speaking, achieve an equivalent and satisfactory degree of protection at the highest practical safety levels for workers, members of the public and the environment. 4. Consultation on management practices and strategies in the context of the abolition for frontier controls within the Community The national provisions that have been defined or are to be defined in relation to the management and storage of radioactive waste, which merit consideration in connection with the abolition of such controls, will be identified with a view to seeking, where the need arises, whatever solutions are appropriate to ensure that the requirements of safety and the protection of members of the public, workers and the environment against the dangers of ionizing radiation can be met. 5. Continuity of interaction between research programmes and administrative, legal and regulatory issues Regular consultations will be held within the Advisory Committee on the plan so that: - a single framework can be provided for considering improvements through technological development to techniques for the final storage of the waste in question as well as for the legal, administrative and social problems that have to be solved, - a contribution can be made in establishing guidelines for research work in the field of radioactive waste. 6. Information for the public The public must be informed of the situation in respect of radioactive waste. In this context, the Member States will continue and intensify their efforts to provide the public with regular information on their activities in the field of radioactive waste management and storage, by drawing up, as far as possible, a common information strategy. The Commission will do likewise with regard to its own activities; in particular, it will, as far as possible, make available to decision-makers and members of the public the findings and knowledge acquired in the context of Community research. 7. Development of an international consensus It is advisable to promote, in accordance with existing Community procedures, concerted action by the Member States on the positions to adopt in such international organizations as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Nuclear Energy Agency of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (NEA); Such a Community approach should contribute to the development of an international consensus in the field of radioactive waste management.