All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32016A0604(01) Commission Opinion of 2 June 2016 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the operation of the Brunsbüttel LasmA radioactive waste storage facility, located at Brunsbüttel in the land of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany Commission Opinion of 2 June 2016 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the operation of the Brunsbüttel LasmA radioactive waste storage facility, located at Brunsbüttel in the land of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany Commission Opinion of 2 June 2016 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the operation of the Brunsbüttel LasmA radioactive waste storage facility, located at Brunsbüttel in the land of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany C/2016/3192 OJ C 199, 4.6.2016, pp. 1–2 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 4.6.2016 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 199/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 2 June 2016 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the operation of the Brunsbüttel LasmA radioactive waste storage facility, located at Brunsbüttel in the land of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany (only the German text is authentic) (2016/C 199/01) The assessment below is carried out under the provisions of the Euratom Treaty, without prejudice to any additional assessments to be carried out under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the obligations stemming from it and from secondary legislation (1). On 28 August 2015, the European Commission received from the German Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the operation of the Brunsbüttel LasmA radioactive waste storage facility. On the basis of these data and additional information requested by the Commission on 10 November 2015 and provided by the German authorities on 9 February 2016, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the Brunsbüttel site and the nearest border with another Member State, in this case Denmark is 100 km. 2. The LasmA facility will not be subject to a discharge authorisation for liquid radioactive effluents: during normal operations the discharge of liquid radioactive effluents will not take place. 3. During normal operations the discharge of gaseous radioactive effluents is not liable to cause an exposure of the population in another Member State that would be significant from the point of view of health, in respect of the dose limits laid down in the new Basic Safety Standards (Directive 2013/59/Euratom). 4. Secondary solid radioactive waste is temporarily stored on site before shipment to licensed treatment or disposal facilities located in Germany. 5. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents that may follow the accidents of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses likely to be received by the population of another Member State would not be significant from the point of view of health, in respect of the reference levels laid down in the new Basic Safety Standards (Directive 2013/59/Euratom). In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form, arising from the operation of the Brunsbüttel LasmA radioactive waste storage facility, located in the land of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany, both in normal operation and in the event of the accidents of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in a radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State, in respect of the provisions laid down in the new Basic Safety Standards (Directive 2013/59/Euratom). Done at Brussels, 2 June 2016. For the Commission Miguel ARIAS CAÑETE Member of the Commission (1) For instance, under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, environmental aspects should be further assessed. Indicatively, the Commission would like to draw attention to the provisions of Directive 2011/92/EU on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment, Directive 2001/42/EC on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment, as well as to the Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora and Directive 2000/60/EC establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy.