All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32008A0112(01) Commission Opinion of 11 January 2008 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Oldbury power station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 11 January 2008 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Oldbury power station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 11 January 2008 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Oldbury power station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 7, 12.1.2008, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) 12.1.2008 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 7/1 COMMISSION OPINION of 11 January 2008 relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Oldbury power station, located in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the English text is authentic) (2008/C 7/01) On 1 February 2007, the European Commission received from the Government of the United Kingdom, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste arising from the decommissioning of the Oldbury power station. On the basis of these data, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the power station and the nearest border with another Member State, in this case France, is approximately 220 km. Ireland is the next nearest Member State, located at approximately 270 km. 2. During normal decommissioning operations, discharges of liquid and gaseous effluents are not liable to cause an exposure liable to affect the health of the population in other Member States. 3. Irradiated fuel elements and solid low level radioactive wastes will be stored at the site before being transported off-site for reprocessing respectively disposal in facilities within the United Kingdom. Solid intermediate level radioactive wastes will be stored at the site awaiting government decisions regarding the choice of a long term repository solution. Non-radioactive solid waste or residual materials in compliance with clearance levels will be released from regulatory control for disposal as conventional waste or for reuse or recycling. This will be done in compliance with the criteria laid down in the Basic Safety Standards (Council Directive 96/29/Euratom). 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive waste that may follow an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, the doses received in other Member States will not be liable to affect the health of the population. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form arising from the decommissioning of the Oldbury Power Station in the United Kingdom, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in the radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.