All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32007A0131(01) Commission Opinion of 30 January 2007 concerning the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Centraco Plant in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 30 January 2007 concerning the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Centraco Plant in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty Commission Opinion of 30 January 2007 concerning the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Centraco Plant in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty OJ C 22, 31.1.2007, p. 1–1 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) 31.1.2007 EN Official Journal of the European Union C 22/1 Commission Opinion of 30 January 2007 concerning the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Centraco Plant in France, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty (Only the French text is authentic) (2007/C 22/01) On 17 July 2006, the European Commission received from the French Government, in accordance with Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty, General Data relating to the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste from the Centraco Plant. On the basis of the General Data, and following consultation with the Group of Experts, the Commission has drawn up the following opinion: 1. The distance between the plant and the nearest point on the territory of another Member State, in this case Italy, is approximately 180 km. 2. The overall result of the planned modification will be to interchange the authorisations for airborne and liquid discharges of tritium (while maintaining the total annual waste stream), to increase the discharge limits for alpha emitters and to establish specific limits for iodine 129. 3. During normal operation, the planned modification will not cause an exposure of the population in another Member State that is significant from the point of view of health. 4. In the event of unplanned releases of radioactive effluents resulting from an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the initial General Data, the planned modification will not give rise to any significant effect from the point of view of health on the population of another Member State. In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that the implementation of the modified plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in whatever form from the Centraco Plant in France, both in normal operation and in the event of an accident of the type and magnitude considered in the General Data, is not liable to result in the radioactive contamination, significant from the point of view of health, of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State.