All official European Union website addresses are in the europa.eu domain. This document is an excerpt from the EUR-Lex website Document 32021D2053 Commission Decision (EU) 2021/2053 of 8 November 2021 on the sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) Commission Decision (EU) 2021/2053 of 8 November 2021 on the sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) Commission Decision (EU) 2021/2053 of 8 November 2021 on the sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) C/2021/7851 OJ L 420, 25.11.2021, pp. 55–86 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL, EN, FR, GA, HR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) In force 25.11.2021 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 420/55 COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2021/2053 of 8 November 2021 on the sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA relevance) THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC (1), and in particular Article 46(1) thereof, Whereas: (1) Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 obliges the Commission to develop sectoral reference documents for specific economic sectors. The documents must include best environmental management practices, environmental performance indicators and, where appropriate, benchmarks of excellence and rating systems identifying environmental performance levels. Organisations registered or preparing to become registered under the eco-management and audit scheme established by Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 are required to take the sectoral reference documents into account when developing their environmental management system and when assessing their environmental performance in their environmental statement, or updated environmental statement, prepared in accordance with Annex IV to that Regulation. (2) Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 required the Commission to establish a working plan setting out an indicative list of sectors to be considered priority sectors for the adoption of sectoral and cross-sectoral reference documents. The Commission has, in that working plan (2), identified the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector as a priority sector. (3) The sectoral reference document should identify, by way of best environmental management practices for that sector (3), concrete actions to improve the overall environmental management of companies in the sector in three main areas, which cover, from the perspective of the manufacturers, the main environmental aspects of the fabricated metal products manufacturing companies. Those main areas are cross cutting issues, optimisation of utilities and manufacturing processes. Specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for a particular best environmental management practice should also be given whenever possible and meaningful. (4) In order to allow organisations in the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector, environmental verifiers, national authorities, accreditation and licensing bodies and other operators sufficient time to prepare for introduction of the sectoral reference document for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector, the date of application of this Decision should be deferred. (5) In developing the sectoral reference document, the Commission has consulted with Member States and other stakeholders in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009. (6) The measures provided for in this Decision are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee established by Article 49 of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009, HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: Article 1 The sectoral reference document on best environmental management practices, sector environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector is set out in the Annex. Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. It shall apply from 25 March 2022. Done at Brussels, 8 November 2021. For the Commission The President Ursula VON DER LEYEN (1) OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1. (2) Communication from the Commission – Establishment of the working plan setting out an indicative list of sectors for the adoption of sectoral and cross-sectoral reference documents, under Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) (OJ C 358, 8.12.2011, p. 2). (3) Antonopoulos I., Canfora P., Gaudillat P., Dri M., Eder P., Best Environmental Management Practice in the Fabricated Metal Products manufacturing sector, EUR 30025 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2020, ISBN 978-92-76-14299-7, doi:10.2760/894966, JRC119281; https://susproc.jrc.ec.europa.eu/product-bureau/sites/default/files/inline-files/JRC_BEMP_fabricated_metal_product_manufacturing_report.pdf ANNEX Contents 1. INTRODUCTION 58 2. SCOPE 60 3. BEST ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, SECTOR ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND BENCHMARKS OF EXCELLENCE FOR THE FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING SECTOR 64 3.1. BEMPs for cross cutting issues 64 3.1.1. Applying effective methods for environmental management 64 3.1.2. Collaboration and communication along and across the value chain 65 3.1.3. Energy management 66 3.1.4. Environmentally sound and resource efficient management of chemicals 66 3.1.5. Biodiversity management 67 3.1.6. Remanufacturing and high quality refurbishment of high value and/or large series products and components 68 3.1.7. Link to the Reference Documents on Best Available Techniques relevant for fabricated metal product manufacturing companies 69 3.2. BEMPs for optimisation of utilities 69 3.2.1. Efficient ventilation 69 3.2.2. Optimal lighting 70 3.2.3. Environmental optimisation of cooling systems 71 3.2.4. Rational and efficient use of compressed air 71 3.2.5. Use of renewable energy 72 3.2.6. Rainwater collection 73 3.3. BEMPs for manufacturing processes 73 3.3.1. Selection of resource efficient metal working fluids 73 3.3.2. Minimisation of lubricoolant consumption in metal processing 74 3.3.3. Incremental sheet metal forming as alternative for mould making 74 3.3.4. Reduction of standby energy use of metal working machines 75 3.3.5. Maintaining material value for metal residues 75 3.3.6. Multi directional forging 76 3.3.7. Hybrid machining as a method to reduce energy use 76 3.3.8. Use of predictive control for paint booth HVAC management 77 4. RECOMMENDED SECTOR-SPECIFIC KEY ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 78 1. INTRODUCTION This Sectoral Reference Document (SRD) is based on a detailed scientific and policy report (1) (‘Best Practice Report’) developed by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC). Relevant legal background The Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) was introduced in 1993, for voluntary participation by organisations, by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 (2). Subsequently, EMAS has undergone two major revisions: Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (3); Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council. An important new element of the latest revision, which came into force on 11 January 2010, is Article 46 on the development of SRDs. The SRDs have to include best environmental management practices (BEMPs), environmental performance indicators for the specific sectors and, where appropriate, benchmarks of excellence and rating systems identifying performance levels. How to understand and use this document The eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) is a scheme for voluntary participation by organisations committed to continuous environmental improvement. Within this framework, this SRD provides sector-specific guidance to the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector and points out a number of options for improvement as well as best practices. The document was written by the European Commission using input from stakeholders. A Technical Working Group, comprising experts and stakeholders of the sector, led by the JRC, discussed and ultimately agreed on the best environmental management practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence described in this document; these benchmarks in particular were deemed to be representative of the levels of environmental performance that are achieved by the best performing organisations in the sector. The SRD aims to help and support all organisations that intend to improve their environmental performance by providing ideas and inspiration as well as practical and technical guidance. The SRD is primarily addressed to organisations that are already registered with EMAS; secondly to organisations that are considering registering with EMAS in the future; and thirdly to all organisations that wish to learn more about best environmental management practices in order to improve their environmental performance. Consequently, the objective of this document is to support all organisations in the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector to focus on relevant environmental aspects, both direct and indirect, and to find information on best environmental management practices, as well as appropriate sector-specific environmental performance indicators to measure their environmental performance, and benchmarks of excellence. How SRDs should be taken into account by EMAS-registered organisations: Pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009, EMAS-registered organisations are to take SRDs into account at two different levels: 1. When developing and implementing their environmental management system in light of the environmental reviews (Article 4(1)(b)): Organisations should use relevant elements of the SRD when defining and reviewing their environmental targets and objectives in accordance with the relevant environmental aspects identified in the environmental review and policy, as well as when deciding on the actions to implement to improve their environmental performance. 2. When preparing the environmental statement (Article 4(1)(d) and Article 4(4)): Elements of SRDs (indicators, BEMPs or benchmarks of excellence) not considered relevant with regards to the significant environmental aspects identified by the organisation in its environmental review should not be reported or described in the environmental statement. EMAS participation is an ongoing process. Every time an organisation plans to improve its environmental performance (and reviews its environmental performance) it shall consult the SRD on specific topics to find inspiration about which issues to tackle next in a step-wise approach. EMAS environmental verifiers shall check if and how the SRD was taken into account by the organisation when preparing its environmental statement (Article 18(5)(d) of Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009). When undertaking an audit, accredited environmental verifiers will need evidence from the organisation of how the relevant elements of the SRD have been selected in light of the environmental review and taken into account. They shall not check compliance with the described benchmarks of excellence, but they shall verify evidence on how the SRD was used as a guide to identify indicators and proper voluntary measures that the organisation can implement to improve its environmental performance. Given the voluntary nature of EMAS and SRD, no disproportionate burdens should be put on the organisations to provide such evidence. In particular, verifiers shall not require an individual justification for each of the best practices, sector-specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence which are mentioned in the SRD and not considered relevant by the organisation in light of its environmental review. Nevertheless, they could suggest relevant additional elements for the organisation to take into account in the future as further evidence of its commitment to continuous performance improvement. Structure of the Sectoral Reference Document This document consists of four chapters. Chapter 1 introduces EMAS’ legal background and describes how to use this document, while Chapter 2 defines the scope of this SRD. Chapter 3 briefly describes the different best environmental management practices (BEMPs) (5) together with information on their applicability. When specific environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence could be formulated for a particular BEMP, these are also given. However, defining benchmarks of excellence was not possible for all BEMPs, either because of the limited availability of data or because of the specific conditions of each company and/or plant (type of products manufactured ranging from small prototypes and products with complex geometries, manufactured in small series or large series, to large or small components, diversity of manufacturing processes carried out in each manufacturing facility, etc.) vary to such an extent that a benchmark of excellence would not be meaningful. Even when benchmarks of excellence are given, these are not meant as targets for all companies to reach or metrics to compare the environmental performance across companies of the sector, but rather as a measure of what is possible to help individual companies assess the progress they made and motivate them to improve further. Finally, Chapter 4 presents a comprehensive table with a selection of the most relevant environmental performance indicators, associated explanations and related benchmarks of excellence. 2. SCOPE This reference document addresses the environmental performance of the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector. The target group of this document are companies belonging to the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector, and specifically companies to the following NACE codes (according to the statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community established by Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 (6)): NACE Division 24 (*) ‘Manufacture of basic metals’ NACE Division 25 ‘Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment’ (included all activities) NACE Division 28 (**) ‘Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c.’ NACE Division 29 (**) ‘Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers’ NACE Division 32 (**) ‘Other manufacturing’ NACE Division 33 ‘Repair and installation of machinery and equipment’ This reference document is divided into three main sections (Table 2-1) which cover, from the perspective of the manufacturers, the main environmental aspects of the fabricated metal products manufacturing companies. Table 2-1 Structure of the reference document for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector and main environmental aspects addressed Section Description Main environmental aspects addressed This section encloses practices that provide guidance on how manufacturers can integrate environmental sustainability frameworks into their existing business models and management systems in order to reduce their environmental impacts. Site management This set of BEMPs provides guidance on how to improve the overall environmental performance of the supporting processes of the manufacturing plants, such as lighting or ventilation etc. Utilities and maintenance This section encloses practices that improve the environmental performance of the core manufacturing operations. Industrial processes The direct and indirect environmental aspects presented in Table 2-2 and Table 2-3 respectively, were selected as the most commonly relevant in the sector. However, the environmental aspects to be managed by specific companies need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Table 2-2 Most relevant direct environmental aspects and related main environmental pressures addressed in this document Processes Most relevant direct environmental aspects Related main environmental pressures Supporting processes Management, procurement, supply chain management, quality control Raw materials Energy Water Consumables Waste: non-hazardous .Logistics, handling, storage, packaging Raw materials Energy GHG emissions Water Consumables Emissions to air Noise, odour, vibration etc. Land use Biodiversity Waste: non hazardous Emission treatment Energy Consumables Emissions to water Emissions to air Noise, Odour, vibration etc. Waste: non-hazardous, hazardous Utilities and maintenance Energy Water Consumables Emissions to water Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: non hazardous, hazardous Land use Biodiversity Manufacturing processes Casting Raw materials Energy Waste: hazardous Shaping Raw materials Energy Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: hazardous Metal powder Raw materials Energy Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: hazardous Heat treatment Raw materials Energy Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: hazardous GHG gases (including F-gases, e.g. from cooling) Removing Raw materials Energy Water Consumables Emissions to water Emissions to air Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: non-hazardous Additive processes Raw materials Energy Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: hazardous, non hazardous Deformation Raw materials Energy Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: hazardous Joining Raw materials Energy Consumables Emissions to air Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: non-hazardous Surface treatment Raw materials Energy Water Consumables Emissions to water Emissions to air Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: non-hazardous, hazardous Assembly Energy Consumables Noise, odour, vibration etc. Waste: hazardous Product and infrastructure design Product design Raw materials Energy Water Consumables Emissions to air Infrastructure design (plant level) Raw materials Energy Water Consumables Emissions to air Emissions to water Waste: non-hazardous Land use Biodiversity Process design (plant level) Raw materials Energy Water Consumables Emissions to air Emissions to water Waste: hazardous, non-hazardous Table 2-3 Most relevant indirect environmental aspects and related main environmental pressures addressed in this document Activities Most relevant indirect environmental aspects Related main environmental pressures Upstream activities Raw material extraction and metal production Raw materials Energy & related GHG emissions Water Consumables Emissions to water Emissions to air Tools and equipment production Downstream activities Use and service phase Raw materials Energy & related GHG emissions Consumables Emissions to air Waste: hazardous, non-hazardous End of Life Waste management The environmental aspects of the NACE codes under the scope of this document that are covered by the Reference Documents on Best Available Techniques (BREFs) (7), directly or indirectly linked to the manufacture of fabricated metal products manufacturing as well as by EU legislation, policy instruments and best practice guidance are excluded from the scope of this document. 3. BEST ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, SECTOR ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND BENCHMARKS OF EXCELLENCE FOR THE FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING SECTOR 3.1. BEMPs for cross cutting issues This section is relevant for the fabricated metal products manufacturers. 3.1.1. Applying effective methods for environmental management BEMP is to use effective methods for environmental management, in order to optimise process and product design at the production stage and reduce environmental impacts along the whole value chain. This framework encompasses two levels: The strategic, which implies the application of circular economy and life cycle thinking approaches, The operational, with the use of tools that ensure continuous improvement of the environmental performance such as lean management and stock reduction. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable for all companies, including SMEs. Lack of sufficient in-house technical knowledge and the need for staff training can limit the applicability of this BEMP. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.1.2. Collaboration and communication along and across the value chain BEMP is to collaborate with other companies within the sector, companies in other sectors and throughout the value chain. This collaboration can be organised as: — sustainable sourcing and procuring of materials and other auxiliary inputs required and use of renewable energy for manufacturing operations; — optimising resources by sharing energy and/or resources in an industrial symbiosis network; — engaging systematically with stakeholders on the development of new environmentally friendly products and on the improvement of the environmental performance of the existing ones. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all size of companies in the sector, including SMEs. Lack of sufficient in-house technical knowledge and the need for staff training implies extra costs that may constitute a significant barrier for some companies, especially for SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.1.3. Energy management BEMP is to optimise energy use by implementing an energy management plan including systematic and detailed energy monitoring across manufacturing sites at the process level, comprising the following elements: The plan can be based on a standardised or customised format, such as ISO 50001 or as part of a global environmental management system like EMAS. Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. The lack of in-house technical knowledge, especially in smaller companies can be a limitation for the applicability of this BEMP. Additionally, improper integration of the elements of the energy management system and weak communication across the organisation can downgrade the performance and effectiveness of the energy management system in place. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.1.4. Environmentally sound and resource efficient management of chemicals BEMP is to optimise the amounts of chemicals used for manufacturing processes, minimise the chemicals that are disposed of and substitute hazardous chemicals wherever possible with more environmentally friendly alternatives. To achieve these aims, fabricated metal products manufacturers can implement the following measures: — reviewing the current chemical use and management on-site; — monitoring the chemical use at the level of individual chemicals (and not several chemicals together) and focusing on the most important chemicals used; — reducing the chemical use wherever possible, e.g. by changing manufacturing processes, using the chemicals more efficiently, adopt business models that align incentives between chemical suppliers and users to incentivise the reduction of chemical volumes; — replacing hazardous chemicals and substituting with alternatives with lower environmental impact; — reducing chemical waste and outflows, e.g. by reusing or recycling chemicals; where relevant, using external expertise, such as through partial or total outsourcing of chemical management. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable by all type of companies of the sector, including SMEs. The operation of the described chemical management system requires some technical knowledge, which may be an important barrier, especially for the SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.1.5. Biodiversity management BEMP is to take into account direct and indirect impacts throughout the value chain and on-site manufacturing processes, by taking the following actions: — assessing direct impacts by conducting a site review and identifying hotspots; — conducting an ecosystem management review to identify the impacts of ecosystem services throughout the value chain; — working with relevant (local) stakeholders to minimise any issues; — measuring impacts by defining and monitoring relevant metrics; — regular reporting to share information about the company’s efforts. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. The implementation of the elements of the BEMP requires commitment from the hierarchy. It is not possible to quantify the direct benefits from the implementation of the elements of this BEMP. Similarly, the calculation of a direct return of investment when applying the elements of the BEMP is not possible as well. These two points can constitute a significant barrier especially for the SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence 3.1.6. Remanufacturing and high quality refurbishment of high value and/or large series products and components Remanufacturing involves dismantling a product, restoring and replacing components and testing individual parts and whole product to ensure that the product meets the same quality standards as new products manufactured nowadays accompanied with an appropriate warranty. Refurbishment refers to used products that met their original quality standards when it was first introduced in the market i.e. the refurbished product achieves the quality standard level that was in place when it was firstly manufactured and actually not the one of the same product produced nowadays. BEMP is to take into account and enable opportunities for remanufacturing or refurbishment of used fabricated metal products and bringing them into the market for reuse, when environmental benefits are proven under a full life cycle perspective. The remanufactured or refurbished products shall achieve at least the same quality levels they had when they were first introduced in the market and are sold with the appropriate warranty. Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. Remanufacturing or refurbishment may increase companies’ operational costs, which are certainly outbalanced for manufacturing of high value products/components/parts and for large volume series. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.1.7. Link to the Reference Documents on Best Available Techniques relevant for fabricated metal product manufacturing companies It is BEMP for fabricated metal products manufacturing companies to consult the relevant Best Available Techniques (10) (BAT) described in the relevant Reference Documents on BAT (BREFs) to identify relevant environmental issues to address and, where appropriate, implement the techniques. Applicability Best Available Techniques (BAT) described in the relevant Reference Documents on BAT (BREFs) applies to large companies under the scope of Industrial Emissions Directive (IED) (11). This BEMP is very relevant for the SMEs (below the IED threshold). However, the lack of technical knowledge or capacity (of SMEs) may constitute a limiting factor. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence (i23) Consideration of relevant BATs. N/A 3.2. BEMPs for optimisation of utilities This section deals with practices for the supporting processes and is relevant for the fabricated metal products manufacturers. 3.2.1. Efficient ventilation BEMP is to improve the efficiency of the ventilation system and reduce its energy use by: — performing a study of the manufacturing site, including buildings and processes; — mapping the sources of heat, humidity, and pollutants to indoor air; — reducing these sources by e.g. implementing effective maintenance that limits emissions of pollutants or isolating a source thanks to an air pressure differential; — defining the actual (current and future) needs for ventilation; — carrying out an audit of the existing ventilation system, to compare the defined needs with the current installation; — re-designing the ventilation system to reduce its energy use and enhance energy recovery (12), use the recovered heat to drive cooling (air-conditioning system) or for heating or pre-heating, install local renewables (solar thermal or solar PV to drive the cooling systems) and reduce the volume of air supplied (which reduces the energy use for heating or cooling it). Demand based ventilation can be designed to avoid peak draws and allow more energy efficient operation with down-sized equipment. A similar approach can be also implemented for new installations, whereby the needs are defined on the designed building and processes and there is further opportunity to minimise them by influencing their design. Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. Insufficient in-house technical knowledge can also sometimes constitute a barrier to implement all the elements of this BEMP. The safety of the staff of the manufacturing facility must be set against the energy efficiency of the ventilation system in place. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.2.2. Optimal lighting In order to achieve optimal lighting in new built and existing manufacturing sites, a lighting study, to define the actual (current and future) light needs and a lighting plan, to define the optimal lighting solution (light systems, fittings, lamps, use of daylight, etc.) need to be carried out. It is BEMP for manufacturers of fabricated metal products to optimise existing and new lighting systems by: — maximising the use of daylight; — installing presence detectors controlled lighting in key locations; — monitoring separately the energy use for lighting; — selecting the most appropriate energy efficient lamps in terms of their planned hours of use and area of installation; — implementing a regular plan for cleaning and maintenance for the lighting system. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in the sector, including SMEs. However, it is more suitable for new built manufacturing sites or renovated production lines. The natural lighting is an important element on efficient lighting systems, but its implementation may be limited to all locations due to local natural conditions. Similarly, its applicability may be limited in existing manufacturing sites due to architectural constraints. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence N/A 3.2.3. Environmental optimisation of cooling systems BEMP is to systemically improve the energy efficiency and overall environmental performance of cooling systems for the machine shops of the manufacturing site by: — striving to reduce the cooling demand; — performing an audit of the cooling system in place in order to compare the defined needs with the current cooling installation; — redesigning the cooling system with a focus on maximising energy and water efficiency and minimising GHG emissions. Applicability The BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs and it is more suitable for new built or renovated manufacturing sites. However, the implementation of this BEMP may require support from external partners, which may constitute a possible barrier, especially for the SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence N/A 3.2.4. Rational and efficient use of compressed air BEMP is for fabricated metal product manufacturers to reduce their energy consumption associated with the use of compressed air in the manufacturing processes by the following measures: Mapping and assessing the use of compressed air. When part of the compressed air is used in inefficient applications or in an inappropriate manner, other technological solutions may be more fit for purpose or more efficient. In case a switch from pneumatic tools to electricity-driven tools for a certain application is considered, a proper assessment, considering not just energy consumption but all environmental aspects as well as the specific needs of the application, needs to be carried out. Optimising the compressed air system by: Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is more suitable for new or renovated production lines. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.2.5. Use of renewable energy BEMP is for fabricated metal product manufacturing companies to use renewable energy for their processes by: — purchasing of verified renewable electricity or own generation of electricity from renewable energy sources; — generating heat from renewable energy sources (e.g. solar thermal, including concentrated solar thermal, geothermal or heat pumps that can also run on renewable electricity e.g. with solar PV, sustainable (waste based) biomass and biogas); — installing energy storage systems, including thermal storage complementing solar thermal, geothermal, ambient heat applications, including coupled with heat pumps for heating and cooling, where relevant, to enable higher rates of own use of self-generated renewable energy. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. The own heat generation from renewables and integration in the fabrication processes, highly depends on the technological specificities of the carried out manufacturing processes and the actual demand e.g. high-temperature process. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.2.6. Rainwater collection BEMP is to reduce freshwater use at manufacturing sites by collecting and using rainwater in the various manufacturing or ancillary processes. Such a system collects rainwater from a catchment area (often the roof of the manufacturing plant or the parking space), has a conveyance system to collect it in a storage tank and a distribution system (pipes and pump) to bring it to the final use points. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is more suitable for new built or retrofitted plants and particularly to those plants where the collected rainwater can be used as process water. In case of retrofitting, the building characteristics may constitute a barrier to the implementation of the BEMP. The geographical location highly influences the relevance of this BEMP (e.g. amount of precipitation, local water scarcity). In certain regions, the BEMP is compulsory by legislation for flood prevention and to reduce the use of ground water. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3. BEMPs for manufacturing processes This section deals with practices for the core manufacturing processes and is relevant for the fabricated metal products manufacturers. 3.3.1. Selection of resource efficient metal working fluids BEMP is to select resource efficient metal working fluids by: carrying out systematic science-based in-depth assessments of available metal working fluids, according to a broad set of criteria, including both environmental and economic aspects, with consideration of the entire life cycle of the fluids and of the manufactured products; looking for available metal working fluids that can provide different functions (e.g. lubrication, chip removal, cleaning) at the same time, or can be used more than once after appropriate recovery and/or reformulation. BEMP is also to evaluate and control the performance of the selected metal working fluids during or after their application by means of a monitoring system. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. However, the lack of in-house technical knowledge can constitute a barrier, especially in SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3.2. Minimisation of lubricoolant consumption in metal processing BEMP is to minimise the use of lubricoolants in metal processing and shaping operations. This can be achieved by applying techniques such as cryogenic cooling or high pressure lubricoolant supply. These techniques result in reduced waste generation, higher overall process efficiencies and consequently lower energy use as well as extended tool service life. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. Due to its energy intensity, it is more suitable for small series or prototypes and for new or renewed installations rather than retrofitting on an ongoing process. However, the energy intensity is a parameter that needs to be carefully examined on a case-by-case basis. This, in combination with the lack of in-house technical knowledge and expertise may constitute a significant barrier for the application of this BEMP. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3.3. Incremental sheet metal forming as alternative for mould making For the production of small series, it is BEMP to apply incremental sheet metal forming (ISF) as an alternative for mould making. This allows the manufacturing of complex products with a higher material efficiency. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in the sector, including SMEs. ISF can be used for a wide variety of materials and it is more suitable for complex product geometries and for small series of production and prototypes. However, companies prior to switching to ISF technique, may carry out a life cycle assessment to understand environmental benefits. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3.4. Reduction of standby energy use of metal working machines BEMP is to reduce the standby energy use of metal working machines by switching off (and on again) the machines in the most efficient way, either manually or automatically (re-programming the control system) or by purchasing more energy-efficient machines in which a ‘green’ standby mode (with very low energy use) is integrated. This operational way is often based on several subunits that can be switched off individually instead of putting the entire machine simply on standby. An additional approach is reducing the duration of standby phases, especially for machines with high energy use during downtime, through an optimisation of production planning. Applicability The BEMP is broadly applicable in all types of companies from the sector, including SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3.5. Maintaining material value for metal residues BEMP is to maintain material value by post-processing metal scrap (chips and swarf), in particular through two aspects of metal residue processing: — segregating flows of metal residues to ensure a high level of purity allowing further recovery and recycling at higher quality grades; — recovering and segregating cutting oil and metal, for instance by pressing chips and swarf into briquettes. Applicability This BEMP is applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs and more relevant for the production of large series. The volume of material working residues must be significant to ensure economic feasibility. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3.6. Multi directional forging When forging complex products with a high variation in cross-section, it is BEMP to apply multi-directional forging. This practice reduces significantly the formation of flash by applying pressure in different directions in the piece under fabrication, resulting in less material needing to be removed by machining afterwards. Applicability This BEMP is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is especially suitable for complexly formed components and niche products, and for companies with large production series. Multi-directional forging can be applied to a wide variety of materials (aluminium, copper, magnesium, titanium). However, the applicability of this BEMP may be limited due to the need of purchasing special forging tools and technical knowledge which result in high investment cost. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3.7. Hybrid machining as a method to reduce energy use BEMP is for fabricated metal product manufacturers to use hybrid machining if this allows a significant decrease in the total energy needs for machining per single part/product/component by combining two or more different manufacturing processes into a new setup exploiting synergistically the advantages of each individual process. The combination of the various manufacturing processes e.g. milling, drilling can enable more freedom in the design and fabrication of parts, products, components when compared to the use of conventional machining technologies. Applicability Hybrid machining is broadly applicable to all types of companies in this sector, including SMEs. It is especially suitable for manufacturing sites that have new machines. Hybrid machining is very relevant for the manufacturing of parts/products/components with complex geometries. The combination of relatively high investment costs and lack of in-house specific technical knowledge/capacity required to implement this BEMP may limit its applicability, especially in SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 3.3.8. Use of predictive control for paint booth HVAC management BEMP is to minimise the energy use of the HVAC for paint booths by implementing a predictive control system, based on feedback and feedforward control, operating on a window of values. Such system allows keeping constant the speed at which the paint dries without necessarily maintaining constant the temperature and humidity levels in the paint booth, as is the case in conventional control systems. The working principle is keeping constant only the difference between the limit to how much vapour can be absorbed by the air (which varies with temperature) and the amount of water vapour already in the air. Applicability This BEMP is suitable for companies with large series of production, large paint booths and with multiple paint booths. The full and effective implementation of the BEMP requires: — qualified employees with profound knowledge of the paint drying process and of paint quality control; — maintenance of the effectiveness of the installation; — reliable and continuous data monitoring (sensors, measuring, etc.) and automation systems in place (on-site). The fulfilment of the increased above mentioned requirements in combination with the lack of in-house technical knowledge and high investment costs constitute a barrier to its implementation, especially for SMEs. Associated environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence Environmental performance indicators Benchmarks of excellence 4. RECOMMENDED SECTOR-SPECIFIC KEY ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Table 4.1 lists a selection of key environmental performance indicators for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector, together with the related benchmarks and reference to the relevant BEMPs. These are a subset of all the indicators mentioned in Section 3. Table 4.1 Key environmental performance indicators and benchmarks of excellence for the fabricated metal products manufacturing sector Indicator Common units Main target group Short description Recommended minimum level of monitoring Related EMAS core indicator (14) Benchmark of excellence Related BEMP (15) BEMPs for cross cutting issues Resource efficiency kg finished products/kg input materials Fabricated metal products manufacturers Amount of finished manufactured products divided by the amount of input materials required for the manufacturing of finished products. The results of this indicator can help the application of approaches such as life cycle thinking, lean management and circular economy to assess the potential for environmental improvements in the manufacturing of existing or new metal products. Site Material efficiency Systematic consideration of life cycle thinking, lean management and circular economy in all strategic decisions making. 3.1.1, 3.3.3, 3.3.6, 3.3.7 Mapping of material flows and their environmental relevance Y/N Fabricated metal products manufacturers This indicator refers to the mapping of all the flows of the materials used for the manufacturing of metal products in order to realise their environmental relevance. Facility Material efficiency New products development are assessed for environmental improvements. 3.1.1 Percentage of goods and services which are environmentally certified or with a verified reduced environmental impact. % Fabricated metal products manufacturers Number of manufactured products or provided services with a verified reduced environmental impact divided by the total number of manufactured products or provided services. Facility Material efficiency All purchased goods and services meet environmental criteria established by the company. 3.1.2 Use of by-products, residual energy or other resources from other companies. kg materials from other companies/kg total input; MJ energy recovered from other companies/MJ total energy use Fabricated metal products manufacturers This indicator refers to the amount of used by-products or residual energy from other companies for the manufacturing of products or parts, divided by the total amount or energy inputs. Company Material efficiency Collaboration with other organisations to use energy and resources more efficiently at systemic level. 3.1.2 Systematic stakeholder involvement with a focus on improved environmental performance Y/N Fabricated metal products manufacturers This indicator refers to whether the involvement of stakeholders across the value chain in the development process of new products or parts with improved environmental performance is taking place systematically. Company Material efficiency Structural engagement of stakeholders in the development of more environmentally friendly products. 3.1.2 Energy monitoring system at process level Y/N Fabricated metal products manufacturers This indicator refers to the implementation of a systematic and detailed energy monitoring across manufacturing sites at process level. Site Energy efficiency Continuous energy monitoring at process level is implemented and driving energy efficiency improvements 3.1.3 For individual chemicals used, amount of chemical applied and its classification according to Regulation (EC) 1272/2008 (CLP Regulation) kg/kg finished product or manufactured part Fabricated metal products manufacturers Total amount of individual chemicals used in the manufacturing processes divided by the amount of finished product or manufactured part. The use of chemicals is reviewed periodically to explore substitution opportunities and chemicals are classified according to 1272/2008 EC CLP Regulation. Site Material efficiency Regular (at least once a year) review the use of chemicals to minimise their use and explore opportunities for substitution 3.1.4 Implementation of a site biodiversity action plan in all manufacturing facilities Y/N Fabricated metal products manufacturers This indicator refers to whether all manufacturing facilities have in place a biodiversity action plan for the site. Site Biodiversity A biodiversity action plan is developed and implemented for all relevant sites (including manufacturing sites) to protect and enhance the local biodiversity 3.1.5 Avoided greenhouse gas emissions associated with remanufacturing/refurbishing a product compared to producing a new one, specifying if scope 1, 2 and/or 3 are included GHG emissions remanufacturing/refurbishing/CO2 equivalent emissions new product Fabricated metal products manufacturers Greenhouse gas emissions associated with remanufacturing or refurbishment of a product divided by the carbon dioxide equivalent emissions generated from the development of a new product. This indicator includes scope 1, 2 and 3 greenhouse gas-emissions. Site Emissions The company is offering remanufactured/refurbished products with LCA verified proven environmental benefits 3.1.6 BEMPs for optimisation of utilities Demand driven ventilation system Y/N Fabricated metal products manufacturers This indicator refers to the installation and operation of demand driven ventilation systems in the manufacturing facilities. Facility Energy efficiency Demand driven ventilation is implemented to reduce HVAC energy use 3.2.1 Effective air volume extracted from the building m3/hour m3/shift m3/production batch Fabricated metal products manufacturers Air volume extracted from the building per hour OR per shift OR per production batch Site Energy efficiency N/A 3.2.1 Energy use of lighting equipment kWh/year/m2 of lighted floor Fabricated metal products manufacturers Energy use of the installed lighting equipment in the manufacturing facility divided by the surface of the lighted floor of the manufacturing facility per year. Facility Energy efficiency N/A 3.2.2 Energy use for cooling kWh/year kWh/kg finished product or manufactured part Fabricated metal products manufactur,rs Energy use of the cooling system in the manufacturing facility per year OR divided by the amount of finished product or manufactured part Facility Energy efficiency N/A 3.2.3 Water use for cooling (tap water/rain water/surface water) m3/year Fabricated metal products manufacturers Volume of water used by the cooling system in the manufacturing facility per year. The type of water should also be reported, e.g. tap/rain water. Facility Water N/A 3.2.3 Electricity use per standard cubic meter of compressed air delivered at the point of end-use at a stated pressure level kWh/m3 Fabricated metal products manufacturers Electricity use of the compressed air system (including the energy use of the compressors, dryers and secondary drives) per standard cubic metre of compressed air delivered, at a stated pressure level. Facility Energy efficiency The electricity use of the compressed air system is lower than 0,11 kWh/m3 of delivered compressed air, for large installations working at 6,5 bars effective, with volume flow normalized on 1 013 mbar and 20 °C, and pressure deviations not exceeding 0,2 bars effective. 3.2.4 Air leakage index Number Fabricated metal products manufacturers The Air Leakage Index is calculated when all air consumers are switched off as the sum for each of the compressors of the time it runs multiplied by the capacity of that compressor, divided by the total standby time and the total rated capacity of the compressors in the system, and it is expressed as: where: ti(cr) is the time (min) during which a compressor runs when all air consumers are switched off (standby of the compressed air system); Ci(cr) is the capacity (Nl/min) of the compressor that switches on for the time ti(cr) while all air consumers are switched off; t(sb) is the total time (min) during which the installed compressed air equipment is in standby mode; C(tot) is sum of the rated capacity (Nl/min) of all the compressors in the compressed air system. Facility Energy efficiency After all air consumers are switched off, the network pressure remains stable and the compressors (on standby) do not switch to load condition. 3.2.4 Share of electricity from renewable sources (self-generated or purchased) out of the total electricity use % Fabricated metal products manufacturers Electricity from renewable sources either self-generated or purchased divided by the total electricity use within the site. Purchased renewable electricity, it is only accounted for in this indicator if verified as additional (i.e. not already accounted for by another organisation or in the electricity mix of the grid). Site Energy efficiency All electricity use is met by self-generated renewable energy or purchased verified renewable electricity via a long-term power purchasing agreement. 3.2.5 Share of heat from renewable sources out of the total heat use % Fabricated metal products manufacturers Heat from renewable sources (e.g. solar thermal, geothermal, heat pumps, waste based biomass and biogas, renewable electricity, preferably generated locally as part of self-generation or a renewable community based approach) divided by the total use of heat by the site. Site Energy efficiency The use of renewable heat generated on-site is integrated in suitable manufacturing processes. 3.2.5 Share of rainwater consumption on total water consumption % Fabricated metal products manufacturers Total volume of rainwater consumed for on-site or ancillary processes divided by the total volume of water consumed for on-site or anciliary process in the manufacturing sites. Site Water Rainwater is collected and used as process water in manufacturing and ancillary processes 3.2.6 BEMPs for manufacturing processes Total amount of metal working fluids purchased per year Kg/year L/year Fabricated metal products manufacturers Amount of metal working fluids used in the manufacturing processes of the manufacturing site per year. Site Material efficiency The company achieves continuous (i.e. year-on-year) improvement in environmental performance as reflected by an improvement in, at least, the following indicators: – energy use per manufactured product; – resource efficiency; – consumption of metal working fluids per manufactured product. 3.3.1 Consumption of metal working fluids per manufactured product kg (or l)/kg finished product or manufactured part Fabricated metal products manufacturers Amount of metal working fluids consumed in the manufacturing processes divided by the amount of finished products or manufactured parts. Site Material efficiency The company achieves continuous (i.e. year-on-year) improvement in environmental performance as reflected by an improvement in, at least, the following indicators: 3.3.1 Consumption of lubricoolants per processed part L/manufactured part Fabricated metal products manufacturers Volume of lubricoolants consumed in the manufacturing processes/operations per manufactured part. Site Material efficiency The company achieves continuous (i.e. year-on-year) improvement in environmental performance as reflected by an improvement in, at least, the following indicators: 3.3.2 Energy use kWh/kg finished product or manufactured part Fabricated metal products manufacturers Energy use in the manufacturing facility for the manufacturing of products or parts divided by the amount of finished product or manufactured part. Facility Energy efficiency The company achieves continuous (i.e. year-on-year) improvement in environmental performance as reflected by an improvement in, at least, the following indicators: 3.1.3, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, 3.3.7 For individual relevant machines: total energy use per machine during downtime kWh/hour Fabricated metal products manufacturers Amount of energy used by the machines during downtime per hour. Facility Energy efficiency All metal working machines have either a green standby mode or a label indicating when they should be manually switched off 3.3.4 Oil recovered L oil/year Fabricated metal products manufacturers Volume of cutting oils recovered from the manufacturing processes per year. Facility Material efficiency Turning chips and grinding swarf have oil/moisture content respectively lower than 2 % then 8 % 3.3.5 Total energy required for the forging process kWh/kg finished product or manufactured part Fabricated metal products manufacturers Total energy required for the forging process divided by the amount of finished product or manufactured part. Facility Material efficiency The company achieves continuous (i.e. year-on-year) improvement in environmental performance as reflected by an improvement in, at least, the following indicators: 3.3.6 Energy use for painting kWh/m2 of surface coated/painted Fabricated metal products manufacturers Energy use for painting of the products/parts divided by the surface of the coated or painted manufactured products or parts. Site Energy efficiency The company achieves continuous (i.e. year-on-year) improvement in environmental performance as reflected by an improvement in, at least, the following indicators: 3.3.8 (1) The scientific and policy report is publicly available on the JRC website at the following address: https://susproc.jrc.ec.europa.eu/activities/emas/fab_metal_prod.html. The conclusions on best environmental management practices and their applicability as well as the identified specific environmental performance indicators and the benchmarks of excellence contained in this Sectoral Reference Document are based on the findings documented in the scientific and policy report. All the background information and technical details can be found there. (2) Council Regulation (EEC) No 1836/93 of 29 June 1993 allowing voluntary participation by companies in the industrial sector in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (OJ L 168, 10.7.1993, p. 1). (3) Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 allowing voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) (OJ L 114, 24.4.2001, p. 1). (4) According to Annex IV (B.(f)) of the EMAS Regulation, the environmental statement shall contain ‘a summary of the data available on the environmental performance of the organisation with respect to its significant environmental aspects. Reporting shall be on both the core environmental performance indicators and the specific environmental performance indicators as set out in Section C. Where environmental objectives and targets exist, the respective data shall be reported.’ Annex IV – Section C.3. states that ‘each organisation shall also report annually on its performance relating to the significant direct and indirect environmental aspects and impacts that are related to its core business activities, that are measurable and verifiable, and that are not covered already by the core indicators. Where available, the organisation shall take account of sectoral reference documents as referred to in Article 46 to facilitate the identification of relevant sector specific indicators.’ (5) A detailed description of each of the best practices, with practical guidance on how to implement them, is available in the ‘Best Practice Report’ published by the JRC and available online at: http://susproc.jrc.ec.europa.eu/activities/emas/documents/BEMP_FabMetProd_BackgroundReport.pdf. Organisations are invited to consult it if interested in learning more about some of the best practices described in this SRD. (6) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical domains (OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1). NB: NACE stands for Nomenclature statistique des Activités économiques dans la Communauté Européenne. (*) Only small scale operations (considerably smaller than IED thresholds with substantially different manufacturing processes, e.g. much more manual than automated processes). (**) These activities are considered in scope insofar as the products concerned are composed mainly of metal. (7) Information on the Reference Documents on Best Available Techniques is available at: https://eippcb.jrc.ec.europa.eu/index.html (8) The output (expressed in the indicators as kg finished product or manufactured part) can be expressed in different ways: number of parts, kg of products etc. depending on the type of products and their homogeneity/heterogeneity. Companies can choose suitable metrics to express the output. (9) Companies that utilise waste materials for energy i.e. heat production by other companies, must have in place appropriate and effective emission treatments systems to avoid air pollution. (10) The full list of the existing developed BREFs is available here: http://eippcb.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reference/ (11) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2010:334:0017:0119:en:PDF (12) E.g. recovering heating energy for building heating with a heat exchanger. , which is calculated when all air consumers are switched off as the sum for each of the compressors of the time it runs multiplied by the capacity of that compressor, divided by the total standby time and the total rated capacity of the compressors in the system. (14) EMAS core indicators are listed in Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 (Section C.2). (15) The numbers refer to the sections in this document.